Title: AEROS: A Single-Agent Operating Architecture with Embodied Capability Modules

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07039v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 01:00:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
# AEROS: A Single-Agent Operating Architecture with Embodied Capability Modules 

Xue Qin a, Simin Luan b, John See c, Cong Yang d, ∗, Zhijun Li b, ∗

> a

School of Software, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 

> b

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 

> c

School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Malaysia Campus, Putrajaya, 62200, Malaysia 

> d

School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou, China 

Abstract 

Robotic systems lack a principled abstraction for organizing intelligence, capa-bilities, and execution in a unified manner. Existing approaches either couple skills within monolithic architectures or decompose functionality into loosely coordinated modules or multiple agents, often without a coherent model of iden-tity and control authority. In this paper, we argue that a robot should not be constructed as a collection of agents, but as a single persistent intelligent sub-ject whose capabilities are extended through installable packages. We formalize this view as a single-agent robotic architecture, which we refer to as AEROS (Agent Execution Runtime Operating System), in which each robot corresponds to one persistent agent, and capabilities are provided through Embodied Capa-bility Modules (ECMs). Each ECM encapsulates executable skills, models, and tools, while execution constraints and safety guarantees are enforced by a policy-separated runtime. This separation enables modular extensibility, composable capability execution, and consistent system-level safety. We implement a refer-ence prototype and evaluate the architecture in PyBullet physics simulation with a Franka Panda 7-DOF manipulator across eight experiments covering dynamic 

> ∗

Corresponding authors 

Email addresses: qinxue@me.com (Xue Qin), luansiminiot@gmail.com (Simin Luan), 

J.See@hw.ac.uk (John See), cong.yang@suda.edu.cn (Cong Yang), lizhijunos@hit.edu.cn 

(Zhijun Li)     

> arXiv:2604.07039v1 [cs.RO] 8 Apr 2026 (a) Simulated environment (b) Physical robot (for illus-tration; all experiments use simulation)
> (c) Baseline comparison (Exp. 4)
> Figure 1: AEROS enables a single persistent agent to operate across simulated (a) and physi-cal (b) platforms via installable Embodied Capability Modules. (c) Compared with published-architecture baselines across three tasks, AEROS achieves 100% task success ( n=100 , 95% Wilson CI).

re-planning, failure recovery, policy enforcement, published-baseline comparison on three tasks, cross-task generality, runtime ECM hot-swapping, component ablation, and failure boundary analysis. Experimental results over 100 random-ized trials per condition demonstrate that AEROS achieves 100% task success across all three tasks versus published baselines (BehaviorTree.CPP-style ex-ecution and ProgPrompt-style execution at 92–93%, flat pipeline at 67–73%), the rule-based policy layer blocks all invalid actions with zero false acceptances (a deterministic result by construction), the runtime benefits generalize across diverse tasks without task-specific tuning, and ECMs can be loaded at runtime with 100% post-swap task success. 

Keywords: robotic architecture, single-agent system, embodied capability module, policy-separated runtime, modular robotics, task planning 

1. Introduction 

Robotic systems are undergoing a fundamental transition from task-specific automation to general-purpose intelligent systems. However, despite rapid progress in large models and embodied intelligence Ahn et al. (2022); Brohan et al. (2023a); Driess et al. (2023), there remains a lack of a principled system ar-2chitecture for organizing intelligence, capabilities, and execution in a unified manner. Existing robotic systems typically adopt one of two approaches. The first relies on monolithic architectures in which skills and control logic are tightly coupled, making systems difficult to extend or reuse. The second decomposes functionality into loosely coupled modules or multiple agents, but often lacks a unified model of identity, memory, and control authority, leading to fragmented system behavior and safety challenges. In this work, we argue that a robot should not be constructed as a collection of agents, but as a single persistent intelligent subject whose capabilities are extended through installable packages. We formalize this view as the Single-Agent Robot Principle , where one robot corresponds to exactly one persistent agent that maintains identity, memory, world model, and decision authority across all tasks. Building on this principle, we introduce Embodied Capability Modules (ECMs) ,a structured abstraction for packaging executable capabilities, including skills, tools, and models. Unlike prior approaches, ECMs do not encapsulate inde-pendent agents, but instead provide capabilities that are invoked by the single persistent agent. To ensure safe and composable execution, we further propose a policy-separated runtime , in which execution constraints, permissions, and safety policies are en-forced independently from capability definitions. This separation enables the same ECM to operate under different safety and resource constraints, while preserving system-level guarantees. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 

• We propose the Single-Agent Robot Principle , establishing a unified model in which one robot corresponds to one persistent intelligent agent. 

• We introduce Embodied Capability Modules (ECMs) as a capability abstraction that enables modular and installable extensions under a single-agent model. 3• We design a policy-separated runtime architecture that enforces safety and execution constraints independently from capability logic. 

• We provide a reference implementation with empirical evaluation demon-strating effective re-planning, failure recovery, and policy enforcement. We refer to this architecture as AEROS (Agent Execution Runtime Operating System), an operating model for embodied systems built around capability mod-ules. The ECM schema specification and reference implementation are available at https://github.com/s20sc/aeros .

Terminology. We distinguish five core terms used throughout this paper. An 

agent is the unique persistent intelligent subject of a robot system, responsi-ble for maintaining identity, memory, world model, and decision authority; a robot contains exactly one agent. An Embodied Capability Module (ECM) is a structured, installable unit that encapsulates executable capabilities invoked by the persistent agent; Each ECM extends the agent’s abilities without intro-ducing independent decision-making entities. A skill is an atomic executable unit that transforms inputs into actions under the control of the persistent agent; skills are the runtime-level building blocks inside ECMs. A capability is a functional ability provided by one or more skills within an ECM; capability is the abstract declarative layer (“what the robot can do”), while skill is the concrete implementation layer (“how it does it”). Throughout this paper, we maintain this distinction: capabilities are never directly executed; only skills are. The runtime is the execution and constraint layer responsible for enforcing policies, managing resources, and orchestrating skill execution, independent of agent logic. In summary, the persistent agent invokes skills provided by ECMs, which collectively define the system’s capabilities, while the runtime enforces execution policies and safety constraints. 42. Related Work 

Robotic system design has been extensively studied from multiple perspec-tives, including middleware architectures, skill-based programming models, multi-agent systems, and capability-based execution frameworks. In this section, we review representative approaches and position our work accordingly. 

2.1. Robotic Middleware and Component Systems 

Robotic middleware systems such as ROS Macenski et al. (2022), ORO-COS Bruyninckx (2001), and YARP Metta et al. (2006) provide modular com-munication and component-based architectures for robot development Elkady and Sobh (2012); García et al. (2020). Classical layered architectures, notably the three-layer (3T) architecture Bonasso et al. (1997) and CLARAty Nesnas et al. (2003), pioneered the separation of deliberation, sequencing, and reactive control—a decomposition that influenced decades of robotic system design. Re-cent extensions include TRADE Scheutz (2025), a middleware that adds goal management, belief maintenance, and cognitive-level coordination beyond what ROS 2 provides, and ROSA Royce et al. (2024), which uses large language mod-els as a natural-language interface to the ROS ecosystem. However, such frameworks primarily address communication and modular-ization at the software or interface level, rather than defining a unified model of intelligence. In particular, they do not impose a coherent abstraction for identity, memory, or decision authority across components. 

2.2. Skill-Based Robot Programming 

Skill-based approaches, including behavior trees Colledanchise and Ögren (2018); Iovino et al. (2022), task graphs, and systems such as SkiROS Rovida et al. (2017) and its successor SkiROS2 Mayr et al. (2023), aim to structure robot behavior in terms of reusable skills. BehaviorTree.CPP Colledanchise and Ögren (2018) is a widely-adopted C++ implementation of behavior trees used extensively in robotics for deterministic fallback and retry strategies. Related work on skill trees Konidaris et al. (2012) and collaborative robot instruction via 5behavior trees and vision Paxton et al. (2017) further demonstrates how modular skill abstractions can be composed for complex tasks. Evaluation of AEROS against a BehaviorTree.CPP-style execution model is presented in Section 6 (Experiment 4). While these approaches introduce useful abstractions for behavior composi-tion, they typically treat skills as the primary organizing unit, without a per-sistent agent-centric model. In many cases, task execution is driven by external controllers or planning frameworks Garrett et al. (2021); Cashmore et al. (2015); Bercher et al. (2023), and the notion of a unified intelligent subject remains im-plicit or fragmented. 

2.3. Multi-Agent and Multi-Robot Systems 

Multi-agent systems Shoham and Leyton-Brown (2008) and swarm robotics frameworks Bonabeau et al. (1999) model robots as collections of interact-ing agents, each with its own local state and decision-making process. Such approaches are effective for distributed coordination, multi-robot collabora-tion Yan et al. (2013), and decentralized control. Recent work such as EMOS Chen et al. (2024) extends multi-agent coordi-nation to heterogeneous embodied robots with LLM-based task decomposition, demonstrating the scalability of multi-agent approaches across different plat-forms. However, within a single robot, the introduction of multiple agents can lead to ambiguity in control authority and fragmented system behavior. Co-ordination mechanisms are required to resolve conflicts between agents, and long-term memory and identity are often distributed or duplicated. These char-acteristics differ fundamentally from the single-subject model considered in this work. 

2.4. Capability-Based Execution and Security 

In software systems, capability-based security models and sandboxing mech-anisms have been widely adopted to enforce safe execution. Examples include 6capability-based operating systems Watson et al. (2010), formally verified mi-crokernels such as seL4 Klein et al. (2009), WebAssembly (WASI) Bytecode Alliance (2021), and permission systems in modern mobile platforms Felt et al. (2011). In the robotics domain, safety standards such as ISO 10218 Interna-tional Organization for Standardization (2011) define requirements for indus-trial robot safety, establishing the importance of systematic safety enforcement at the system level. These approaches demonstrate the importance of separating execution policies from application logic. However, they are not directly designed for embodied systems, and do not address how capabilities should be structured and invoked within a unified in-telligent agent. 

2.5. Emerging Embodied Architectures 

A recent line of work uses large language models as the cognitive core of robotic systems. ChatGPT for Robotics Vemprala et al. (2024) demonstrates LLM-based task orchestration through prompt engineering and high-level func-tion libraries. Inner Monologue Huang et al. (2022) introduces closed-loop embodied reasoning where an LLM planner receives environment feedback to iteratively refine plans. Code as Policies Liang et al. (2023) generates exe-cutable robot control code from language instructions. More recent work ex-tends LLM-based planning in complementary directions: SayPlan Rana et al. (2023) grounds LLM planning in 3D scene graphs for scalable task decompo-sition, ProgPrompt Singh et al. (2023) generates situated task plans as pro-grammatic structures, and Bhat et al. Bhat et al. (2024) propose a dual-LLM hierarchy with closed-loop state feedback for grounded re-planning. Beyond robotics-specific work, ReAct Yao et al. (2023) synergizes reasoning and acting in language models through interleaved thought–action traces, and Gorilla Patil et al. (2024) connects LLMs with massive API libraries for tool-use grounding— both relevant to AEROS’s skill-invocation pattern. These approaches implicitly adopt a single-agent pattern—one LLM orchestrating all capabilities—but do not formalize this as an architectural principle, nor do they separate execution 7policy from capability logic. At the intersection of LLM planning and behavior trees, Ao et al. Ao et al. (2024) leverage LLMs to generate behavior trees for robot task planning, and RoboMatrix Mao et al. (2024) proposes a skill-centric hierarchical framework with meta-skill composition for scalable open-world execution. Khan et al. Khan et al. (2025) introduce safety-aware task planning via multi-LLM feedback, the-matically related to the policy enforcement concern that motivates our runtime separation, though their approach uses cross-LLM checking rather than a dedi-cated runtime policy layer. Concurrently, foundation models such as PaLM-E Driess et al. (2023), RT-1 Brohan et al. (2023b), and RT-2 Brohan et al. (2023a) collapse perception, planning, and control into end-to-end learned policies, raising the question of whether modular architectures remain necessary. Classical cognitive architec-tures such as SOAR Laird et al. (1987) and ACT-R Anderson (1993) (surveyed in Kotseruba and Tsotsos (2020)) have long modeled single-agent cognition, and deliberation architectures Ingrand and Ghallab (2017) provide a rich tax-onomy of sense–plan–act loops, but neither tradition was designed for embodied capability composition or runtime safety enforcement. Broader surveys of LLM-based autonomous agents Wang et al. (2024) and LLM–robot integration Kim et al. (2024) confirm that a principled architectural layer is still missing. Of particular relevance, Voyager Wang et al. (2023) implements a persistent LLM agent that progressively accumulates a skill library—the closest existing system to AEROS’s single-agent-with-growing-capabilities concept. However, Voyager operates in a game environment without safety constraints or formal capability packaging. VoxPoser Huang et al. (2023) demonstrates composable 3D value maps for skill composition via LLMs, relevant to the ECM skill com-position formalism but without a runtime policy layer. At the systems level, RoboOS Tan et al. (2025) introduces a hierarchical embodied framework with a brain model for high-level planning, a cerebellum skill library for execution, and shared memory for multi-agent coordination. While RoboOS addresses cross-embodiment and multi-robot settings, it does not 8Table 1: Qualitative comparison ( • = supported, ◦ = partial, — = not supported). ROS 2 BT LLM Ours Agent identity — — ◦ •                    

> Capability pkg. ◦•—•
> Persist. memory ——◦•
> Policy safety ———•
> Re-planning —◦••
> Formal model ———•

enforce the single-agent principle: its architecture explicitly supports multiple agents within its hierarchy. From a historical perspective, Brooks’ subsumption architecture Brooks (1986) pioneered single-agent reactive control with layered competences, but operated below the level of symbolic skill composition. These emerging systems highlight a growing consensus that a new integration layer is needed between middleware and cognition, but they do not yet provide a formal single-subject model or a policy-separated runtime for safety enforcement. The present work addresses this gap directly. 

2.6. Positioning of This Work 

Table 1 summarizes how AEROS relates to representative approaches. Ex-isting work studies modular components, skill composition, multi-agent coor-dination, and emerging OS-level embodied frameworks, but does not provide a unified abstraction that treats a robot as a single persistent intelligent subject with extensible capabilities. In contrast, this paper proposes a single-agent robotic architecture in which one robot corresponds to one persistent agent, whose abilities are extended through installable Embodied Capability Modules (ECMs). Furthermore, we introduce a policy-separated runtime that enforces safety and execution con-straints independently from capability logic. This combination of a single-agent model, capability packaging abstraction, and runtime-level policy enforcement 9distinguishes our approach from existing robotic system designs. 

3. Design Principles and System Architecture 

We present a robotic operating architecture governed by three design prin-ciples and realized through a three-layer system. Throughout this paper, A

denotes the persistent agent, E the set of installed Embodied Capability Mod-ules, and Π the runtime policy configuration. 

Principle 1: Single-Agent Robot.. A robot system contains exactly one persis-tent agent that serves as the unified intelligent subject, maintaining identity, memory, world model, and decision authority across all tasks. Formally, we define a robot system as: 

R = ( A, E, Π) (1) where A is the unique persistent agent, E = {E1, . . . , E N } is the set of installed ECMs, and Π is the policy configuration enforced by the runtime. 

Principle 2: Capability Packaging.. All task-specific capabilities are encapsu-lated as installable Embodied Capability Modules (ECMs), each providing ex-ecutable skills, tools, models, and metadata. ECMs extend the single agent’s functionality without introducing new agents. The capability set is C = SNi=1 Ci,where each Ci is provided by ECM Ei.

Principle 3: Policy-Logic Separation.. Execution policies 1, safety constraints, and resource management are enforced at the runtime layer, independently from capability logic. Skills define what can be done ; policies define what is allowed ;the runtime enforces how actions are executed . This separation allows the same ECM to operate under different safety conditions without modification.              

> 1Throughout this paper, policy refers to declarative runtime constraints (permis-sions, safety bounds, resource limits) enforced by the execution layer, distinct from the reinforcement-learning sense of policy as π(a|s).

10 Persistent Agent (A)Identity Memory World Model Planner Dispatcher    

> ECM E1
> Skills / Models
> ECM E2
> Skills / Tools
> ECM EN
> Skills / Models

· · · 

Runtime Layer (Π)Policy Engine Resource Mgr Execution Engine Comm Bus 

Hardware / Simulation (ROS 2 Bridge)  

> invoke
> execute under Π
> observe
> ECM Layer ( E)Agent Layer Runtime

Figure 2: Single-agent robotic operating architecture. The persistent agent ( A) is the sole decision-making entity, invoking capabilities from Embodied Capability Modules ( E). The runtime enforces policy constraints ( Π) and mediates all hardware interaction. Unlike multi-agent architectures, this design maintains a single intelligent subject with all capabilities provided as installable packages. 

Based on these principles, the architecture consists of three layers: (1) a persistent agent layer, (2) a capability package (ECM) layer, and (3) a runtime layer. Figure 2 illustrates the overall architecture. 

3.1. Persistent Agent Layer 

The persistent agent represents the unified intelligent subject of the robot. It is responsible for maintaining global state and coordinating all task execution. The agent consists of the following components: 

• Identity and Lifecycle : maintains a continuous identity across sessions and tasks. 

• Memory System : stores episodic, semantic, and working memory. 

• World Model : represents the environment, objects, and system state. 11 • Planner : decomposes high-level goals into executable task structures. 

• Skill Dispatcher : selects and invokes skills provided by ECMs. 

• Safety Supervisor : validates task-level preconditions and postconditions at the semantic level, complementing the system-level policy enforcement in the runtime. All decision-making authority resides within this layer; ECMs are invoked as capability providers, not autonomous decision-makers. 

3.2. ECM Layer 

The ECM layer provides modular and installable capabilities to the agent. Each Embodied Capability Module (ECM) is defined as a structured unit that includes: 

• Capability Definitions : high-level functions exposed to the agent. 

• Skills : executable units with defined inputs, outputs, and effects. 

• Models and Tools : optional components supporting perception and rea-soning. 

• Manifest : metadata including dependencies, resource requirements, and interfaces. ECMs follow a lifecycle model: install → configure → activate → deactivate → remove The agent dynamically installs and invokes ECMs, enabling extensibility without modifying the core system. Importantly, ECMs do not introduce ad-ditional agents. They extend the capabilities of the single persistent agent. Figure 3 illustrates the internal structure and lifecycle of an ECM. 12 Embodied Capability Module (ECM)              

> Manifest — Interfaces / Deps Skills — I/O / Effects
> Models / Tools — Percept. / Reason. Metadata — Version / Compat.
> Permissions & Policies — Resource Req. / Safety Constraints / Access Scope
> Schema
> Install Config Activate Deactivate Remove Lifecycle

Figure 3: Structure and lifecycle of an Embodied Capability Module (ECM). Left: internal schema showing skills, models, metadata, and permission declarations. Right: runtime life-cycle from installation to removal. The reactivation loop between Activate and Deactivate reflects that ECMs can be suspended and resumed without reinstallation. Notably, ECMs contain no agent-level constructs (identity, memory, planner), reinforcing that they are capa-bility extensions, not independent subjects. 

ECM Schema Definition.. An Embodied Capability Module is represented as a structured package with a declarative schema. Each ECM Ei is formally defined as a tuple: 

Ei = ( Ci, Si, Mi, Pi, Di) (2) where Ci denotes capability definitions, Si the set of skills with typed input– output interfaces, Mi optional models and tool adapters, Pi permission dec-larations specifying resource and access constraints, and Di dependency and metadata information (version, compatibility, interfaces). This schema ensures that each ECM is self-describing and can be validated, registered, and managed by the runtime without inspecting its internal logic. A reference implementation of the ECM schema is provided in the accompanying open-source repository. 2

> 2

https://github.com/s20sc/aeros 

13 3.3. Runtime Layer 

The runtime layer is responsible for executing actions and enforcing system-level constraints. It includes the following components: 

• Policy Engine : enforces permissions, safety rules, and execution con-straints at the system level, operating on resource and access boundaries rather than task semantics. 

• Resource Manager : allocates computational and hardware resources. 

• Communication Bus : provides a unified abstraction for data exchange (e.g., ROS 2 DDS). 

• Execution Engine : translates high-level actions into low-level commands. 

• Simulation Bridge : provides a platform-agnostic interface between sim-ulation and real hardware. This is an optional adaptation layer, not a required component, enabling the same architecture to operate across dif-ferent deployment targets. The runtime operates independently of agent logic and capability definitions, ensuring that safety and execution policies are applied consistently. 

3.4. Execution Flow 

The system operates as a closed-loop interaction between the agent and the runtime. Recalling the system definition R = ( A, E, Π) from Section 3, the execution cycle proceeds as follows: 1. The agent A receives observations from the environment or user input. 2. The planner generates a task representation. 3. The skill dispatcher selects appropriate skills from installed ECMs E.4. The runtime executes actions under policy constraints Π.5. Observations are updated and fed back into the agent. This loop ensures continuous adaptation and consistent control under a uni-fied agent model. 14 4. Formalization 

To provide a precise understanding of the proposed architecture, we formalize the behavior of the persistent agent, the composition of capabilities, and the policy enforcement model. While full formal verification of robotic systems remains an active research area Luckcuck et al. (2019), we focus here on defining the structural invariants of our architecture. 

4.1. Agent Closed-Loop Model 

We model the robot as a single persistent agent operating in a closed-loop interaction with its environment. At time step t, the agent maintains an internal state: 

st = ( mt, w t) (3) where mt represents memory and wt represents the world model. Given an observation ot, the agent produces a task representation τt:

τt = F(ot, s t) (4) where F is the planning function. The task τt is then decomposed into a sequence of skill invocations: 

τt = {σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ k} (5) where each σi corresponds to a skill provided by an ECM E ∈ E .Each skill is executed by the agent to produce an action: 

at = σi(st) (6) The runtime then applies policy constraints defined by Π:

a′ 

> t

= Π( at) (7) The environment then transitions to a new state, producing observation ot+1 ,closing the loop. 15 This formulation ensures that all decision-making originates from the single agent A, skills are passive executors invoked by the agent, and execution is mediated by the policy configuration Π — consistent with the system definition 

R = ( A, E, Π) from Section 3. Figure 4 illustrates this closed-loop execution model. 

4.2. Skill Composition, Policy, and Safety Invariants 

A skill σ : X → Y is a typed executable unit. Capabilities are constructed via sequential ( σ1 ; σ2), parallel ( σ1 ∥ σ2), and conditional (if c then σ1 else σ2)composition operators, all defined over skills rather than agents, preserving the single-agent structure. Each ECM Ei is associated with a permission set Pi, and each action at

must satisfy at ∈ P i. The runtime enforces the global policy: 

Π( at) = 



at if at satisfies all policies 

⊥ otherwise (blocked) (8) Safety is defined as a set of invariants ∀t, Φ( st, a t) = true, encoding physical limits, collision avoidance, and resource constraints. Because policy enforcement is centralized in the runtime, Φ holds regardless of which ECM provides the skills, ensuring safety is compositional and system-wide. 16 ot Observation 

Persistent Agent (A)

st = ( mt, w t)

Planner F

τt = F(ot, s t)

Skill Dispatcher select σi from E

Installed ECMs 

σ1, . . . , σ k

Runtime ( Π)

a′

t = Π( at)

Environment Hardware / Simulation 

perceive 

plan 

decompose 

at = σi(st)

provide 

a′

t execute 

ot+1 

Figure 4: Closed-loop execution model of the single persistent agent. Observation ot updates the agent state st; the planner F generates task τt; the dispatcher selects skills σi from installed ECMs E; the runtime enforces policy Π before execution. Environmental feedback 

ot+1 closes the loop. 

17 5. Implementation 

We implement the proposed architecture as a reference system on top of ROS 2 Macenski et al. (2022) and PyBullet physics simulation. The implemen-tation is intended to demonstrate the feasibility of the architecture, rather than to constrain it to a specific middleware or simulator. Accordingly, ROS 2 and PyBullet are used as a concrete realization of the proposed design, while the architectural principles remain platform-agnostic. While the implementation is a lightweight reference system, it captures the key architectural properties of the proposed design, including capability modularity, runtime mediation, and agent-centric execution. The reference implementation consists of three major parts: (1) a simulation and communication bridge built on ROS 2 and PyBullet, (2) an ECM toolchain for packaging, validation, and registration, and (3) a policy sandbox for runtime enforcement and monitoring. The policy sandbox is the implementation-level re-alization of the policy-separation principle introduced in Section 3: it concretizes the abstract constraint model Π as a set of enforceable runtime checks within the execution path. 

5.1. PyBullet–ROS 2 Bridge 

The execution environment is implemented in PyBullet, with ROS 2 serving as the communication substrate between the persistent agent, the runtime, and the simulated robot. This bridge provides a unified interface for observations and actions, allowing the proposed architecture to be evaluated without assuming a specific hardware platform. At the observation level, simulated sensors such as RGB cameras, depth streams, object states, and robot kinematics are exposed through ROS 2 top-ics. These observations are aggregated by the runtime and converted into a normalized observation format consumed by the persistent agent. This design ensures that the agent reasons over a stable interface, independent of whether the underlying source is simulation or physical hardware. 18 At the execution level, high-level actions generated by the agent are first submitted to the runtime, which then translates them into ROS 2-compatible commands. Depending on the target skill, these commands may be published as topic messages, sent through services, or dispatched as action goals. This indirection is central to the proposed architecture: the persistent agent does not directly operate actuators, but instead interacts with the environment through the runtime-mediated execution path. The PyBullet–ROS 2 bridge also serves as a simulation abstraction layer. By isolating simulation-specific logic inside the runtime, the same agent and ECM definitions can be reused across deployment targets. In this sense, PyBullet is not treated as a defining assumption of the architecture, but as one reference backend for executing and evaluating the system. 

5.2. ECM Toolchain 

To support modular capability delivery, we implement an ECM toolchain that manages package construction, validation, registration, installation, and activation. Each Embodied Capability Module is organized as a structured package di-rectory containing a manifest, skill definitions, optional model or tool adapters, and policy-related metadata. The manifest specifies package identity, version, declared capabilities, dependency constraints, interface bindings, and resource requirements. Skill definitions expose the executable units available to the per-sistent agent, including their input-output signatures and effect descriptions. The toolchain provides three core functions. First, it supports build and validation . Before an ECM can be installed, the package is checked for structural completeness, dependency consistency, and interface correctness. This includes verifying that required skill entry points are present, that package metadata is well-formed, and that referenced resources satisfy the declared compatibility constraints. Second, it supports registration and discovery . Validated ECMs are entered into a package registry that records version information, declared capabilities, 19 and dependency metadata. The persistent agent queries this registry through the runtime to identify which skills are available for invocation under the current system configuration. Third, it supports lifecycle management . At runtime, an ECM may be in-stalled, configured, activated, deactivated, or removed without recompiling or restructuring the core agent logic. This lifecycle is implemented as a stateful runtime operation: installation introduces the package into the registry, acti-vation makes its skills visible to the dispatcher, deactivation temporarily with-draws them from scheduling, and removal clears the package from the active environment. In the reference implementation, ECM loading is intentionally lightweight. The goal is to demonstrate that capabilities can be packaged and managed as explicit software units, analogous to installable extensions, rather than as hardcoded fragments embedded in a monolithic robot application. 

5.3. Policy Sandbox 

A central objective of the implementation is to enforce the Policy-Logic Separation Principle. To this end, we implement a policy sandbox inside the runtime, which evaluates whether requested actions are permitted before they are executed. Each ECM is associated with a declared permission profile, including access to sensors, actuators, communication channels, and computational resources. These declarations do not grant authority by themselves; instead, they are in-terpreted by the runtime, which enforces the active policy configuration. As a result, the same ECM can be deployed under different runtime policies without modification to its internal logic. The policy sandbox operates at two levels. At the access-control level, it regulates which resources may be used by a given capability. For example, an ECM may be permitted to read object state observations but denied direct access to motion execution interfaces. Similarly, 20 access to networked services, logging channels, or optional accelerators can be selectively enabled or disabled through runtime policy. At the execution-control level, it constrains how actions are carried out. Be-fore an action is forwarded to ROS 2 or PyBullet, the runtime checks it against global safety and resource rules, such as actuator scope, motion limits, or exe-cution quotas. Actions that violate policy are rejected or attenuated, and the runtime records the event as a policy violation. To support analysis and debugging, the sandbox includes runtime monitor-ing and audit logging. Every blocked action, policy rejection, and capability activation event is recorded together with its associated ECM and execution context. This monitoring mechanism is essential both for the empirical evalua-tion in Section 6 and for demonstrating that policy enforcement remains external to skill logic. 

5.4. Planner Architecture 

A key design choice in AEROS is that the planner F is a replaceable compo-nent within the persistent agent layer, not a fixed algorithm. The architecture imposes no constraint on whether F is rule-based, learned, LLM-driven, or a hybrid—only that it maps the current observation ot and world state st to a task structure τt that the dispatcher can execute. In the reference implementation used for evaluation, F is realized as a 

rule-based, world-state-conditioned planner . Each ECM provides a plan skill (e.g., dumpling.plan , clean.plan , fetch.plan ) that inspects the current world state and emits the remaining steps needed to complete the task. This planner is deterministic: given the same world state, it always produces the same task graph. The re-planning loop arises because the world state changes after each skill execution, causing the planner to generate updated plans that reflect the new situation. This design choice is deliberate. The rule-based planner isolates the evalu-ation from confounding factors introduced by stochastic LLM generation (tem-perature sensitivity, prompt variation, model version), ensuring that measured 21 performance differences reflect architectural properties rather than planner qual-ity. In deployment, the planner slot can be replaced by an LLM-based plan-ner (e.g., using GPT-4, Claude, or domain-specific models) that generates task graphs from natural-language instructions and environmental observations. The AEROS runtime treats the planner as a black-box skill: regardless of its internal mechanism, the output is mediated by the same policy sandbox and executed through the same dispatcher pipeline. This modularity is analogous to how robotic middleware frameworks (e.g., ROS 2 navigation stack) decouple plan-ning algorithms from execution infrastructure. 

6. Evaluation 

We evaluate the proposed architecture through eight experiments. Exper-iments 1–3 isolate individual runtime mechanisms (dynamic re-planning, fail-ure recovery, and policy enforcement); Experiment 4 compares AEROS against published-baseline architectures (flat pipeline, BehaviorTree.CPP-style execu-tion, ProgPrompt-style execution) across three diverse tasks; Experiment 5 val-idates cross-task generality via static-vs-dynamic re-planning on multiple tasks; Experiment 6 validates runtime ECM hot-swapping; Experiment 7 performs an ablation study decomposing AEROS’s advantage by selectively disabling indi-vidual components; and Experiment 8 explores the failure boundary by sweep-ing skill failure probability from 10% to 90%. All experiments are conducted in PyBullet physics simulation using a Franka Emika Panda 7-DOF manipulator, with 100 independent randomized trials per condition. 

6.1. Experimental Setup 

The evaluation uses three author-designed multi-step manipulation tasks. While standardized benchmarks such as BEHAVIOR-1K Li et al. (2023) and ManiSkill2 Gu et al. (2023) provide valuable cross-study calibration, they eval-uate skill-level performance rather than architectural mechanisms (re-planning, policy enforcement, capability hot-swapping) and thus do not directly test the 22 claims of this paper. The three tasks are: (1) dumpling preparation (ma-terial preparation, wrapper alignment, wrapping, cooking); (2) clean_table 

(clear clutter, wipe surface, verify cleanliness); and (3) fetch_object (navigate to target location, detect object, grasp, deliver to goal, recover from failures). Each skill invocation triggers physical robot actions (arm movement via inverse kinematics, gripper open/close, mobile base navigation) in the PyBullet simu-lation environment. We introduce controlled stochastic perturbations: object positions are randomly initialized within a bounded workspace, and selected per-ception checks fail with a configurable probability (30% for dumpling wrapping, 40% for table wiping, 35% for fetch object detection). We report the following metrics across experiments: task success rate (per-centage of trials completing all stages), average execution steps (total skill invo-cations per trial), re-planning count (number of plan regeneration cycles), recov-ery count (number of fallback actions triggered), and policy violation blocking rate. 

Wall-clock overhead.. We report computational overhead (excluding simulated physics latency) measured on a single-core Intel i7 @ 3.4 GHz. Mean per-trial wall-clock times for the four architectures are: Flat Pipeline 24 ms, Behavior-Tree.CPP-style 19 ms, ProgPrompt-style 20 ms, and AEROS 18 ms. The addi-tional re-planning cycles in AEROS do not increase wall-clock cost because each cycle operates on updated world-state predicates (Boolean lookups, <0.01 ms per predicate evaluation), and the rule-based planner itself executes in <1 ms. In a physical deployment, total execution time would be dominated by robot motion (seconds per action) rather than planning overhead. 

6.2. Dynamic Re-planning 

We compare two execution strategies under identical random conditions (wrapper alignment failure rate: 30%). In the static plan condition, the planner generates a complete task plan once and executes all steps sequentially without adapting to world state changes. In the dynamic re-planning condition, the 23 agent re-invokes the planner after each step, allowing the plan to adapt based on the current world state.          

> Table 2: Dynamic re-planning vs. static planning (100 trials). Method Succ. (%, 95% CI) Steps Replan Static 70.0 [60.5, 78.2] 3.7 1.0 Dynamic 100.0 [96.4, 100] 4.4 5.0

As shown in Table 2, dynamic re-planning achieves a 100% success rate com-pared to 70% for static planning. The static strategy fails when intermediate world state changes (e.g., alignment perturbations) invalidate later steps in the pre-computed plan. Dynamic re-planning incurs a modest overhead of approxi-mately 0.7 additional steps on average, corresponding to the additional planning cycles required to adapt to changing conditions. At the physical execution level, dynamic re-planning averages 561 IK solver steps and 19.1 robot actions per trial, compared to 488 IK steps and 16.6 actions for static planning—a moder-ate cost for a 30 percentage-point gain in success rate. This result confirms that closed-loop planning at the architecture level is essential for robust embodied execution. 

6.3. Retry and Recovery Mechanisms 

We evaluate the impact of the runtime’s retry and recovery mechanisms under a higher failure rate (wrapper alignment failure: 50%, retry limit: 1). We compare three configurations: (1) no retry and no recovery, (2) retry only (one additional attempt on failure), and (3) retry with recovery (a fallback action that resets alignment state before the agent re-plans). Table 3 shows a clear performance gradient across configurations. Without retry or recovery, the success rate (49%) closely matches the single-attempt alignment probability, confirming that execution failures propagate directly to task failure. Adding retry raises the success rate to 79%, consistent with the theoretical two-attempt success probability under an independence assumption 24 Table 3: Impact of retry and recovery (100 trials, 50% failure rate). Strategy Succ. (%, 95% CI) Steps Recovery None 49.0 [39.3, 58.8] 3.5 0.0 Retry 79.0 [70.0, 86.1] 4.3 0.0 Retry + Recov. 100.0 [96.4, 100] 5.2 0.3 

(1 − 0.52 = 75% , with additional gains from re-planning after earlier steps). The combination of retry and recovery achieves 100% success: when retries are exhausted, the recovery action resets the alignment state, allowing the re-planning loop to generate a corrected plan. The additional execution cost (5.2 vs. 3.5 steps) reflects the fallback actions, which we consider an acceptable trade-off for full task completion. 

6.4. Policy Enforcement 

We evaluate the policy-separated runtime by injecting a mix of valid and invalid skill execution requests across all loaded ECMs. Invalid requests in-clude: skills requesting blocked actuators (e.g., knife), skills with high risk lev-els, cross-ECM permission violations (e.g., invoking a dumpling skill under the clean_table ECM context), and requests for nonexistent skills. We test 18 dis-tinct request types per trial across 100 trials (1800 total checks).          

> Table 4: Policy enforcement (1800 permission checks). Setting Block (%) F. Accept (%) F. Reject (%) Policy Disabled 0.0 100.0 0.0 Policy Enabled 100.0 0.0 0.0

As shown in Table 4, the three-layer policy check (operator override, ECM-declared permissions, and skill-level risk/actuator scope) correctly blocks all invalid requests while admitting all valid ones, with zero false rejections and zero false acceptances. We emphasize that this result is deterministic by construction: the policy engine is entirely rule-based, so the 100% blocking 25 rate and 0% false-acceptance rate follow directly from the policy definitions rather than being discovered empirically. The value of this experiment lies in verifying the correct implementation of the policy engine across all 1800 permission checks, not in establishing a statistical claim. The policy check overhead is negligible ( <0.01 ms per check), confirming that safety enforcement can be applied to every skill invocation without measurable performance impact. Stochastic policies or learned safety filters would require statistical treatment of false-positive and false-negative rates. 

6.5. Published-Baseline Comparison 

To evaluate AEROS against established execution architectures, we com-pare four execution strategies across three diverse tasks ( n = 100 trials per condition). The baselines represent published architectural approaches: Flat Pipeline Colledanchise and Ögren (2018): a fixed skill sequence executed once without retry, re-planning, or policy enforcement; BehaviorTree.CPP-style execution Colledanchise and Ögren (2018); Iovino et al. (2022): a behavior-tree with deterministic fallback sequences and configurable retry depth ( k = 3 ); 

ProgPrompt-style execution Singh et al. (2023): LLM-based task planning with configurable re-planning attempts ( k = 3 , resampling from environment feedback); and AEROS (full) : the complete architecture with dynamic re-planning, retry, recovery, and policy enforcement. The reimplemented baselines capture the execution semantics of these pub-lished systems while operating within the same evaluation environment (PyBul-let, ROS 2 bridge) to ensure fair comparison. As shown in Table 5, AEROS achieves perfect success (100%) across all three tasks, demonstrating a consistent advantage over published-architecture baselines. BehaviorTree.CPP-style execution and ProgPrompt-style execution both achieve 92.7% mean success, showing that fixed retry strategies and ex-ternal re-planning approaches provide substantial but incomplete solutions to task robustness. The flat pipeline baseline achieves 67.7% mean success, con-firming that basic sequential execution without adaptation fails under realistic 26 Table 5: Experiment 4 — Published-baseline comparison (4 architectures × 3 tasks, n = 100       

> per condition). CI = 95% Wilson score interval. Fisher’s exact test (AEROS vs. BT.CPP): dumpling p= 0 .030 , clean_table p < 0.001 , fetch_object p= 0 .007 .

Architecture Dumpling (%) CleanTbl (%) FetchObj (%) Mean Flat Pipeline 73.0 [63.3, 80.8] 57.0 [47.2, 66.4] 73.0 [63.3, 80.8] 67.7 BT.CPP (retry=3) 95.0 [88.8, 97.8] 90.0 [82.4, 94.8] 93.0 [86.1, 96.7] 92.7 ProgPrompt (replan=3) 95.0 [88.8, 97.8] 90.0 [82.4, 94.8] 93.0 [86.1, 96.7] 92.7 AEROS (full) 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0   

> Table 6: Experiment 5 — Cross-task generality: static vs. dynamic re-planning on three tasks (n= 100 each). CI = 95% Wilson score interval.

Task Static (%) 95% CI Dynamic (%) 95% CI Dumpling 72.0 [62.5, 79.9] 100.0 [96.3, 100] CleanTbl 51.0 [41.3, 60.6] 100.0 [96.3, 100] FetchObj 63.0 [53.2, 71.8] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 

failure rates. Fisher’s exact test shows that AEROS’s improvement over Behav-iorTree.CPP is statistically significant at p < 0.05 on all three tasks, with the strongest evidence on the clean_table task ( p < 0.001 ). The additional execu-tion cost of AEROS (additional re-planning cycles) is justified by the qualitative guarantee of task completion across diverse task structures. 

6.6. Cross-Task Generality 

To evaluate whether the runtime benefits generalize across diverse task struc-tures without task-specific tuning, we compare static-plan execution against dynamic re-planning on all three tasks ( n = 100 trials per task). This experi-ment isolates the contribution of closed-loop adaptation independent of baseline architecture choice. Table 6 shows that dynamic re-planning achieves perfect (100%) success on all three tasks, while static planning ranges from 51%–72% depending on task 27 Table 7: Experiment 6 — Runtime ECM hot-swapping ( n = 100 ). CI = 95% Wilson score interval. 

Metric Result (%, 95% CI) ECM swap success 100.0 [96.3, 100] Post-swap task success 100.0 [96.3, 100] Overall (both tasks) 100.0 [96.3, 100] structure. The consistency of AEROS’s 100% performance across manipula-tion, perception, and navigation tasks confirms that the runtime’s benefits are not task-specific and do not require task-dependent tuning. The wide variance in static success (51%–72%) reflects the different failure models and complex-ity levels inherent in each task, yet AEROS uniformly adapts via closed-loop re-planning. We note that all three tasks operate within the tabletop manip-ulation domain; “cross-task” here refers to structural diversity (pure manipu-lation, perception-heavy surface cleaning, and navigation-plus-manipulation), not cross-domain generalization to fundamentally different robot morphologies or environments. 

6.7. Runtime ECM Hot-Swapping 

To validate dynamic capability extension—a core architectural claim—we test whether ECMs can be loaded at runtime and immediately utilized by the persistent agent without restarting or re-initializing the system. The agent starts with only the make_dumplings ECM loaded. After com-pleting the dumpling task, a clean_table ECM is dynamically loaded into the ECM registry at runtime. The agent must detect the newly available skills and plan and execute the table-cleaning task using only these new capabilities. We run n = 100 independent randomized trials (30% failure rate on wrap , 40% on 

wipe ; dynamic re-planning enabled for both tasks). As shown in Table 7, all 100 trials successfully load the new ECM and complete the subsequent task. The mean swap latency is <0.001 ms (registry 28 Table 8: Experiment 7 — Ablation study: AEROS variants ( n = 100 per condition). CI = 95% Wilson score interval. 

Variant Dumpling (%) CleanTbl (%) FetchObj (%) Mean AEROS (full) 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 AEROS-no-policy 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 100.0 AEROS-static-plan 97.0 [91.5, 99.0] 86.0 [77.9, 91.5] 100.0 [96.3, 100] 94.3 AEROS-no-recovery 97.0 [91.5, 99.0] 86.0 [77.9, 91.5] 92.0 [85.0, 95.9] 91.7 

update only), confirming that ECM hot-swapping imposes negligible overhead. As with Experiment 3, the swap operation itself is deterministic (the registry always accepts a well-formed ECM definition), so the 100% swap success rate is by construction. The experimental value lies in verifying that (a) the agent correctly discovers and plans with newly available skills, and (b) task execution after hot-swap is unaffected by the dynamic capability change, with no degrada-tion relative to Experiment 5’s static-load baseline (87% under identical failure conditions). The higher success rate here (100% vs. 87%) is attributable to the combined effect of re-planning across both tasks rather than clean_table alone. Memory persistence and cross-session experience accumulation remain ar-chitecturally supported but empirically untested, and are explicitly targeted as future work (Section 7). 

6.8. Ablation Study 

To decompose AEROS’s advantage, we selectively disable individual archi-tectural components and evaluate all four variants under the same conditions as Experiment 4 ( n = 100 trials per condition, identical failure rates). The four variants are: AEROS (full) : the complete architecture; AEROS-no-policy :policy enforcement bypassed (all skill invocations permitted); AEROS-static-plan : plan generated once, executed sequentially without re-planning (retains retry, recovery, and policy); AEROS-no-recovery : recovery/fallback actions removed (retains re-planning, retry, and policy). 29 Table 8 reveals three findings. First, removing policy enforcement has no ef-fect on task success under benign conditions (AEROS-no-policy = AEROS-full = 100%), confirming that the policy layer acts as a safety guard rather than a task-completion mechanism. Its contribution would become visible under adver-sarial conditions (e.g., malformed ECMs attempting unsafe actions). Second, removing dynamic re-planning (AEROS-static-plan) causes a 5.7 percentage-point mean drop, with the largest impact on the clean_table task (86%), which has the highest per-step failure rate (40%). Third, removing recovery actions (AEROS-no-recovery) causes the largest mean degradation (8.3pp), particularly on fetch_object (92%, down from 100%), where grasp recovery is critical for handling perception failures. Together, dynamic re-planning and recovery are the two primary contributors to AEROS’s robustness advantage over published baselines. 

6.9. Failure Boundary 

Experiments 1–7 use moderate failure probabilities (30%–40%), under which AEROS achieves 100% success. To characterize where each architecture breaks down, we sweep the per-skill failure probability pfail from 10% to 90% in 10-point increments, averaging across all three tasks ( n = 100 trials per condition per task). Figure 5 shows that AEROS maintains near-perfect success ( >99%) up to 

pfail = 70% and degrades gracefully to 97% at 80% and 82.3% at 90%. In contrast, both BT.CPP and ProgPrompt baselines fall below 90% at pfail =50% and reach 27.7% at 90%. The flat pipeline degrades most rapidly, falling below 50% at pfail = 50% . AEROS’s robustness derives from the multiplicative effect of dynamic re-planning (which generates fresh plans after each failure) and recovery actions (which restore the world state to a recoverable configuration). The 82.3% floor at pfail = 90% corresponds to the re-planning cycle budget (k = 10 ): at extreme failure rates, some trials exhaust all re-plan cycles before completing the task. 30 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

> Skill Failure Probability (%)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Mean Task Success Rate (%)
> Failure Boundary: Success Rate vs. Failure Probability
> Flat Pipeline
> BT.CPP (retry=3)
> ProgPrompt (replan=3)
> AEROS (full)

Figure 5: Experiment 8 — Failure boundary: mean task success rate vs. skill failure proba-bility, averaged across three tasks ( n = 100 per condition per task). AEROS maintains >97% success up to pfail = 80% and degrades gracefully at 90%, whereas published baselines fall below 90% success at pfail = 50% .

6.10. Discussion of Results 

The eight experiments collectively validate the core mechanisms and archi-tectural claims of the proposed system. Experiments 1–3 isolate individual runtime features: dynamic re-planning (Exp. 1) demonstrates robust adaptation to environmental uncertainty; retry and recovery (Exp. 2) achieves graceful degradation under high failure rates; policy enforcement (Exp. 3) confirms deterministic access control with zero false rejections or acceptances. Experiment 4 directly compares AEROS against published-baseline archi-tectures across three diverse tasks. BehaviorTree.CPP-style execution (92.7% mean success) and ProgPrompt-style execution (92.7% mean) represent mature, well-established architectural approaches from the literature. AEROS achieves 100% success across all three tasks, with statistical significance (Fisher’s ex-act, p < 0.05 ) on each individual task, demonstrating a consistent architectural advantage. The improvement of AEROS over published baselines reflects the 31 combined benefit of dynamic re-planning, implicit recovery strategies, and pol-icy enforcement — properties that are either absent or only partially present in the baselines. Experiment 5 validates cross-task generality: the same runtime, with no task-specific tuning, achieves 100% success on all three structurally different tasks (manipulation, tabletop, navigation+manipulation), whereas static plan-ning achieves only 51%–72% depending on task structure. This demonstrates that AEROS’s benefits are not task-specific and do not require engineering sep-arate tuning per domain. Experiment 6 validates dynamic capability extension: ECMs loaded at run-time are immediately available to the agent, with 100% post-swap task success, confirming that the ECM hot-swapping mechanism works as designed. Experiment 7 (ablation) decomposes AEROS’s advantage: dynamic replanning and recovery actions are the two primary contributors ( −5.7pp and −8.3pp mean degradation when removed, respectively), while policy enforcement has no ef-fect on task success under benign conditions. Experiment 8 (failure boundary) shows that AEROS maintains >97% success up to pfail = 80% , while published baselines fall below 90% at pfail = 50% , providing clear evidence of where each architecture breaks down. Together, these properties emerge from the architecture itself rather than from task-specific engineering. The same runtime mechanisms apply uniformly across all ECMs and tasks, supporting the generality of the proposed design. 

Statistical significance.. Experiment 4 Fisher’s exact test results: AEROS vs. BT.CPP shows p = 0 .030 (dumpling), p < 0.001 (clean_table), p = 0 .007 

(fetch_object), indicating significant improvement across all three tasks. Ex-periments 1–3 and 6 use deterministic or near-ceiling measures (policy enforce-ment, hot-swap) and do not require statistical testing. Experiment 5 demon-strates qualitatively consistent improvement (0% success under static planning cannot occur by chance and confirms the necessity of dynamic re-planning). 32 Tail behavior.. The re-planning loop in Experiments 1, 4, and 5 is bounded by MAX_REPLAN_CYCLES = 10 . Under the failure model used (independent Bernoulli, pfail = 0 .30 ), the number of re-plan cycles per trial follows a geo-metric distribution with P (replans > k ) = 0 .30 k. Monte Carlo simulation ( 10 4

replications of n = 100 trials) yields an expected worst-case of 4.8 re-plan cycles (95th percentile: 7). For Experiment 5 ( pfail = 0 .40 ), the expected worst-case is 6.2 (95th percentile: 9). No trial in any experiment reached the 10-cycle cap. We note that the independence assumption between attempts is a simplification; correlated failures in physical systems would shift these tail statistics. 

7. Discussion 

In this section, we discuss the baseline evaluation, limitations, generalizabil-ity, and future directions of the proposed single-agent robotic architecture. 

7.1. Baseline Evaluation and Architectural Comparison 

Experiment 4 directly compares AEROS against two published-architecture baselines (BehaviorTree.CPP-style execution and ProgPrompt-style LLM plan-ning) across three diverse tasks. These baselines represent well-established ap-proaches from the literature and are reimplemented to operate within the same evaluation environment (PyBullet, ROS 2 bridge) for fair comparison. 

Baseline faithfulness.. Because we reimplement the baselines rather than run-ning the original frameworks, we provide an explicit design-decision comparison in Table 9 to document which execution semantics are preserved and where our reimplementation diverges. The key execution semantics—tick-based traversal with bounded retry for BT.CPP, and sequential execution with full-plan regeneration for ProgPrompt— are faithfully preserved. The primary divergences are (1) the omission of non-functional components (Groot visualization for BT.CPP), and (2) the use of a rule-based planner in place of the LLM instantiation for ProgPrompt. The latter is a deliberate design choice: by holding the planner constant across all 33 conditions, we isolate the contribution of execution architecture from planner quality , which is the variable under study. A comparison using the original LLM-based ProgPrompt planner would conflate architectural differences with model-specific performance variance. Future work could strengthen this comparison by integrating the original baseline frameworks directly into the evaluation. 

7.2. Limitations 

First, while the current evaluation uses PyBullet physics simulation with a 7-DOF manipulator, the simulated environment does not fully capture real-world uncertainties such as sensor noise, contact dynamics, and actuation de-lays. Deploying and validating the architecture on physical robot platforms re-mains an important step for future work. Regarding sim-to-real transfer Collins et al. (2021), we note that the three architectural layers face different transfer challenges: (a) the agent layer (planner, world model) requires calibration of world-state predicates to physical sensor readings, which is independent of the planning logic itself; (b) the ECM layer requires that individual skills be val-idated against real actuator dynamics, a per-skill engineering effort analogous to standard sim-to-real skill transfer; (c) the runtime layer (policy enforcement, execution trace) operates at the symbolic level and transfers without modifica-tion, since it evaluates Boolean permission predicates rather than continuous signals. Thus, the primary sim-to-real burden falls on the skill implementations within ECMs, not on the architectural mechanisms evaluated in this paper. Second, the scalability of the architecture with respect to the number of ECMs has not been fully explored. As the number of installed capability pack-ages increases, the complexity of skill selection, dependency resolution, and runtime policy evaluation may introduce additional overhead. In the current implementation, the planner’s decision latency scales linearly with the number of registered skills ( O(|S|) for skill lookup), and the policy engine evaluates a fixed set of rules per invocation ( O(|R|)). For the two-ECM configuration eval-uated here ( |S| = 12 , |R| = 6 ), total per-invocation overhead is sub-millisecond. However, at larger scales (e.g., 50+ ECMs with hundreds of skills), the single-34 agent bottleneck may become significant: the sequential decision loop forces all skill selection and policy evaluation through a single control path. Quantify-ing this scalability ceiling through synthetic experiments with increasing ECM counts is an important next step. Third, the formalization presented in this paper focuses on high-level sys-tem behavior and safety invariants, but does not provide a complete formal verification of all possible execution paths. In particular, interactions between complex skill compositions and dynamic policy constraints may require more rigorous analysis, potentially involving formal verification or model checking techniques Luckcuck et al. (2019). Fourth, the current policy enforcement operates at the skill-invocation level and does not address real-time latency guarantees when an LLM planner is in the decision loop. As recent work on LLM-based robotic control grows Royce et al. (2024), reconciling variable-latency neural inference with bounded worst-case execution time for safety-critical actions remains an open architectural challenge. Fifth, while Experiment 6 validates runtime ECM hot-swapping, the archi-tecture also defines memory persistence and cross-session experience accumu-lation as design features (Sections 4–5) that remain empirically untested. In particular, cross-session memory transfer and cumulative skill improvement re-quire longitudinal experiments that are beyond the scope of this initial study and are targeted as priorities for future work. Sixth, the current design assumes persistent availability of the single agent and does not address agent-level fault tolerance. If the persistent agent crashes (e.g., due to an unhandled exception in the planner or a memory corruption), the entire system halts because no secondary control authority exists by design. For a system positioned as an “operating architecture,” this is a notable gap. Potential mitigation strategies include checkpointing the agent’s world-state and execution trace at each re-plan cycle (enabling restart-from-checkpoint), and implementing a lightweight watchdog process that monitors agent heartbeats and triggers a cold restart with state recovery. These mechanisms are compatible 35 with the single-agent principle—the watchdog is not itself an agent (it has no goals or decision authority) but a system-level monitor analogous to a kernel panic handler. Designing and validating such fault tolerance mechanisms is an important direction for future work. 

7.3. Generality and Platform Independence 

Although the reference implementation is built on ROS 2 and PyBullet, the proposed architecture is not tied to a specific middleware or simulation frame-work. The separation between agent logic, capability packages, and runtime enforcement allows the system to be mapped onto different execution backends. In particular, the persistent agent in our architecture represents a logical control entity rather than a specific implementation. It can be instantiated us-ing a wide range of agentic systems, including LLM-based planning agents or conventional rule-based controllers, making the framework both model-agnostic and implementation-agnostic. Similarly, the ECM interface and runtime can be adapted to different hardware platforms or real-time control systems. This suggests that the architecture defines a candidate computational model for em-bodied intelligent systems, rather than a framework specific to a particular soft-ware stack. Validating this generality across diverse platforms and task domains remains an important direction for future work. 

7.4. Single-Agent Scope and Multi-Robot Extension 

This work focuses on the single-robot setting, where one persistent agent gov-erns the entire system. We acknowledge that multi-agent decomposition within a single robot offers genuine advantages: concurrent reasoning across subsys-tems can reduce latency, specialized agents can be independently developed and tested, and agent boundaries provide natural fault-isolation units. These properties are particularly valuable in large-scale systems with heterogeneous hardware and time-critical subsystems. However, we argue that for a broad class of manipulation and service tasks, these benefits are outweighed by the costs of maintaining consistency across 36 multiple control authorities, resolving conflicts in shared state, and debugging emergent behavior arising from inter-agent interactions. The single-agent model trades parallelism for coherence: it provides a single locus of identity, mem-ory, and decision authority that simplifies reasoning about system behavior and safety. Importantly, this does not preclude multi-robot scenarios. Instead, we en-vision a system in which each robot corresponds to one persistent agent, and multi-robot coordination emerges from interactions between agents at a higher level. This distinction avoids introducing multiple agents within a single robot, while still allowing distributed systems to be constructed as collections of single-agent robots. A rigorous empirical comparison between single-agent and multi-agent ar-chitectures on the same task remains an important open question. 

Abstraction-level objection.. A modern AEROS agent may internally consist of multiple sub-models (LLM planner, vision encoder, motion controller). We adopt a principled criterion: a component is an agent if and only if it maintains its own persistent identity, goal state, and decision authority. Stateless sub-models invoked by the agent are tools , not agents: agents negotiate, tools are called. 

7.5. Future Directions 

Key directions include: (1) real-robot deployment with physical policy vali-dation and sim-to-real transfer; (2) learning-based capability acquisition, where skills are learned from data and packaged as ECMs; (3) large-scale capabil-ity ecosystems with ECM versioning, sharing, and trust; and (4) standardized architectural benchmarks enabling controlled architecture-vs-architecture com-parisons. 37 Table 9: Baseline faithfulness: design decisions preserved and divergences from the original published systems. 

Design Decision BT.CPP Origi-nal Colledanchise and Ögren (2018) Our Reimplementa-tion Divergence Execution model Tick-based traversal Tick-based traversal None Fallback strategy Sequence + Fallback nodes Sequence +Retry( k=3) deco-rator Equivalent retry semantics Re-planning Not supported (static tree) Not supported (static tree) None Recovery actions Via explicit Fallback subtrees No explicit recovery subtrees Simplified Visualization Groot GUI monitoring Not included Non-functional Design Decision ProgPrompt Origi-nal Singh et al. (2023) Our Reimplementa-tion Divergence Plan generation LLM generates pythonic plan Rule-based full-plan generation Different planner Execution model Sequential step execu-tion Sequential step execu-tion None Re-planning Full plan regeneration on failure Full plan regeneration (k=3) Same semantics Environment feedback Assertion-based state checks World-state condition checks Equivalent LLM instantia-tion GPT-3/Codex Not used (rule-based) Isolates architec-ture from LLM 

38 8. Conclusion 

This paper introduced AEROS, an architecture built on three core principles: one robot hosts exactly one persistent agent (the Single-Agent Robot Principle), capabilities are delivered through installable Embodied Capability Modules, and safety is enforced by a policy-separated runtime that is independent of capability logic. Evaluation in PyBullet simulation across eight experiments and three diverse tasks showed that the architecture enables robust dynamic replanning (100% success vs. 51%–72% static planning), failure recovery under stochastic skill failures, deterministic policy enforcement with zero false acceptances, consistent cross-task generality without task-specific tuning, published-baseline compari-son showing statistical significance over BehaviorTree.CPP and ProgPrompt-style execution (100% vs. 92.7%, p < 0.05 ), runtime ECM hot-swapping with negligible overhead ( < 0.001 ms), ablation analysis confirming dynamic re-planning and recovery as the primary contributors to robustness, and graceful degra-dation under extreme failure rates ( >97% success at pfail = 80% , 82.3% at 

pfail = 90% ). The primary limitations—simulation-only validation, reimple-mented rather than original-framework baselines, and untested memory/lifecycle features—are acknowledged and targeted as priorities for future work, alongside real-robot deployment and scalability analysis. In the longer term, this architecture points toward a robotic operating model in which capabilities can be installed, composed, and governed in a principled manner, analogous to application ecosystems in modern computing platforms. 

Appendix A. Planning Rules 

This appendix lists the complete rule-based planning logic used in the ref-erence implementation evaluated in Section 7. The planner is invoked at each re-planning cycle and returns a task graph conditioned on the current world state. Each task’s plan skill inspects world-state predicates and emits only the steps that remain incomplete. 39 Task Routing (Agent-Level Planner) 

The agent-level planner maps natural-language instructions to the appropri-ate ECM plan skill via keyword matching: 

if "dumpling" in instruction: return "dumpling.plan" elif "clean" or "table" in instruction: return "clean.plan" elif "fetch" or "bring" or "retrieve": return "fetch.plan" 

Dumpling Task Rules 

> def plan(world_state): steps = [] if not world.dough_on_workspace or not world.filling_on_workspace: steps += [dumpling.prepare] if not world.wrapper_aligned and not world.dumpling_wrapped: steps += [dumpling.recover] if not world.dumpling_wrapped: steps += [dumpling.wrap, retry=2, on_failure=dumpling.recover] if not world.dumpling_cooked: steps += [dumpling.boil] return steps

Four world-state predicates ( dough_on_workspace , wrapper_aligned , dumpling_ wrapped , dumpling_cooked ) determine which steps are emitted. The wrap step includes a retry budget of 2 and a recovery fallback ( dumpling.recover ) that realigns the wrapper. 40 Clean Table Task Rules 

> def plan(world_state): steps = [] if not world.table_wiped: steps += [clean.wipe] if not world.table_organized: steps += [clean.organize] return steps

Two predicates ( table_wiped , table_organized ). Retry and recovery for 

clean.wipe are injected at the agent level (retry=1, on_failure=clean.recover). 

Fetch Object Task Rules 

> def plan(world_state): steps = [] if not world.robot_at_target: steps += [fetch.navigate] if not world.object_detected: steps += [fetch.detect] if not world.object_grasped: steps += [fetch.grasp, retry=1, on_failure=fetch.recover] if not world.object_delivered: steps += [fetch.deliver] return steps

Four predicates spanning navigation and manipulation. The grasp step includes retry and recovery to handle stochastic perception failures (35% failure rate in evaluation). 

Generality Assessment 

The planning rules are strictly world-state-conditioned: each rule checks a single Boolean predicate and emits the corresponding skill if the predicate is 41 unsatisfied. This pattern generalizes to any task expressible as a sequence of state transitions, provided the task’s completion conditions can be represented as world-state predicates. The rules are intentionally simple to isolate architec-tural contributions from planner sophistication, as discussed in Section 6.4. 

References 

Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David, B., Finn, C., et al., 2022. Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Anderson, J.R., 1993. Rules of the Mind. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Ao, J., Hao, X., Yang, B., Chen, H., 2024. LLM-as-BT-planner: Leveraging LLMs for behavior tree generation in robot task planning, in: IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Bercher, P., Alford, R., Höller, D., 2023. A survey on hierarchical task network planning. Artificial Intelligence 318, 103891. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2023. 103891 .Bhat, S., Parnandi, A., Walsman, A., Ding, Y., Liu, Z., Perez-D’Arpino, C., Allen, P.K., 2024. Grounding LLMs for robot task planning using closed-loop state feedback, in: Advanced Robotics, pp. 1316–1331. doi: 10.1080/ 01691864.2024.2401412 .Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M., Theraulaz, G., 1999. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems. Santa Fe Institute Studies on the Sciences of Complexity, Oxford University Press. Bonasso, R.P., Firby, R.J., Gat, E., Kortenkamp, D., Miller, D.P., Slack, M.G., 1997. Experiences with an architecture for intelligent, reactive agents. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 9, 237–256. doi: 10.1080/ 095281397147103 .42 Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen, X., Choromanski, K., et al., 2023a. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Dabis, J., Finn, C., et al., 2023b. RT-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale, in: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS). Brooks, R.A., 1986. A robust layered control system for a mobile robot. IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation 2, 14–23. doi: 10.1109/JRA.1986. 1087032 .Bruyninckx, H., 2001. Open robot control software: The OROCOS project, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA), IEEE. pp. 2523–2528. Bytecode Alliance, 2021. WebAssembly System Interface (WASI). https:// wasi.dev/ .Cashmore, M., Fox, M., Long, D., Magazzeni, D., Ridder, B., Carrera, A., Palomeras, N., Hurtos, N., Carreras, M., 2015. ROSPlan: Planning in the robot operating system, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS). Chen, J., Gao, C., Xu, X., Lin, Y., Li, D., Zhu, Z., Jiang, H., Sun, Y., Li, Y., Gao, Y., 2024. EMOS: Embodiment-aware heterogeneous multi-robot operating system with LLM agents, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Colledanchise, M., Ögren, P., 2018. Behavior Trees in Robotics and AI: An Introduction. CRC Press. Collins, J., Chand, S., Vanderkop, A., Howard, D., 2021. On the use of sim-ulation in robotics: Opportunities, challenges, and suggestions for moving forward, in: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 43 Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M.S.M., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., et al., 2023. PaLM-E: An embodied multimodal language model, in: International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML). Elkady, A., Sobh, T., 2012. Robotics middleware: A comprehensive literature survey and attribute-based bibliography. Journal of Robotics 2012. doi: 10. 1155/2012/959013 .Felt, A.P., Chin, E., Hanna, S., Song, D., Wagner, D., 2011. Android permis-sions demystified, in: Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pp. 627–638. doi: 10.1145/2046707. 2046779 .García, S., Strüber, D., Brugali, D., Berger, T., Pelliccione, P., 2020. Robotics software engineering: A perspective from the service robotics domain, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineer-ing Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE), pp. 593–604. doi: 10.1145/3368089.3409743 .Garrett, C.R., Chitnis, R., Holladay, R., Kim, B., Silver, T., Kaelbling, L.P., Lozano-Pérez, T., 2021. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 4, 265–293. doi: 10.1146/ annurev-control-091420-084139 .Gu, J., Xiang, F., Li, X., Ling, Z., Liu, X., Mu, T., Tang, Y., Tao, S., Wei, X., Yao, Y., Yuan, X., Xie, P., Huang, Z., Chen, R., Su, H., 2023. ManiSkill2: A unified benchmark for generalizable manipulation skills, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). Huang, W., Wang, C., Zhang, R., Li, Y., Wu, J., Fei-Fei, L., 2023. VoxPoser: Composable 3D value maps for robotic manipulation with language models, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Huang, W., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Chan, H., Liang, J., Florence, P., Zeng, A., Tompson, J., Mordatch, I., Chebotar, Y., et al., 2022. Inner monologue: 44 Embodied reasoning through planning with language models, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Ingrand, F., Ghallab, M., 2017. Deliberation for autonomous robots: A survey. Artificial Intelligence 247, 10–44. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2014.11.003 .International Organization for Standardization, 2011. Robotics — safety re-quirements for industrial robots. Iovino, M., Scukins, E., Styrud, J., Ögren, P., Smith, C., 2022. A survey of behavior trees in robotics and AI. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 154, 104096. doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2022.104096 .Khan, A., Ali, A., Rizvi, S.T.W., et al., 2025. Safety aware task planning via large language models in robotics, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). Kim, Y., Kim, D., Choi, J., Park, J., Oh, N., Park, D., 2024. A survey on integration of large language models with intelligent robots. Intelligent Service Robotics 17, 1091–1107. doi: 10.1007/s11370-024-00550-5 .Klein, G., Elphinstone, K., Heiser, G., Andronick, J., Cock, D., Derrin, P., Elkaduwe, D., Engelhardt, K., Kolanski, R., Norrish, M., Sewell, T., Tuch, H., Winwood, S., 2009. seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), pp. 207–220. doi: 10.1145/1629575.1629596 .Konidaris, G., Kuindersma, S., Grupen, R., Barto, A., 2012. Robot learning from demonstration by constructing skill trees. The International Journal of Robotics Research 31, 360–375. doi: 10.1177/0278364911428653 .Kotseruba, I., Tsotsos, J.K., 2020. 40 years of cognitive architectures: Core cognitive abilities and practical applications. Artificial Intelligence Review 53, 17–94. doi: 10.1007/s10462-018-9646-y .45 Laird, J.E., Newell, A., Rosenbloom, P.S., 1987. SOAR: An architecture for gen-eral intelligence. Artificial Intelligence 33, 1–64. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(87) 90050-6 .Li, C., Zhang, R., Wong, J., Gokmen, C., Srivastava, S., Martín-Martín, R., Wang, C., Levine, S., Lingelbach, M., Sun, J., Bajracharya, M., Siddharth, M., Gweon, H., Hashimoto, J., Zhong, H., et al., 2023. BEHAVIOR-1k: A human-centered, embodied AI benchmark with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Liang, J., Huang, W., Xia, F., Xu, P., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., Florence, P., Zeng, A., 2023. Code as policies: Language model programs for embod-ied control, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9493–9500. Luckcuck, M., Farrell, M., Dennis, L.A., Dixon, C., Fisher, M., 2019. Formal specification and verification of autonomous robotic systems: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys 52, 1–41. doi: 10.1145/3342355 .Macenski, S., Foote, T., Gerkey, B., Lalancette, C., Woodall, W., 2022. Robot operating system 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild. Science Robotics 7, eabm6074. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074 .Mao, W., Jiang, J., Fang, F., Chen, Y., et al., 2024. RoboMatrix: A skill-centric hierarchical framework for scalable robot task planning and execution in open-world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00171 . Mayr, M., Rovida, F., Krüger, V., 2023. SkiROS2: A skill-based robot con-trol platform for ROS, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6273–6280. Metta, G., Fitzpatrick, P., Natale, L., 2006. YARP: Yet another robot platform. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 3, 43–48. doi: 10.5772/ 5761 .46 Nesnas, I.A.D., Wright, A., Bajracharya, M., Simmons, R., Estlin, T., Kim, W.S., 2003. CLARAty: An architecture for reusable robotic software. Pro-ceedings of SPIE — Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology V 5083, 253–264. doi: 10.1117/12.503444 .Patil, S.G., Zhang, T., Wang, X., Gonzalez, J.E., 2024. Gorilla: Large language model connected with massive APIs, in: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Paxton, C., Hundt, A., Jonathan, F., Guerin, K., Hager, G.D., 2017. CoSTAR: Instructing collaborative robots with behavior trees and vision, in: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 564–571. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989070 .Rana, K., Haviland, J., Garg, S., Abou-Chakra, J., Reid, I., Suenderhauf, N., 2023. SayPlan: Grounding large language models using 3D scene graphs for scalable task planning, in: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). Rovida, F., Crosby, M., Holz, D., Polydoros, A.S., Großmann, B., Petrick, R.P.A., Krüger, V., 2017. SkiROS — a skill-based robot control platform on top of ROS, in: Robot Operating System (ROS): The Complete Reference, Springer. pp. 121–160. Royce, R., et al., 2024. Enabling novel mission operations and interactions with ROSA: The robot operating system agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06472 . Scheutz, M., 2025. The TRADE middleware for advanced robotic architectures, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Symposium Series. Shoham, Y., Leyton-Brown, K., 2008. Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations. Cambridge University Press. Singh, I., Blukis, V., Mousavian, A., Goyal, A., Xu, D., Tremblay, J., Fox, D., Thomason, J., Garg, A., 2023. ProgPrompt: Generating sit-uated robot task plans using large language models, in: IEEE Interna-47 tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10161317 .Tan, H., Hao, X., et al., 2025. RoboOS: A hierarchical embodied frame-work for cross-embodiment and multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03673 . Vemprala, S., Bonatti, R., Bucker, A., Kapoor, A., 2024. ChatGPT for robotics: Design principles and model abilities. IEEE Access 12, 55682–55696. doi: 10. 1109/ACCESS.2024.3387941 .Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., Anand-kumar, A., 2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large lan-guage models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) . Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., Zhao, W.X., Wei, Z., Wen, J.R., 2024. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science 18, 186345. doi: 10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1 .Watson, R.N.M., Anderson, J., Laurie, B., Kennaway, K., 2010. Capsicum: Practical capabilities for UNIX, in: Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Association. pp. 29–46. Yan, Z., Jouandeau, N., Cherif, A.A., 2013. A survey and analysis of multi-robot coordination. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 10, 399. doi: 10.5772/57313 .Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., Cao, Y., 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, in: Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 48