Title: Bridging Discrete Planning and Continuous Execution for Redundant Robot

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02021v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:06:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Bridging Discrete Planning and Continuous Execution for Redundant Robot Manipulators 

Teng Yan ∗, Yue Yu ∗, Yihan Liu ∗, Bingzhuo Zhong ∗,∗∗ ∗ The Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, Information Hub, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511400, China (e-mail: tyan497@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, yyu704@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, yliu135@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn).  

> ∗∗

The Thrust of Intelligent Transportation, System Hub, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511400, China (e-mail: bingzhuoz@hkust-gz.edu.cn) 

Abstract: Voxel-grid reinforcement learning is widely adopted for path planning in redundant manipulators due to its simplicity and reproducibility. However, direct execution through point-wise numerical inverse kinematics on 7-DoF arms often yields step-size jitter, abrupt joint transitions, and instability near singular configurations. This work proposes a bridging framework between discrete planning and continuous execution without modifying the discrete planner itself. On the planning side, step-normalized 26-neighbor Cartesian actions and a geometric tie-breaking mechanism are introduced to suppress unnecessary turns and eliminate step-size oscillations. On the execution side, a task-priority damped least-squares (TP-DLS) inverse kinematics layer is implemented. This layer treats end-effector position as a primary task, while posture and joint centering are handled as subordinate tasks projected into the null space, combined with trust-region clipping and joint velocity constraints. On a 7-DoF manipulator in random sparse, medium, and dense environments, this bridge raises planning success in dense scenes from about 0.58 to 1.00, shortens representative path length from roughly 1.53 m to 1.10 m, and—while keeping end-effector error below 1 mm—reduces peak joint accelerations by over an order of magnitude, substantially improving the continuous execution quality of voxel-based RL paths on redundant manipulators. 

Keywords: Robot manipulators, Redundant robots, Motion planning, Path planning, Reinforcement learning, Trajectory generation, Autonomous systems, Collision avoidance 1. INTRODUCTION Redundant robot manipulators are widely used in flexible and semi-structured environments, where they must gen-erate collision-free motions while respecting joint limits, avoiding singularities, and staying within actuator bounds. Classical sampling- and optimisation-based planners offer strong guarantees but rely on accurate models and care-ful tuning, which makes frequent layout or task changes expensive. Reinforcement-learning (RL) planners on vox-elised workspaces therefore become attractive: they learn a reusable value function on a finite state–action space and answer motion queries by table look-up. A common formulation discretises the task space into a voxel grid, defines a finite neighbourhood action set, and trains an RL agent to move the end-effector from a start voxel to a goal voxel while avoiding occupied cells. The output is a discrete Cartesian path. When such a path is executed on a seven-degree-of-freedom (7-DoF) redundant arm by point-wise numerical inverse kinematics (IK), however, planning and execution are misaligned: each waypoint is solved  

> ⋆This work was supported in part by Youth S&T Talent Support Programme of GDSTA (SKXRC2025468).

independently, step sizes fluctuate, joint configurations can jump, and the solution is highly sensitive to singularities and joint limits. Trajectories may converge numerically but remain dynamically implausible. Figure1 summarises the gap considered in this work. Classical motion planning answers Question 1: How to reach the goal? by producing a feasible collision-free path. For redundant manipulators in cluttered environments, it is equally important to answer Question 2: How to reach the goal better? , i.e., along a path that is short, smooth, and compliant with safety and actuation constraints. This paper focuses on this second question at the interface between a voxel-based RL planner and the continuous execution layer of a 7-DoF arm. A further difficulty stems from the geometry of the discrete action set. In a three-dimensional voxel grid, the standard 26-neighbourhood mixes axis-aligned, face-diagonal, and space-diagonal moves with different Euclidean lengths. Combined with ε-greedy exploration and approximate value functions, this anisotropy produces “saw-tooth” paths where long and short steps are interleaved and the end-effector oscillates around obstacles or meanders in 

> arXiv:2604.02021v1 [cs.RO] 2 Apr 2026

Fig. 1. Conceptual motivation . Left: classical planning - feasible collision-free path ( Q1 ); Right: practical deployment - high-quality path ( Q2 ). The proposed method meets the second requirement by bridging a voxel RL planner with a continuous execution layer on a redundant manipulator. unproductive directions. Paths become unnecessarily long, contain redundant turns, and visit homotopy classes that are hard to track smoothly in joint space. Existing techniques address only parts of this interface. Path smoothing and time-parameterisation fit continuous trajectories through discrete waypoints and enforce veloc-ity and acceleration bounds, but do not correct topological artefacts such as detours or oscillations. Damped least-squares (DLS) and task-priority IK improve robustness near singularities and support secondary goals such as joint-limit avoidance, yet are usually applied as pointwise solvers and assume already smooth references. As a result, the interface between discrete planning and continuous execution is often treated as a trivial concatenation rather than a design problem. This paper treats that interface explicitly and proposes a lightweight bridge between voxel-based RL planners and continuous execution on redundant manipulators. The RL planner is used as a black box; only the geometry of its action space and the execution layer are modified. On the planning side, the 26-neighbourhood is replaced by a step-normalized Cartesian action set with a geometric tie-breaking rule that prefers small turning angles and larger estimated clearance, regularising path geometry without changing the RL update rule. On the execution side, a TP-DLS layer tracks a globally smoothed and locally subdivided end-effector path, using joint-centering in the null space, along with norm and per-joint increment limits, to enforce trust-region-like bounds on joint updates. The proposed bridge is evaluated on a 7-DoF manipulator in MATLAB across random environments with sparse, medium, and dense obstacle distributions. Metrics at both planning and execution levels quantify path length, turn-ing behaviour, clearance, joint-space smoothness, and dy-namic feasibility. Results show that modest modifications at the planning and execution interfaces substantially im-prove planning success, shorten paths, and turn numeri-cally feasible but physically unrealistic IK sequences into dynamically reasonable motions. The main contributions of this paper are: 

Mismatch analysis. Identifies the structural mismatch between voxel-based RL paths and continuous execu-tion on redundant manipulators, clarifying the roles of anisotropic action metrics and pointwise IK in generating artefacts. 

Bridge architecture. Proposes a lightweight bridge that combines step-normalized 26-neighbour actions with geo-metric tie-breaking on the planning side and a TP-DLS execution layer with joint-centering and bounded joint updates. 

Benchmark and evidence. Develops a benchmark suite and metric set for a 7-DoF arm and demonstrates im-proved path length, joint-space smoothness, and physical executability in cluttered environments. 2. RELATED WORK 

2.1 RL-Based Motion Planning and Voxel Policies 

Recent surveys provide comprehensive overviews of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) in robotic-manipulator mo-tion planning and identify persistent limitations in safety, sample efficiency, and execution robustness on high-DOF systems (Elguea-Aguinaco et al., 2024; Han et al., 2023). For redundant manipulators, DRL-based frameworks have been shown to directly generate task-space motions while considering kinematic limits (Li et al., 2021). Research leveraging voxel or grid representations further demon-strates the suitability of discretized workspaces and finite action sets for RL-based planning (Landgraf et al., 2021; James et al., 2022). A representative example in this direction is the use of RL for autonomous obstacle-avoidance path planning on six-axis robotic arms, where voxelized environments enable stable policy learning and reliable deployment (Jia et al., 2020). Although these works validate the effectiveness of voxel and discrete-action policies, they typically focus on pro-ducing discrete end-effector paths and do not examine how such paths should be executed on redundant manipulators governed by continuous-time dynamics. 

2.2 Redundancy Resolution and Task-Priority Control 

For execution on redundant arms, damped least-squares (DLS) inverse kinematics has long been employed to bound joint velocities and mitigate singularity-induced instabil-ities (Deo and Walker, 1995). Task-priority control orga-nizes multiple objectives—such as end-effector tracking, posture optimization, and safety margins—into a hier-archical structure, projecting secondary tasks into the Jacobian null space (Nakamura et al., 1987; Basso and Pettersen, 2020). These classical formulations form the mathematical basis of the task-priority DLS (TP-DLS) execution layer used in this work. In parallel, safety-focused architectures have been pro-posed to encapsulate learning-based controllers within ver-ifiable supervisory layers (Zhong et al., 2021, 2023). The present work does not introduce a new safety filter; in-stead, it shows that a suitably regularized TP-DLS layer, together with mild action-space constraints, already yields improved smoothness and safety when executing voxel RL policies on 7-DOF arms. 

2.3 Trajectory Smoothing and Optimization 

Beyond kinematic execution, substantial research has fo-cused on smoothing piecewise-linear paths generated by sampling-based planners. Collision-aware spline construc-tions and time-parameterization approaches have been shown to reduce curvature, acceleration peaks, and dis-continuities in task-space trajectories (Pan et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2020). Optimization-based methods further integrate collision avoidance and dynamic feasibility into unified formulations (Liu et al., 2021). These techniques, however, typically require solving a dedicated optimization problem for each path. In contrast, the present work introduces a lightweight bridging mechanism. Rather than invoking a full trajec-tory optimizer, it regularizes the geometry of the discrete planner and the differential update law of the execution layer, enabling existing voxel planners to be executed directly on redundant manipulators. From the RL per-spective, sequence-modeling approaches that incorporate Q-value regularization—such as Q-Value Regularized De-cision ConvFormer (QDC)—highlight the benefits of stabi-lizing return consistency during trajectory stitching (Ruan et al., 2024). This viewpoint motivates interpreting voxel policies as discrete sequences that require tailored bridging strategies at the geometric and control levels to interface with continuous robot dynamics. 3. METHODOLOGY: BRIDGING DISCRETE GEOMETRY AND CONTINUOUS PHYSICS The method is structured into two tightly coupled layers. 

Geometry Layer. This layer operates in task space, where a voxel-based Q-learning planner generates a dis-crete end-effector path using normalized 26-connected ac-tions together with a geometric tie-breaking mechanism. 

Physics Layer. This layer operates in joint space, where a task-priority damped least-squares (TP-DLS) inverse kinematics solver tracks a smoothed version of the planned path on a 7-DoF manipulator. In the underlying implementation, the manipulator model internally stores joint configurations in row-vector format when interfacing with standard kinematic routines. For the theoretical development, however, joint configurations are denoted as column vectors q ∈ R7 to maintain consistency with conventional analytical notation. The difference be-tween row and column representations is purely notational and does not affect the underlying kinematic definitions. Let p(q) ∈ R3 denote the end-effector position obtained from the forward kinematic mapping. The corresponding geometric Jacobian is written as J(q) ∈ R6×7. Its transla-tional component, associated with the positional degrees of freedom, is denoted by Jp(q) ∈ R3×7 and corresponds to the upper three rows of J(q). 

3.1 Geometry layer: voxel-based Q-learning and action regularisation Q-learning planner on a 3-D voxel grid The reachable workspace is discretised into a uniform three-dimensional grid of cubic voxels. Let S ⊂ R3 denote the set of obstacle-free voxel centres. A tabular Q-learning agent is trained on this grid. At each decision step, the agent occupies a state s ∈ S and selects an action a ∈ A . The environment deterministically maps the pair ( s, a ) to a successor state s′ by adding the corresponding voxel offset, and returns a scalar reward r.The Q-table Q(s, a ) is updated according to 

Qk+1 (s, a ) = (1 −α) Qk(s, a )+ α r+γ max  

> a′

Qk(s′, a ′) (1) where α is the learning rate and γ is the discount factor. The reward function follows the reproduced baseline: a positive terminal reward at the goal, a large negative reward for collisions or leaving the grid, and a small step penalty to favour shorter paths and discourage wandering. After training converges, a greedy policy rolls out a se-quence of states 

s0, s 1, . . . , s N , sk ∈ S (2) connecting the start voxel s0 to the goal voxel sN . Mapping each state sk to its corresponding Cartesian location yields a discrete end-effector path 

xRL  

> k

∈ R3, k = 0 , . . . , N (3) which is the output of the geometry layer before smooth-ing. 

Normalized 26-Connected Actions with Geometric Tie-Break The core difference between the proposed planner and the baselines lies in the action geometry and the tie-break rule applied during the policy rollout. In the proposed planner, the index-space neighbour direc-tions are 

v = (∆ i, ∆j, ∆k),

∆i, ∆j, ∆k ∈ {− 1, 0, 1}, v̸ = (0 , 0, 0) (4) forming the usual 26-connected neighbourhood. Instead of using these directions directly as grid steps (as in the unnormalized 26-connected baseline), each v is mapped to a Cartesian displacement with a fixed physical step length 

δ > 0: 

a(v) = δ v

∥v∥2

∈ R3 (5) The resulting action set is 

A = {a1, . . . , a 26 } (6) where each aℓ has Euclidean norm ∥aℓ∥2 = δ. This makes the planner isotropic in physical space: axial, face-diagonal, and space-diagonal moves produce the same end-effector displacement magnitude. In the experiments, this eliminates the “long diagonal step” bias of the unnormal-ized 26-connected planner and provides a more uniform base step length for the execution layer. Crucially, the Q-learning state transitions still occur between discrete voxel centers, but the physical path xRL  

> k

is generated using these normalized displacements. Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the proposed bridging framework combining discrete Q-learning planning, geometric regularization, and continuous TP-DLS execution. When evaluating the greedy policy after training, it often occurs that several actions at state s have similar Q-values. If one simply selects arbitrarily among these, the resulting path exhibits unnecessary zig–zag behaviour and frequent changes of direction. To bias the path toward smoother and safer homotopy classes without modifying the Q-update rule, a geometric tie-break is introduced and applied only when there is more than one near-optimal action. Let 

Qmax (s) = max  

> a′

Q(s, a ′) (7) be the largest Q-value at state s. For a small threshold 

εQ > 0, define the set of εQ-near-optimal actions 

Atie (s) = a ∈ A : Q(s, a ) − Qmax (s) < ε Q . (8) Let ak−1 be the action taken at the previous step, and let x denote the current end-effector position. For each candidate a ∈ A tie (s), compute 

θ(a, a k−1) (turning angle) ,dobs (x, a ) (approx. look-ahead clearance) . (9) A geometric score is then defined as 

Jgeo (a) = − wθ θ(a, a k−1) + wd dobs (x, a ) (10) with positive weights wθ and wd. The selected action is 

a⋆ =



arg max  

> a∈A tie (s)

Jgeo (a), if |A tie (s)| > 1,

arg max  

> a∈A

Q(s, a ), otherwise . (11) In this way, standard greedy selection arg max a Q(s, a )is recovered whenever there is a unique εQ-near-optimal action, while the geometric tie-break only operates when multiple actions have similar Q-values. For completeness, two baseline planners are also evalu-ated: Original , using a 6-connected action set with grid-resolution step length; and NoNorm , using the raw 26-connected index-space directions v as unnormalized phys-ical steps without a tie-break rule. 

Task-space spline smoothing and micro-step control The Q-learning planner produces a polyline {xRL  

> k

} with con-stant step length δ. Although the normalization and tie-breaking mechanisms reduce oscillatory patterns, the path still contains corners. Directly calling inverse kinematics at these points can cause large joint jumps at high-curvature locations. To obtain a continuous and differentiable reference tra-jectory for the execution layer, a two-stage smoothing procedure is applied. First, three independent cubic splines are fitted to the Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z ) of {xRL  

> k

}, parameterized by the waypoint index k. This yields a continuous parametric curve: 

xspl (t) ∈ R3, t ∈ [0 , 1] (12) Second, the total length L of the curve is approximated, and a desired macro step size smacro (approximately 5 mm in the implementation) is chosen. The number of macro waypoints is then set as 

M =

 Lsmacro 



(13) and parameters ti are sampled uniformly on [0 , 1] to define 

xref  

> i

= xspl (ti), i = 0 , . . . , M (14) Consecutive macro waypoints {xref  

> i

} are thus approxi-mately arc-length uniform. Finally, a micro-step constraint is enforced within the inverse kinematics routine. If the Euclidean distance be-tween consecutive macro-waypoints exceeds a predefined threshold dmax (typically < 1 mm), intermediate points are inserted via linear interpolation such that every micro-segment satisfies: 

∥xmicro  

> j+1

− xmicro  

> j

∥2 ≤ dmax (15) This constraint guarantees that the end-effector displace-ment per TP-DLS iteration remains bounded. This stabil-ity is corroborated by the convergence results, where the position error per iteration consistently remains well below the 1 mm threshold. 3.2 Physics Layer: Task-Priority Damped Least-Squares Execution 

Given the smoothed reference sequence {xref  

> i

}Mi=0 , the physics layer computes a joint trajectory {qi}Mi=0 on the 7-DoF manipulator. For each reference point xref  

> i

, the solver starts from the previous configuration q and performs multiple internal iterations of task-priority damped least-squares until the position error falls below a specified tolerance or the maximum iteration count is reached. 

Primary Task: Damped Least-Squares Position Control 

At a given internal iteration, the position error is 

ep = xref  

> i

− p(q) ∈ R3 (16) The translational Jacobian is 

Jp(q) = J1:3 ,:(q) ∈ R3×7 (17) and the damped least-squares pseudo-inverse is 

J† 

> p

(q) = Jp(q)⊤ Jp(q)Jp(q)⊤ + λ2I3

−1 (18) with scalar damping factor λ > 0. Using a scalar position gain kp > 0, the primary joint update is ∆q1 = J† 

> p

(q) kp ep (19) The associated null-space projector is 

N1(q) = I7 − J† 

> p

(q)Jp(q) (20) Orientation tracking is not enforced in the present experi-ments: the rotational component of the Jacobian is ignored (or equivalently, its gain is set to zero), allowing the end-effector orientation to adapt freely as the solver exploits redundancy. 

Null-space joint-centering objective To avoid configura-tions near joint limits and maintain a healthy joint-limit margin, a joint-centering objective is added in the null space of the primary task. Let qmin , q max ∈ R7 denote the joint limits, and define 

qmid = qmin + qmax 

2 (21) as their midpoint. The joint-centering error is 

ec = qmid − q (22) A simple gradient projection in the null space is applied: ∆q2 = αc N1(q)⊤ec (23) with a small gain αc > 0. Since ∆ q2 lies in the null space of the primary task, it does not affect the end-effector position to first order but redistributes the internal posture. This design results in a more balanced minimum joint-limit margin (JointMargin) for TP-DLS compared with the numerical IK baseline. The unconstrained joint update is therefore ∆q = ∆ q1 + ∆ q2 (24) 

Step-Length and Velocity Clipping Before applying ∆ q

to update the configuration, both a global step-length bound and per-joint bounds are imposed to keep joint displacements and implied velocities within reasonable limits. Let ∆ qmax > 0 denote the scalar step-length bound. If 

∥∆q∥2 > ∆qmax (25) the update is scaled as ∆q ← ∆q ∆qmax 

∥∆q∥2

(26) Then, for each joint j = 1 , . . . , 7, an individual bound ∆qmax  

> j

> 0 is enforced: ∆qj ← clip  ∆qj , −∆qmax  

> j

, ∆qmax 

> j

 (27) where clip( ·) saturates its argument to the specified inter-val. Given a nominal time step ∆ t, these bounds corre-spond to maximum joint velocities |∆qj |/∆t ≤ ˙qmax  

> j

.Finally, the configuration is updated as 

q ← q + ∆ q (28) For each reference waypoint xref  

> i

, this procedure is iterated until ∥ep∥ ≤ εp with εp = 1 mm, or until a maximum number of internal iterations is reached. If any waypoint fails to meet the tolerance within the iteration limit, the entire trajectory is marked as a failure for that solver. For TP-DLS, the recorded per-iteration errors over all waypoints and tasks form the convergence profile, where virtually all iterations remain within the 10 −4 ∼ 10 −3 mband, well below the threshold. As a baseline, a Num-IK executor is also implemented using a conventional numerical inverse kinematics solver. For each reference waypoint, Num-IK solves a full-pose IK problem with the previous solution as initial guess, without task priority, null-space joint centering, or explicit step-length limits. Both executors track the same smoothed reference paths generated by the Improved planner, en-abling a fair comparison of joint-space smoothness and safety margins. The detailed pseudocode of the improved planner and the TP-DLS execution layer is provided in Appendix A. 4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP: FROM SIMULATION TO DATA This section details the complete experimental workflow conducted on a MATLAB 7-DOF robotic arm simulation platform,ranging from 3D simulation and task set con-struction to metric evaluation. Instead of focusing on qual-itative visual demonstrations, the objective is to establish a systematic and reproducible framework for rigorously assessing the proposed bridging layer. The controlled system is a 7-DoF robotic manipulator with a typical collaborative robot topology, with joint limits set to the same magnitudes as the physical hardware. This work focuses on the safety distance between the end-effector and obstacles. A collision is considered to occur when the clearance between the end-effector and any obstacle becomes non-positive, i.e., when their inter-center distance is no greater than the sum of their radii. Self-collisions are outside the scope of this paper. 

4.1 Scenario Classes and Task Set 

Static environments are grouped into three density classes according to the number of spherical obstacles: 

• Sparse : 0–30 obstacles. 

• Medium : 31–99 obstacles. 

• Dense : at least 100 obstacles. Given a density class and a random seed, the scenario generator deterministically samples obstacle positions and radii. For each scenario, a collision-free initial configu-ration qstart with sufficient joint margin is selected, its forward kinematics define the start pose, and a target end-effector pose xgoal is specified. Candidate qgoal con-figurations are obtained by inverse kinematics; solutions in collision or too close to joint limits are discarded and one feasible qgoal is kept. For every density class, 1,000 start-goal pairs are gener-ated, giving 3,000 tasks in total. All statistics are com-puted over this task set and reported per density class. 

4.2 Planner Configurations 

At the planning layer, a Q-learning voxel-grid planner is used as a black box. The state space, reward design, and learning hyperparameters are identical in all comparisons; only the action geometry differs: 

• Original : 6-neighbour actions, allowing motion along the three coordinate axes with step size equal to the grid resolution. 

• NoNorm : unnormalized 26-neighbour actions, al-lowing transitions to all adjacent voxels with different Euclidean step lengths for axial and diagonal moves. 

• Improved (proposed) : 26-neighbour actions nor-malized to a uniform physical step length, combined with a geometric tie-breaking rule based on turning angle and local clearance when Q-values are nearly equal. All planners share the same learning rate, discount factor, and ε-greedy exploration. After convergence, each planner produces a discrete end-effector path for every task. The resulting voxel sequences are mapped to Cartesian space, fitted with a cubic spline, and resampled at approximately equal arc length to obtain a smooth reference path. This path is used both to evaluate planner geometry (length, turns, clearance) and as the common input to the execu-tion layer. 

4.3 Execution Layer Configurations 

To isolate the execution-layer effect, all executors operate on the same smooth reference paths generated by the Improved planner; only the inverse kinematics strategy is changed. 

Num-IK. A toolbox-based numerical IK baseline. For each reference waypoint, inverseKinematics is called inde-pendently, using the previous solution as the initial guess. Redundancy is not exploited and joint increments are not explicitly bounded. 

TP-DLS (proposed). A task-priority damped least-squares scheme, with end-effector position tracking as the primary task and joint centering as a soft null-space objective. Both the norm of the joint increment and each joint component are clamped at every step, effectively regulating joint velocities and accelerations. In this way, differences in execution quality can be at-tributed to the IK strategy rather than to differences in the planned path. 

4.4 Data Pipeline and Metrics 

For each task, planner outputs and joint trajectories are recorded and processed by a unified script that computes all metrics. Planner-level metrics are: success rate, path length, num-ber of turns, number of discrete steps, and minimum end-effector–obstacle distance. Execution-level metrics are: the 95th percentile of the joint increment norm, maximum joint velocity, maximum joint acceleration, minimum joint-limit margin, number of backtracks or retries, and total computation time. For planner comparison, tasks that fail to reach the goal are assigned fixed penalty values for length, turns, and step count, so that feasibility and path quality can be evaluated jointly. For execution-layer comparison, the planner is fixed to the improved variant. 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Fig. 3. Qualitative comparison on a 7-DoF arm. 

(a) Baseline (unnormalised actions + Num-IK) shows irregular steps and joint-limit configurations. (b) Pro-posed bridge (normalised 26-neighbour + TP–DLS) equalises step size and keeps joints away from limits. 

5.1 Planning Interface Regularization 

Table 1 reports the planning metrics for the three planners over 150 queries. The Original and NoNorm baselines reach only 0.56–0.70 success rate, with most failures oc-curring in dense scenes. The proposed Improved planner achieves 1.00 success rate under all obstacle densities. Regarding geometric quality, the Improved method consis-tently produces shorter paths with fewer turns than both baselines, especially in dense environments. Minimum-clearance values, however, remain nearly identical across all methods, indicating that the improvements do not trade clearance for path length. Instead, step normaliza-tion and geometric tie-breaking reduce the irregular step alternation and backtracking inherent in the unnormalized 26-neighbor expansion. Step-size statistics further show that the Improved planner yields highly uniform waypoint spacing, which is beneficial for subsequent spline interpo-lation and DLS tracking. 

5.2 Impact of Execution Layer on Trajectory Quality 

For the execution layer comparison, the planner is fixed to Improved for all 150 tasks. Since both solvers track Table 1. Three Planners Under Different Obstacle Densities                                                             

> Density Algorithm Success rate Length Turns MinClearance Steps Sparse Original 0.68 192.572 1862.9 0.213 2126.72 Sparse NoNorm 0.6 283.35 1451.42 0.213 2563.84 Sparse Improved 1.0 0.602 4.26 0.216 7.02
> Medium Original 0.68 168.516 1681.98 0.157 1926.16 Medium NoNorm 0.7 195.7 1122.5 0.152 1725.12 Medium Improved 1.0 0.598 3.98 0.165 6.98
> Dense Original 0.56 396.468 3901.6 0.125 3965.68 Dense NoNorm 0.58 499.377 3237.8 0.119 3783.9 Dense Improved 1.0 0.68 5.02 0.138 7.8

Table 2. Two Execution Layers Under the Same Reference Trajectory                                                         

> Density Solver Success rate DQ 95 MaxVel MaxAcc JointMargin Backtracks Time Sparse Num-IK 1.0 0.8211 141.8634 12701.6607 0.0053 7.18 0.7231 Sparse TP-DLS 1.0 0.0113 84.2102 3943.5816 0.0126 19.44 35.9558 Medium Num-IK 1.0 0.6415 190.3101 16793.8613 0.0045 6.5 0.6859 Medium TP-DLS 1.0 0.0113 79.747 3860.0759 0.0112 37.6 36.7482 Dense Num-IK 1.0 0.937 175.8501 15659.236 0.0002 5.48 0.6497 Dense TP-DLS 1.0 0.0088 91.651 4438.005 0.014 22.16 29.0056

identical task-space trajectories, metrics such as path length, number of turns, and minimum clearance remain virtually unchanged, and both maintain position errors within 1 mm for all reference points, achieving a success rate of approximately 100%. Table 2 reveals that TP-DLS exhibits an order-of-magnitude advantage over the numerical IK baseline in terms of 

DQ 95 . Across all obstacle densities, TP-DLS keeps DQ 95 

on the order of 10 −2 rad, whereas NumIK ranges from 10 −1 to 10 0 rad. In representative trajectories, maximum joint increments remain below the 0.1-rad warning thresh-old, causing the curve to remain nearly flat. Likewise, TP-DLS substantially reduces M axV el and M axAcc , sup-pressing the abrupt joint transitions and dynamic spikes typical of numerical IK. Statistics for JointM argin show that both solvers main-tain comparable margins from joint limits. TP-DLS holds a slight advantage in most tasks, suggesting that the sub-ordinate joint-centering task in the null space does not compromise safety but rather increases the distance from limits in certain scenarios. Conversely, TP-DLS achieves these improvements at a higher computational cost: both 

Backtracks and T ime are notably higher than those of NumIK , reflecting the strategy of employing multiple small-step iterations and retries in locally challenging sec-tions. Given that this work focuses on offline evaluation, this computational overhead remains within an acceptable range. Both solvers maintain similar JointM argin values, with TP-DLS showing a mild advantage, indicating that its null-space joint-centering does not compromise safety. In representative dense scenarios, the final position error of interpolated reference points for TP-DLS stabilizes within the range of 10 −4 to 10 −3 m, consistently remaining below the 1 mm threshold. The vast majority of error points during iterations cluster within a narrow band near 10 −4 m, with only a few initial points corresponding to the phase of approaching the trajectory neighborhood from the initial configuration, showing no widespread numerical divergence. This demonstrates the stable convergence and reliable trajectory tracking performance of TP-DLS across multiple tasks and scenarios. 6. CONCLUSION This work addresses the common robotic RL planning paradigm characterized by “voxel grids + finite neighbor-hood actions + Q-learning.” Without modifying the un-derlying planning algorithm, we propose a bridging frame-work between discrete planning and continuous execution for 7-DoF redundant manipulators. On the planning side, the introduction of step-normalized 26-neighbor actions and a geometric tie-breaking mechanism explicitly elim-inates the geometric anisotropy of discrete actions. This significantly reduces path length and the number of turns while improving success rates in complex obstacle scenar-ios, all without compromising minimum clearance. On the execution side, a TP-DLS inverse kinematics layer, com-bined with task-space spline smoothing and step-limited interpolation, achieves millimeter-level end-effector accu-racy and substantially improved joint smoothness. Conse-quently, the 95th-percentile joint increments and dynamic peaks are compressed to levels far lower than those of traditional numerical IK. Since this bridging layer relies solely on the discrete end-effector path output by the planner and remains agnostic to the specific RL algorithm or network structure, it serves as a generic interface that effectively decouples existing grid-based RL planning from the continuous control of redundant manipulators. Future work will integrate this method with safety filtering techniques to achieve online execution with formal safety guarantees. Additionally, we aim to validate its applicability and limitations on physical robot platforms and in more complex tasks, such as multi-arm coordination and dexterous manipulation. REFERENCES Basso, E.A. and Pettersen, K.Y. (2020). Task-priority con-trol of redundant robotic systems using control lyapunov and control barrier function based quadratic programs. 

IFAC-PapersOnLine , 53(2), 9037–9044. Deo, A.S. and Walker, I.D. (1995). Overview of damped least-squares methods for inverse kinematics of robot manipulators. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Sys-tems , 14(1), 43–68. Elguea-Aguinaco, ´I., Inziarte-Hidalgo, I., Bøgh, S., and Arana-Arexolaleiba, N. (2024). A review on reinforce-ment learning for motion planning of robotic manip-ulators. International Journal of Intelligent Systems ,2024(1), 1636497. Han, D., Mulyana, B., Stankovic, V., and Cheng, S. (2023). A survey on deep reinforcement learning algorithms for robotic manipulation. Sensors , 23(7), 3762. James, S., Wada, K., Laidlow, T., and Davison, A.J. (2022). Coarse-to-fine q-attention: Efficient learning for visual robotic manipulation via discretisation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 13739–13748. Jia, Y., Li, Y., Xin, B., and Chen, C. (2020). Path planning with autonomous obstacle avoidance using reinforcement learning for six-axis arms. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC) , 1–6. IEEE. Kim, J., Jin, M., Park, S.H., Chung, S.Y., and Hwang, M.J. (2020). Task space trajectory planning for robot manipulators to follow 3-d curved contours. Electronics ,9(9), 1424. Landgraf, C., Meese, B., Pabst, M., Martius, G., and Hu-ber, M.F. (2021). A reinforcement learning approach to view planning for automated inspection tasks. Sensors ,21(6), 2030. Li, X., Liu, H., and Dong, M. (2021). A general framework of motion planning for redundant robot manipulator based on deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transac-tions on Industrial Informatics , 18(8), 5253–5263. Liu, Y., Zha, F., Li, M., Guo, W., Jia, Y., Wang, P., Zang, Y., and Sun, L. (2021). Creating better collision-free trajectory for robot motion planning by linearly constrained quadratic programming. frontiers in Neu-rorobotics , 15, 724116. Nakamura, Y., Hanafusa, H., and Yoshikawa, T. (1987). Task-priority based redundancy control of robot manip-ulators. The International Journal of Robotics Research ,6(2), 3–15. Pan, J., Zhang, L., and Manocha, D. (2012). Collision-free and smooth trajectory computation in cluttered environments. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 31(10), 1155–1175. Ruan, Z., Yan, T., Cai, Y., Han, Y., Zheng, L., and Zhang, Y. (2024). Q-value regularized decision convformer for offline reinforcement learning. In 2024 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (RO-BIO) , 91–97. IEEE. Zhong, B., Lavaei, A., Cao, H., Zamani, M., and Cac-camo, M. (2021). Safe-visor architecture for sandbox-ing (ai-based) unverified controllers in stochastic cyber– physical systems. Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems ,43, 101110. Zhong, B., Liu, S., Caccamo, M., and Zamani, M. (2023). Secure-by-construction controller synthesis via control barrier functions. IFAC-PapersOnLine , 56(2), 239–245. Appendix A. PSEUDOCODE OF THE PLANNING–EXECUTION BRIDGE 

Algorithm 1 Improved RL planner and reference path 

Require: start/goal xs, x g ∈ R3; obstacles O; Q-table Q;step δ; macro step smac ; micro step dmax 

Ensure: reference waypoints Xref = {xi} 

> 1:

s ← VoxelFromPos (xs) 

> 2:

sG ← VoxelFromPos (xg ) 

> 3:

k ← 0; XRL ← [ PosFromVoxel (s) ]; aprev ←

Null  

> 4:

while s̸ = sG and k < K max do ▷ RL rollout on normalized 26-neighbourhood  

> 5:

Qmax ← max a Q(s, a ) 

> 6:

Atie ← { a ∈ A | | Q(s, a ) − Qmax | < ε Q} 

> 7:

if |A tie | > 1 then ▷ true tie: several near-optimal actions  

> 8:

a⋆ ← arg max a∈A tie Jgeo (a, a prev , X RL [k], O) 

> 9:

else ▷ unique winner: fall back to greedy  

> 10:

a⋆ ← arg max a∈A Q(s, a ) 

> 11:

s ← NextState (s, a ⋆, δ ) 

> 12:

aprev ← a⋆ 

> 13:

append PosFromVoxel (s) to XRL  

> 14:

if Collision (XRL [k + 1] , O) then  

> 15:

break  

> 16:

k ← k + 1  

> 17:

Xmac ← SplineResample (XRL , s mac ) 

> 18:

Xref ← Subdivide (Xmac , d max )

Algorithm 2 TP–DLS execution along the reference path 

Require: Xref = {xref  

> i

}; robot model; end-effector name; 

q0; joint limits qmin , q max ; damping λ; gain kp; null-space gain αc; bounds ∆ qmax , {∆qmax ,j }; tolerance εp;max iterations Kmax 

Ensure: joint trajectory Q = {q[i]}; success flag  

> 1:

q ← q0; qmid ← 12 (qmin + qmax ); Q[0] ← q 

> 2:

for i = 0 to |Xref | − 1 do  

> 3:

x⋆ ← xref  

> i

; k ← 0 

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

x ← ForwardPos (robot , q ) 

> 6:

ep ← x⋆ − x 

> 7:

if ∥ep∥ ≤ εp then  

> 8:

break  

> 9:

J ← GeomJacobian (robot , q ) 

> 10:

Jp ← J1:3 ,: ▷ translational block  

> 11:

J† 

> p

← J⊤ 

> p

(JpJ⊤ 

> p

+ λ2I3)−1 

> 12:

∆q1 ← J† 

> p

(kpep) 

> 13:

N1 ← I7 − J† 

> p

Jp 

> 14:

ec ← qmid − q 

> 15:

∆q2 ← αcN ⊤ 

> 1

ec 

> 16:

∆q ← ∆q1 + ∆ q2 

> 17:

∆q ← ClipNorm (∆ q, ∆qmax ) 

> 18:

for j = 1 to 7 do  

> 19:

∆qj ← Clip (∆ qj , −∆qmax ,j , ∆qmax ,j ) 

> 20:

q ← q + ∆ q; k ← k + 1  

> 21:

until k ≥ Kmax  

> 22:

if ∥ep∥ > ε p then  

> 23:

return (Q, false ) 

> 24:

Q[i + 1] ← q 

> 25:

return (Q, true )