Title: Explaining AutoClustering: Uncovering Meta-Feature Contribution in AutoML for Clustering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.18348v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Feb 2026 01:49:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# EXPLAINING AUTO CLUSTERING : U NCOVERING META -F EATURE 

# CONTRIBUTION IN AUTO ML FOR CLUSTERING 

A P REPRINT 

Matheus Camilo da Silva 

Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Geosciences University of Trieste Piazzale Europa, 1, 34127 Trieste TS, Italy. 

matheus.camilodasilva@phd.units.it 

Leonardo Arrighi 

Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Geosciences University of Trieste Piazzale Europa, 1, 34127 Trieste TS, Italy. 

leonardo.arrighi@phd.units.it 

Ana Carolina Lorena 

Division of Computer Science Aeronautics Institute of Technology Praça Marechal Eduardo Gomes, 50, 12228-900 São José dos Campos SP, Brazil. 

ana.lorena@gp.ita.br 

Sylvio Barbon Junior 

Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and Geosciences University of Trieste Piazzale Europa, 1, 34127 Trieste TS, Italy. 

sylvio.barbonjunior@units.it 

ABSTRACT 

AutoClustering methods aim to automate unsupervised learning tasks, including algorithm selection (AS), hyperparameter optimization (HPO), and pipeline synthesis (PS), by often leveraging meta-learning over dataset meta-features. While these systems often achieve strong performance, their recommendations are often difficult to justify: the influence of dataset meta-features on algorithm and hyperparameter choices is typically not exposed, limiting reliability, bias diagnostics, and efficient meta-feature engineering. This limits reliability and diagnostic insight for further improvements. In this work, we investigate the explainability of the meta-models in AutoClustering. We first review 22 existing methods and organize their meta-features into a structured taxonomy. We then apply a global explainability technique (i.e., Decision Predicate Graphs) to assess feature importance within meta-models from selected frameworks. Finally, we use local explainability tools such as SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) to analyse specific clustering decisions. Our findings highlight consistent patterns in meta-feature relevance, identify structural weaknesses in current meta-learning strategies that can distort recommendations, and provide actionable guidance for more interpretable Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) design. This study therefore offers a practical foundation for increasing decision transparency in unsupervised learning automation. 

Keywords AutoML · Clustering · Explainable Artificial Intelligence · XAI · Meta-learning 

1 Introduction 

Designing effective Machine Learning (ML) pipelines is a complex engineering task. Each stage, from data prepro-cessing and feature extraction to model selection and hyperparameter tuning, requires expert judgment and iterative experimentation [Olson et al., 2016, Hutter et al., 2019]. Even minor design choices can substantially affect performance, making the process costly, time-consuming, and difficult to reproduce. Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) emerged to alleviate this burden by automatically searching for and configuring ML pipelines [Hutter et al., 2014, Vanschoren, 2019]. AutoML frameworks typically decompose this automation into progressively complex subproblems: algorithm selection (AS), hyperparameter optimization (HPO), combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization (CASH), pipeline synthesis (PS) [Brazdil et al., 2022], and in the 

> arXiv:2602.18348v1 [cs.LG] 20 Feb 2026

Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

context of deep learning, neural architecture search (NAS) [Elsken et al., 2019]. While this hierarchy has driven major advances in supervised learning, extending such automation to unsupervised learning, particularly clustering, presents unique challenges [Bahri et al., 2022]. Unlike classification or regression, clustering lacks ground truth labels. This absence complicates the definition of objective functions, model evaluation, and therefore the automation of the entire pipeline [Von Luxburg et al., 2012, Halkidi et al., 2001]. Conventional approaches rely on Cluster Validity Indices (CVIs), internal measures of data compactness and separation, to guide optimization [Vendramin et al., 2010]. However, CVI-based optimization often encodes rigid assumptions about what constitutes a “good” clustering, which may not align with user intent or domain semantics. Moreover, many CVIs are inherently biased toward algorithms that optimize similar geometric or density-based criteria, creating circular preferences and limiting the diversity of solutions explored [Gagolewski et al., 2021]. To address this limitation, recent work has explored meta-learning as a strategy for guiding AutoML in unsupervised settings. In this paradigm, knowledge from previously clustered datasets is reused to inform automation of configurations for new, unseen data [Poulakis et al., 2024]. At the heart of this process are meta-features: numerical descriptors that summarize dataset characteristics [Kotlar et al., 2021, Rivolli et al., 2022a, Vanschoren, 2018]. These meta-features can serve as inputs to meta-models or surrogate models that predict the expected performance of clustering pipelines, enabling learned objectives that extend beyond static CVIs. However, while extensive research has focused on designing and selecting meta-features, their influence on the meta-model’s recommendations is rarely analysed in a systematic way. Systematic here means: (a) explicit framework selection criteria; (b) unified meta-feature taxonomy across N frameworks; (c) identical explanation pipeline; (d) cross-framework comparability via normalized metrics. In most frameworks, the reasoning process by which a meta-model recommends one algorithm or configuration over another remains a “black box” [Segel et al., 2023, Moosbauer et al., 2022a], providing limited visibility into why a given algorithm or configuration is preferred. It is often unclear which meta-features drive these decisions, how strongly they contribute, or whether they encode biases toward specific dataset types. These biases may arise not only from dataset characteristics but also from the inductive biases of the algorithms themselves, which can shape the meta-model’s preferences in subtle and unintended ways. This limited decision transparency creates important constraints for both practice and research. In practical deployments, stakeholders may be reluctant to rely on AutoClustering recommendations without access to the underlying rationale, particularly in high-stakes settings [Moosbauer, 2023]. From an XAI perspective, explanations are needed not only to 

justify recommendations, but also to support control (e.g., auditing and intervention), enable improvement (debugging and refinement of the meta-learning design), and facilitate discovery of previously unnoticed regularities in the data or in the behaviour of candidate methods [Adadi and Berrada, 2018]. On the research side, the absence of explainability hinders iterative development of meta-learning strategies, because it becomes difficult to diagnose why certain pipelines succeed or fail across dataset regimes [Lindauer et al., 2024, da Silva et al., 2024a]. Moreover, when feature influence is not inspected, meta-models may overfit to spurious or weakly relevant dataset characteristics, reducing robustness and generalizability across diverse collections [Mehrabi et al., 2021, Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018]. To address these challenges, our work investigates how explainable AI (XAI) methods can be applied to uncover and interpret the influence of meta-features in AutoClustering systems. We present a systematic and multi-level investigation into the explainability of meta-models in AutoClustering. First, we review and analyse 22 existing frameworks, categorizing their meta-features into a unified taxonomy spanning six families: simple, statistical, information-theoretic, complexity-based, model-based, and landmarking features. Second, we apply the global explainability method DPG, proposed by Arrighi et al. [2024] to reveal how meta-models combine these features into decision paths and thresholds. Finally, we complement this with local explainability via SHAP [Lundberg and Lee, 2017], to examine how individual meta-feature values influence particular AutoClustering recommendations. Together, these components define the contributions of this work: • We provide a unified meta-feature taxonomy and a structured explainability study of AutoClustering, revealing recurrent drivers, systematic preference effects, and limitations to generalisation. • A global explainability analysis using DPG to reveal decision structures, feature hierarchies, and salient interaction patterns in clustering meta-models. • A local explainability analysis using SHAP to examine fine-grained instance-level feature attributions. • Practical guidelines for building more transparent and robust AutoClustering systems, including recom-mendations for meta-feature selection and bias-aware meta-learning, based on combined global and local explanations 2Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

By exposing how meta-features are combined into decision rules and instance-level attributions, this work enables practitioners to justify and audit AutoClustering recommendations rather than treating them as unexpected outputs. At the same time, the observed concentration of influence and the ablation results show how explanations can be used to improve AutoClustering, reducing meta-feature extraction cost substantially while preserving most of the meta-model’s predictive power. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Sections 2 and 3 introduce a motivating example and the required background; Sections 4 and 5 review related work and present our taxonomy of AutoClustering meta-features; Sections 6 and 6 report global (DPG) and local (SHAP) explainability results and an explanation-driven ablation study; Section 7 discusses implications and limitations; and Section 9 concludes. 

2 Motivational Example 

To illustrate the importance of understanding the inference mechanisms behind AutoClustering meta-models, we present a scenario in which both global and local XAI tools reveal misleading meta-feature influence and guide refinement of clustering recommendations. Using the Problem-oriented AutoML in Clustering (PoAC) framework proposed by da Silva et al. [2024b] to recommend a clustering pipeline, we focus on how meta-features influence algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization, and how XAI techniques can identify meta-features that are weakly relevant or potentially misleading for the model. Consider a new dataset Dnew representing consumer trajectories in a retail environment. The data exhibit noise and contain clusters with varied shapes and densities, characteristics that often challenge conventional clustering algorithms such as k-means. In such contexts, density-based methods like DBSCAN [Ester et al., 1996] are typically better suited, as they can identify arbitrarily shaped clusters and are inherently robust to noise [Kriegel et al., 2011], provided that their density thresholds (e.g., eps , min_samples ) are well configured. This highlights the dual importance of algorithm choice and effective hyperparameter tuning, both of which are influenced by the meta-model’s interpretation of dataset characteristics. Before presenting the extracted meta-features, we clarify that meta-feature categories correspond to the taxonomy of meta-features, grouping descriptors that capture similar types of dataset characteristics, such as statistical properties, information-theoretic properties, or performance-based landmarkers. Table 2 reports the numerical values of the meta-features extracted from Dnew by PoAC. These values are computed directly from the dataset and serve as inputs to the meta-model used for algorithm and hyperparameter recommendation. 

Meta-Feature Category Value 

hopkins Information-theoretic 0.92 

iq_range.sd Statistical 0.83 

nr_num Simple 5.00 

SIL Landmarker -0.08 

DBS Landmarker 4.10 These values suggest a dataset with strong cluster tendency, as indicated by the Hopkins statistic ( hopkins ≈ 1.00 ), moderate dispersion ( iq_range.sd > 0.60 ), and poor performance of centroid-based clustering methods. The latter is reflected by a negative average SILhouette score ( SIL ), a landmarker that measures cluster compactness and separation, and by a high Davies–Bouldin score ( DBS ), which quantifies the ratio between intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster separation. Together, these landmarkers indicate overlapping or non-spherical cluster structures that are typically challenging for convex clustering algorithms. Based on these meta-features, PoAC recommends DBSCAN with hyperparameters eps = 0.4 and min_samples = 15. To understand the rationale behind this recommendation, we apply the global explainability technique DPG. In DPG, predicates correspond to decision rules of the form “meta-feature operator threshold” (e.g., hopkins > 0.85) and represent the structural components through which the meta-model encodes its global reasoning. Table 2 lists the most influential predicates, ranked by Local Reaching Centrality (LRC), a measure of structural importance within the predicate graph. 3Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Predicate LRC Score 

hopkins > 0.85 1.6600 

iq_range.sd > 0.6 1.5521 

SIL ≤ 0.0 1.3773 

DBS > 3.0 1.2204 

kurtosis.mean > 2.0 0.9596 The first three predicates align with expectations for density-based clustering, indicating high clusterability, data dispersion, and the unsuitability of centroid-based algorithms. However, kurtosis.mean , while recurrent in the learned DPG predicates, has limited interpretability in the context of spatial or density-based cluster separability. This is because kurtosis characterizes the tail-heaviness of feature distributions rather than geometric properties such as neighborhood density, local connectivity, or inter-point distances, which directly govern the behaviour of density-based clustering algorithms like DBSCAN. To further examine this effect, we apply SHAP for local, instance-level analysis of the same recommendation. The SHAP explanation reveals the contribution of each meta-feature to the predicted suitability of DBSCAN for Dnew , as shown in Table 2. 

Meta-Feature SHAP Value Interpretation 

hopkins +0.24 Strong positive contribution 

iq_range.sd +0.17 Supports preference for non-spherical clusters 

SIL +0.15 Penalizes centroid-based methods 

kurtosis.mean +0.12 Minor contribution 

nr_num −0.06 Slight penalty for low dimensionality Although kurtosis.mean appears structurally prominent in the global DPG analysis, its relatively small SHAP value indicates that it has limited influence on the specific recommendation for Dnew . This discrepancy between global structural importance and local instance-level impact highlights the value of combining global and local explainability perspectives to uncover modeling biases and spurious feature dependencies. Furthermore, the SHAP analysis provides interpretability for the selected hyperparameter eps = 0.4. The combination of high hopkins and moderate iq_range.sd suggests well-separated clusters with variable local densities, for which smaller eps values are appropriate to avoid merging distinct dense regions. In contrast, larger eps values could over-smooth density differences and degrade clustering quality. Overall, this example illustrates the practical role of explainability in AutoClustering: it helps surface meta-features that are structurally prominent yet weakly relevant in specific decisions (e.g., kurtosis.mean ), provides case-level justification of recommendations through local attributions (SHAP), and links hyperparameter choices to interpretable signals in the meta-feature space. In doing so, it motivates our combined global–local analysis as a basis for more transparent, robust, and efficient unsupervised AutoML. 

3 Theoretical Background 

This section outlines the foundational concepts underpinning our work. We begin with a detailed overview of meta-learning for AutoClustering, describing how past experience across datasets can be leveraged to recommend clustering pipelines in a data-driven, task-specific manner. We then discuss the role of explainability in AutoML systems, highlighting the challenges of interpreting meta-model decisions and the importance of transparent recommendation processes, particularly in unsupervised settings where ground-truth labels are unavailable. 

3.1 Meta-Learning for AutoClustering 

Meta-learning, often referred to as “learning to learn” [Vanschoren, 2019], is a paradigm in which prior experience from solving multiple learning tasks is leveraged to improve performance on new, unseen ones [Vilalta and Drissi, 2002, Hospedales et al., 2022]. In this context, the term task refers to a dataset along with its associated learning objective (e.g., classification, regression, or clustering), and should not be confused with AutoML tasks like AS or HPO, for instance. Rather than learning directly from raw data, meta-learning relies on meta-data , such as past performance evaluations, dataset characteristics, or model behaviours, to drive generalization across tasks [Brazdil et al., 2022]. At the core of this process is the meta-learner , which learns patterns in how pipelines perform across diverse tasks. This often involves training a meta-model , that maps properties of tasks (e.g., meta-features) to properties of pipelines 4Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

(e.g., expected performance). These meta-models can be used to predict performance [Brazdil et al., 2022], rank candidate pipelines [Reif et al., 2012], or recommend pipeline configurations [Fusi et al., 2018], often in combination with different optimization or learning-to-rank strategies [Vanschoren, 2019]. In unsupervised learning, meta-learning can be more complex due to the absence of ground-truth labels and standard evaluation metrics like accuracy or recall. As a result, the meta-learner often rely on CVIs [Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023a, da Silva et al., 2024a] or task-specific heuristics [Bahri et al., 2022, Chan et al., 2024] as proxies for clustering quality. These proxies may be noisy or conflicting, introducing ambiguity and bias into the meta-learning process. Nevertheless, the meta-learning framework remains largely the same from supervised tasks. Based on two main phases, the offline (learning phase) and the online (inference phase). During the offline phase, a collection of historical datasets D = {D1, . . . , D n} is processed to extract meta-features and evaluate clustering pipelines using internal or external validation measures. This results in a meta-dataset Dmeta ,used to train a meta-model M : F 7 → Y , where F ∈ Rd represents a vector of meta-features and Y denotes a clustering pipeline recommendation. The choice of meta-model formulation, whether classification [Lemke et al., 2015, Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023a], regression [da Silva et al., 2024b], or learning-to-rank [de Souto et al., 2008, Nascimento et al., 2009, Reif et al., 2014], depends on the nature of the available tasks. Although AutoClustering aims to work in unsupervised settings, many meta-learning approaches rely on labeled datasets during the offline phase to compute external metrics like Adjusted Ranom Index (ARI) or Normalized Mutual Information, which provide more reliable performance signals. These signals enable classification or regression models. When labels are unavailable and only internal CVIs can be used, the problem is more often cast as a ranking task, where the goal is to order clustering pipelines by their expected relative performance de Souto et al. [2008]. The two main modelling approaches used during the offline phase, are: 

(1) Ranking-Based Meta-Learning. This approach treats the meta-knowledge base as a repository of prior ex-perience [Gabbay et al., 2021a]. The core assumption is that tasks with similar meta-features benefit from similar clustering pipelines. Given the meta-feature vector xnew of a new dataset, the system retrieves the most similar historical datasets {xi} using a similarity function sim (·, ·), and recommends the best-performing pipelines associated with them [De Souto et al., 2008, Pimentel and de Carvalho, 2018, Cohen-Shapira and Rokach, 2021, Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023a]. Let P = {π1, π 2, . . . , π n} be the set of pipeline configurations evaluated during the offline phase, where each πi

denotes a clustering algorithm and its hyperparameters. 

πrec = arg max  

> πi∈P

sim (xnew , x i), (1) The top-K pipelines with the best historical performance among the most similar datasets are selected as: 

{π(1) , . . . , π (K)} = TopK πi (perf (πi | sim (xnew , x i))) . (2) 

(2) Performance Prediction. The second approach is to train a meta-model fmeta : X → R that directly estimates the performance of each pipeline based on the meta-features of the dataset [Adam and Blockeel, 2015, Poulakis et al., 2020, da Silva et al., 2024b]. Here, X ⊆ Rd represents the meta-feature space. For a new dataset Dnew , with meta-features 

xnew , the model predicts the performance of each candidate pipeline πi:

ˆyi = fmeta (xnew , π i), (3) and recommends the top-K pipelines with the highest predicted scores: 

{π(1) , . . . , π (K)} = TopK πi (ˆ yi) . (4) In the online phase, a new dataset Dnew is transformed into its meta-feature representation Fnew and passed to the meta-model M, which returns a clustering recommendation. This can support a variety of AutoML tasks, such as AS [de Souto et al., 2008, Ferrari and de Castro, 2012], HPO [Poulakis et al., 2020, Cohen-Shapira and Rokach, 2021], CASH [Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023a], or PS [ElShawi and Sakr, 2022a, da Silva et al., 2024b]. 5Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

By leveraging prior knowledge, AutoClustering systems can avoid exhaustive searches and instead focus on the most promising regions of the pipeline space. This allows for efficient search and optimization using strategies such as Bayesian optimization, genetic algorithms [ElShawi and Sakr, 2022a, da Silva et al., 2024b], or regression-based ranking approaches [de Souto et al., 2008], improving both performance and search efficiency in unsupervised settings. Overall, the structure of AutoClustering systems underscores a central distinction between two meta-learning strategies. Ranking-based systems (Approach 1) primarily operate through similarity retrieval or relative preference estimation: rather than directly predicting absolute pipeline performance, the meta-learner infers rankings or similarities among pipelines based on their meta-feature proximity. While some ranking techniques may still learn an explicit scoring or preference function, the resulting decision process remains inherently relative and dependent on the choice of meta-features and similarity metrics. As a consequence, these systems can be robust when only internal CVIs are available, but they are highly sensitive to the representation of the meta-feature space and often struggle to generalize beyond regions well covered by previously observed datasets. By comparison, performance-prediction systems (Approach 2) learn an explicit function that maps meta-features to expected pipeline performance. This enables richer generalization and more nuanced reasoning about pipeline behaviour, but also introduces risks of overfitting to noisy or biased performance estimates, particularly when these are derived from imperfect internal CVIs. Despite these differences, both paradigms share a critical dependency: all decision-making occurs in the meta-feature space, without direct access to raw data or ground-truth labels. Consequently, applying XAI techniques becomes essential for understanding which meta-features drive recommendations, for enabling fair comparisons across systems, and for identifying costly or redundant features that contribute little to the final decision. 

3.2 Explainability and Automated Machine Learning 

XAI, in the context of AutoML, aims to make the behaviour of learning systems understandable by clarifying how 

and why models produce specific outputs [Arrieta et al., 2020, Lundberg and Lee, 2017]. Beyond improving human understanding, XAI is increasingly framed as an enabling layer for (i) justifying recommendations to stakeholders, (ii) 

supporting control through auditing and intervention, (iii) improving systems via debugging and refinement, and (iv) 

facilitating discovery of previously unnoticed regularities or failure modes [Adadi and Berrada, 2018, Gunning et al., 2019, Vilone and Longo, 2021, Longo et al., 2024]. Although the terms interpretation and explanation are sometimes used interchangeably, recent work has emphasised useful distinctions. Following Lipton [2018], we use interpretability to denote the extent to which a human can reliably anticipate a model’s output given an input, and explainability to denote the extent to which the internal mechanics or decision rationale can be articulated in human terms. In this view, interpretability is primarily associated with intrinsically transparent models (e.g., linear models or shallow decision trees), whereas explainability often relies on post-hoc methods that approximate or attribute the behaviour of complex models (e.g., ensembles or deep networks) without requiring them to be inherently transparent [Lipton, 2018, Arrieta et al., 2020]. Building on this distinction, XAI methods can be further differentiated by the scope of the explanation they provide. 

Global explainability characterises a model’s behaviour across the input space, for instance by identifying dominant features, decision rules, or recurring interaction patterns. By contrast, local explainability focuses on individual predictions, attributing a specific output to particular input features for a given instance. Some approaches, such as SHAP, support both perspectives by producing instance-level attributions that can also be aggregated to summarise global trends. nature [Lundberg and Lee, 2017, Ribeiro et al., 2016]. In AutoML, explanations are particularly valuable because the objects being optimised and recommended are not single predictions but pipeline decisions (e.g., algorithm choice, validation criterion, or hyperparameter configuration). In AutoClustering, this decision-making occurs in a meta-feature space , where each dataset is treated as an instance and the meta-model maps dataset descriptors to pipeline recommendations. This setting calls for complementary explanation views: a global perspective that captures the dominant decision logic learned by the meta-model across datasets, and a local perspective that justifies individual recommendations for a specific dataset. Accordingly, we adopt DPG as a global, model-agnostic technique that exposes rule-like decision structure and feature interactions, and SHAP as a local attribution method that quantifies how meta-feature values contribute to a particular recommendation. Together, DPG and SHAP provide a coherent explanation stack for AutoML systems, supporting both auditing of general decision patterns and case-by-case justification. 

3.2.1 Global Explainability of Decision Predicate Graphs 

Several global explainability methods have been proposed in recent years to understand the overall behaviour of machine learning models focusing on AutoML context. These include Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs) [Moosbauer et al., 2021] and symbolic regression [Segel et al., 2023]. These techniques offer valuable insights on traditional AutoML, but they 6Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

often struggle to preserve both interpretability and structural fidelity, especially when applied to meta-models operating in high-level feature spaces, such as those found in AutoClustering. Given the unique characteristics of meta-datasets used in AutoClustering approaches, we consider DPG to be particularly well-suited for providing global explanations. DPG are a model-agnostic technique designed to produce global, interpretable summaries of machine learning mod-els [Arrighi et al., 2024, Ceschin et al., 2025]. Rather than analysing raw predictions, DPG extracts symbolic decision rules, called predicates , from trained models and connects them based on their influence and generality. Given a set of input features x ∈ Rd and a trained model f : Rd → R, DPG constructs a graph where each node represents a predicate (e.g., xj > θ ), and edges represent logical pathways in the model’s decision space. The influence of each predicate is quantified using the LRC, which measures its reach and discriminative contribution. LRC (pi) = X

> x∈D

1 [pi is satisfied in the path to f (x)] 

This approach provides global insights such as: “datasets with high hopkins and low SILhouette scores tend to receive DBSCAN”. The symbolic structure and quantifiable relevance of DPG predicates make them well-suited to analyse the behaviour of different AutoClustering meta-models operating in the meta-feature space. 

3.2.2 Local Explainability using SHAP 

Local explainability methods provide instance-level interpretations by attributing the model’s output to its input features. Among the most widely adopted methods is SHAP [Lundberg and Lee, 2017], which computes the contribution of each feature to a specific prediction using cooperative game theory. For a given prediction f (x), the SHAP value ϕj for feature j satisfies: 

f (x) = ϕ0 +

> d

X

> j=1

ϕj , where ϕj reflects the marginal contribution of feature j. 

In supervised learning, SHAP reveals which features most influence a prediction. In unsupervised or meta-learning contexts, this becomes more nuanced: predictions are not labels but cluster validity estimates or rankings, and features are not original dataset attributes, but meta-features summarizing dataset properties (e.g., entropy , iq_range.sd ,

hopkins ). The main challenge in applying local explainability to AutoClustering methods is the abstraction of the input space, rather than interpreting a prediction based on raw features (e.g., pixel intensities or gene expressions), we must interpret predictions over meta-features, whose meaning is already a second-order abstraction of dataset behaviour. Despite these challenges, local methods remain critical for justifying specific AutoClustering recommendations (e.g., “why DBSCAN with eps = 0.4 was selected”), especially in domains where transparency and trust are essential. 

4 Related Works 

Explainability in AutoML has gained growing attention as researchers seek to improve fairness, transparency, and trust in automated machine learning pipelines [Lindauer et al., 2024]. Much of this research has focused on supervised learning settings [Van Rijn and Hutter, 2018, Garouani et al., 2022, Moosbauer, 2023], where labeled data allows for clearer evaluation and interpretability of model behaviour, optimization dynamics, and configuration choices. A major line of research in this area is Hyperparameter Importance (HPI) analysis, which seeks to determine which hyperparameters most significantly influence model performance. A foundational method is f-ANOVA [Hutter et al., 2014], which uses variance decomposition to estimate the marginal contribution of each hyperparameter and their interactions, often revealing that a small subset of hyperparameters accounts for the majority of performance variation. Building on this, Van Rijn and Hutter [2018] introduced a meta-learning framework that aggregates experimental results across many datasets to identify, for a given algorithm, which hyperparameters are generally most important and what typical good values are. In the same vein, Probst et al. [2019] proposed measures for tunability to identify which hyperparameters are worth tuning. Subsequent work has expanded these approaches. Moosbauer et al. [2022a] incorporated Bayesian optimization for probabilistic importance estimates, while Jin [2022] proposed efficient subsampling strategies to improve HPI estimation. Watanabe et al. [2023] introduced PED-ANOVA, focusing on top-performing configurations, and Theodorakopoulos 7Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

et al. [2024] extended HPI to multi-objective settings, showing that hyperparameter impact can differ across goals such as accuracy, efficiency, and fairness. In parallel, other explainability methods in AutoML have explored visualization and symbolic analysis. Moosbauer et al. [2022b] proposed PDPs with uncertainty estimates to interpret model responses to hyperparameter changes. Segel et al. [2023] used symbolic regression to derive human-readable expressions linking hyperparameters to performance, aiding interpretability of the HPO landscape. Additional efforts like AutoAblation [Sheikholeslami et al., 2021] automate ablation studies to understand pipeline components, while tools like CAVE [Biedenkapp et al., 2019] visualize AutoML optimization trajectories and search behaviour. Despite these advances, explainability in AutoClustering remains relatively unexplored. Clustering presents distinct challenges: it lacks ground truth labels and depends on subjective or domain-specific evaluation metrics [Von Luxburg et al., 2012], complicating both the automation and interpretability of AutoML task results. Moreover, many of the explainability techniques developed for supervised learning or HPO do not directly transfer to clustering-based AutoML systems. Most AutoClustering frameworks rely on meta-learning, where historical performance on previous datasets guides algorithm selection for new, unseen data. To achieve this, meta-features are extracted to characterize datasets in a way that is predictive of clustering performance [Rivolli et al., 2022a, Kotlar et al., 2021, Brazdil et al., 2022]. However, meta-feature selection is often ad hoc or empirically driven, with limited standardization across frameworks. While some surveys, such as Poulakis et al. [2024], have catalogued the general use of meta-features, the field still lacks a systematic taxonomy comparing and organizing them across methods. This hinders comparative evaluation and makes it difficult to assess the generalizability or redundancy of feature sets used in different AutoClustering approaches. 

4.1 Positioning and Contribution of This Work 

Existing work in AutoClustering has largely emphasised predictive performance and the proposal of new meta-features or meta-learning strategies [Rivolli et al., 2022a, Kotlar et al., 2021, Brazdil et al., 2022], whereas comparative organisation of meta-features across frameworks remains limited to broad surveys [Poulakis et al., 2024]. Moreover, although a few works in AutoML discuss transparency and user control at a high level [Lindauer et al., 2024], there is still a lack of systematic evidence on how meta-features influence AutoClustering meta-models in practice, and how such evidence can be used to improve system design. This paper addresses these gaps by bringing explainability to the meta-learning layer of AutoClustering. First, we provide a unified taxonomy of meta-features used in 22 AutoClustering frameworks, supporting comparability across methods and highlighting redundancy and fragmentation in current feature design [Poulakis et al., 2024]. Second, we combine complementary global and local explanation perspectives to analyse reconstructed meta-models from representative frameworks: global explanations via DPG expose decision structures and feature hierarchies, while local attributions via SHAP explain individual recommendations in the meta-feature space. Finally, we demonstrate that explanation evidence is not merely descriptive: it can be operationalised to guide meta-feature ablation, quantifying efficiency–accuracy trade-offs and motivating more transparent and cost-aware AutoClustering design. Together, these contributions position our work as a systematic step towards decision-transparent unsupervised AutoML, where recommendations can be inspected, audited, and refined rather than treated as opaque outputs. 

5 Meta-Feature Taxonomy for AutoClustering Meta-Learning 

In the context of AutoClustering, the domain of meta-features remains fragmented across studies, with varying definitions, computation costs, and empirical relevance. To analyse and explain AutoClustering meta-models in a comparable way across frameworks, we first need a shared view of the meta-feature space—what descriptors are used, how they relate, and how consistently they appear in the literature. We focused on works that explicitly define and utilize meta-features. Our selection spans from 2008 (the year of the first known study in this domain of De Souto et al. [2008]) to 2025, and includes 22 representative frameworks chosen for their relevance and influence in the field, as shown in Table 1. These range from early contributions by de Souto et al. [2008], Nascimento et al. [2009], and Soares et al. [2009], which introduced meta-features in high-dimensional biological contexts, to more recent systems such as Treder-Tschechlov et al. [2023a], da Silva et al. [2024b], and Fernandes et al. [2021], which leverage synthetic datasets and classic benchmarks like UCI. This curated selection captures the evolution of meta-feature design across time and application domains, enabling a robust comparative taxonomy. 8Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Table 1: Overview of 22 AutoClustering frameworks reviewed in this study. 

Title Reference 

Ranking and selecting clustering algorithms using a meta-learning approach de Souto et al. [2008] Mining rules for the automatic selection process of clustering methods applied to cancer gene expression data Nascimento et al. [2009] An analysis of meta-learning techniques for ranking clustering algorithms applied to artificial data Soares et al. [2009] Clustering algorithm recommendation: a meta-learning approach Ferrari and de Castro [2012] Dealing with overlapping clustering: a constraint-based approach to algorithm selection Adam and Blockeel [2015] Clustering algorithm selection by meta-learning systems: a new distance-based problem characterization and ranking combination methods Ferrari and De Castro [2015] Extending meta-learning framework for clustering gene expression data with component-based algorithm design and internal evaluation measures Vukicevic et al. [2016] Constraint-based clustering selection Van Craenendonck and Blockeel [2017] Statistical versus distance-based meta-features for clustering algorithm recommendation using meta-learning Pimentel and de Carvalho [2018] A new data characterization for selecting clustering algorithms using meta-learning Pimentel and De Carvalho [2019] Unsupervised meta-learning for clustering algorithm recommendation Pimentel and de Carvalho [2019] AutoClust: a framework for automated clustering based on cluster validity indices Poulakis et al. [2020] Automatic selection of clustering algorithms using supervised graph embedding Cohen-Shapira and Rokach [2021] cSmartML: a meta-learning-based framework for automated selection and hyperparam-eter tuning for clustering ElShawi et al. [2021] Towards understanding clustering problems and algorithms: an instance space analysis Fernandes et al. [2021] Isolation forests and landmarking-based representations for clustering algorithm recom-mendation using meta-learning Gabbay et al. [2021b] AutoCluster: meta-learning-based ensemble method for automated unsupervised clus-tering Liu et al. [2021] AutoML4Clust: efficient AutoML for clustering analyses Tschechlov et al. [2021] cSmartML-Glassbox: increasing transparency and controllability in automated cluster-ing ElShawi and Sakr [2022b] TPE-AutoClust: a tree-based pipeline ensemble framework for automated clustering ElShawi and Sakr [2022a] ML2DAC: meta-learning to democratize AutoML for clustering analyses Treder-Tschechlov et al. [2023b] Problem-oriented AutoML in clustering da Silva et al. [2024b] 

To better understand the design space of meta-feature usage in AutoClustering, we organize our taxonomy around two core components: the base datasets used to construct meta-datasets, and the types of meta-features extracted from them. The first component, Dataset Analysis, examines the sources, diversity, and characteristics of the datasets that serve as input for generating meta-features and training meta-models. The second, Meta-feature Categories, explores the different groups of meta-features adopted across frameworks, highlighting both widely used descriptors and more specialized or novel types. Together, these dimensions provide insight into how AutoClustering systems are grounded in data and guided by metadata to support the training and generalization of meta-models. 

5.1 Base Dataset Analysis 

The first step in training a meta-model for AutoClustering is the selection of base datasets that are representative of the kinds of clustering tasks the practitioner aims to support. This step is especially critical in the unsupervised setting, where there is no universally correct clustering, and both the data characteristics and the intended grouping logic must align with the target use cases [Von Luxburg et al., 2012]. In this context, not only should the chosen datasets resemble those that the user expects to encounter, but the way they are labelled or clustered must also reflect the user’s intent on how new data should be clustered. Its from these base datasets that meta-features are extracted, which ultimately enables the training of meta-models. In this sense, their properties such as domain, dimensionality and size, directly influence the kinds of patterns a meta-model can learn and generalize to new data. Therefore, understanding the composition and origin of these datasets is crucial to interpreting the design choices made across different frameworks. Based on the selected works presented in Table 1, we identify four main groups of datasets commonly used in the literature: 9Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Cancer Gene Expression Datasets. This dataset group consists of 35 publicly available microarray datasets curated and distributed by De Souto et al. [2008]. These datasets represent various types of cancer and are characterized by extremely high dimensionality (typically over 1,300 features) and very small sample sizes (fewer than 100 instances per dataset), making them particularly challenging for clustering tasks. The data originates from two main microarray platforms, Affymetrix and cDNA, which differ in measurement methodology. This group was predominantly used by earlier frameworks such as de Souto et al. [2008], Nascimento et al. [2009], and Vukicevic et al. [2016], which aimed to evaluate clustering performance in biomedical domains where ground-truth labels (e.g., cancer subtypes) are available and well-studied. The small sample size and high dimensionality of these datasets present unique challenges, making them a natural proving ground for robustness to overfitting and noise. These datasets are less common in more recent work, likely due to their limited generalizability to other application domains and the increasing availability of more scalable benchmarking resources. 

General-Purpose Benchmark Repositories. Datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [Kelly et al., 2023] and OpenML [Vanschoren et al., 2013] platform are frequently used in AutoClustering research due to their broad accessibility, domain diversity, and historical importance in benchmarking machine learning systems. These repositories offer a diverse collection of real-world datasets across various domains, including healthcare, finance, biology, and sensor data. They are widely used for benchmarking due to their accessibility, varying levels of complexity, and annotated ground truth labels. Datasets from these sources vary significantly in size, dimensionality, and cluster structure, making them suitable for evaluating the generalization ability of AutoClustering systems across heterogeneous settings. Frameworks such as Ferrari and De Castro [2015], Cohen-Shapira and Rokach [2021], and Pimentel and De Carvalho [2019] make extensive use of datasets from UCI and OpenML, reflecting a shift toward real-world applicability and diversity. These repositories provide broad coverage of domains and data modalities, which helps assess the generalization capabilities of AutoClustering systems. Importantly, the inclusion of widely recognized benchmark datasets enhances reproducibility and comparability with prior work. The increased reliance on these repositories in recent literature highlights the community’s move toward more representative and accessible benchmarking standards. 

Synthetic Data. This group consists of datasets that are algorithmically generated with the goal of simulating simplified yet plausible data distributions that may resemble real-world clustering tasks. By systematically varying parameters such as the number of clusters, dimensionality, sample size, or noise levels, synthetic datasets enable controlled experimentation and fine-grained benchmarking across a range of data morphologies. One influential early toolset is that of Handl and Knowles [2005], which introduced both Gaussian and ellipsoidal cluster generators, offering parametric control over shape, orientation, and overlap. More recent frameworks have made extensive use of the scikit-learn generators such as make_blobs, make_circles, and make_moons, which allow researchers to generate synthetic data with varied geometric and topological properties using simple APIs. Additionally, packages like pymfe support mixture model-based data synthesis for high-throughput generation of clustering scenarios. These datasets are particularly useful for training meta-models or evaluating generalization performance, as they can be generated in large numbers while retaining controllable structural complexity. Frameworks such as Soares et al. [2009], Fernandes et al. [2021], and Treder-Tschechlov et al. [2023b] have relied on synthetic data to explore performance under scalable and diverse conditions. 

Clustering Benchmark Suites. In contrast, clustering benchmark suites such as SIPU [Fränti and Sieranoja, 2018] and Clustering-benchmark [Barton, 2015], include carefully crafted datasets (e.g., TwoDiamonds, Jain, Smile) that are synthetically generated but not intended to simulate real-world data. Instead, they are designed explicitly to stress-test clustering algorithms on edge cases. These datasets often contain geometric configurations, overlapping boundaries, or chaining effects that deliberately challenge specific algorithmic assumptions, such as Euclidean distance-based similarity. For example, the TwoDiamonds dataset consists of two adjacent diamond-shaped clusters where points are uniformly distributed inside each shape, forming a continuous structure that is difficult to separate using traditional distance metrics [Ultsch, 2003]. These benchmark suites are used in works such as Van Craenendonck and Blockeel [2017] and Fernandes et al. [2021] typically to probe algorithmic robustness and sensitivity under known but difficult clustering scenarios. Table 2 provides a detailed overview of dataset usage across the reviewed AutoClustering frameworks, sorted chronologically by publication year. For each framework, we report the number of datasets used, along with per-framework average values for the number of samples, dimensions, and ground-truth clusters across the datasets considered (when available). The dataset groups (A–D) correspond to the categories introduced above. 10 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Table 2: Summary of dataset usage across AutoClustering frameworks. Dataset groups: A = Cancer gene expression microarray data, B = Synthetic datasets, C = General-purpose benchmark repositories, D = Clustering benchmarking collections. Note: Numerical columns for samples, dimensions, and clusters report average values per framework 

across the datasets used. Parentheses indicate different dataset settings within the same publication.                                                                                                                                             

> Framework Group #Datasets #Samples #Dimensions #Clusters
> de Souto et al. [2008] A32 76.58 1383.38 3.00 Nascimento et al. [2009] A35 76.58 1383.38 3.00 Soares et al. [2009] B160 309.40 75.00 7.50 Ferrari and de Castro [2012] C30 1636.23 36.20 7.50 Adam and Blockeel [2015] (1) C14 522.93 11.07 3.92 Adam and Blockeel [2015] (2) –22 –––Ferrari and De Castro [2015] C84 369.00 87.22 9.45 Vukicevic et al. [2016] A30 89.77 1713.67 3.70 Van Craenendonck and Blockeel [2017] (1) C16 804.62 273.12 4.69 Van Craenendonck and Blockeel [2017] (2) D51954.40 2.00 3.40 Pimentel and de Carvalho [2018] –218 –––Pimentel and De Carvalho [2019] C219 4799.85 19.96 5.84 Pimentel and de Carvalho [2019] –57 –––Poulakis et al. [2020] C24 810.04 27.42 4.54 Cohen-Shapira and Rokach [2021] C210 726.79 22.29 165.46 ElShawi et al. [2021] (1) C12 922857.04 48.50 5.50 ElShawi et al. [2021] (2) D15 1950.13 8.13 13.00 Fernandes et al. [2021] (1) B160 1859.25 40.50 18.50 Fernandes et al. [2021] (2) C219 275.27 16.73 23.62 Fernandes et al. [2021] (3) D220 3466.69 191.21 8.53 Gabbay et al. [2021b] C100 2259.55 58.85 237.07 Liu et al. [2021] –150 –––Tschechlov et al. [2021] C58691.80 142.40 12.00 ElShawi and Sakr [2022b] –200 –––ElShawi and Sakr [2022a] –118 –––Treder-Tschechlov et al. [2023b] B78 5333.33 21.38 21.38 da Silva et al. [2024b] B6130 2081.86 41.55 16.54

The composition of datasets used by AutoClustering frameworks has evolved substantially. Earlier works tended to rely on smaller, high-dimensional biomedical datasets (e.g., microarrays), whereas more recent frameworks have increasingly employed synthetic generators and large-scale general-purpose repositories like UCI and OpenML. This diversification reflects both an expansion in available data resources and a growing interest in benchmarking across varied domains. However, a notable issue persists: several frameworks did not provide detailed dataset characteristics (e.g., number of instances, features, or clusters), or failed to make their datasets publicly accessible. This lack of transparency poses challenges to reproducibility and comparability, undermining efforts to evaluate progress in the field rigorously. 

5.2 Meta-Feature Families 

Meta-features are quantitative descriptors computed from base datasets that characterize their properties in a way that facilitates the learning of patterns by meta-models regarding algorithm performance or suitability Castiello et al. [2005]. In the context of AutoClustering, meta-features are designed to capture not only structural, statistical, and geometric aspects of the input data, but also characteristics of the clustering partitions derived from them De Souto et al. [2008], Pimentel and De Carvalho [2019]. These descriptors form the basis of the meta-space, enabling the comparison of tasks, the modeling of task similarity, and ultimately the prediction of effective clustering configurations. The extraction of meta-features is a multi-step process involving careful selection, computation, and preprocessing. As summarized in Vanschoren [2018], many meta-features are derived from individual data attributes (e.g., feature-wise skewness) or combinations thereof (e.g., correlation matrices), requiring aggregation via summary statistics such as mean, standard deviation, and quartiles. Task-level normalization is often necessary to make these descriptors comparable across datasets [Rivolli et al., 2018, 2022b]. The particular choices in which meta-features to extract and their preprocessing can significantly impact the quality of the resulting meta-models [Pinto et al., 2016]. Given the flexibility of the meta-feature extraction process, a vast number of possible descriptors can be constructed. The optimal set of meta-features often depends on the intent behind the meta-model: for instance, whether it aims to rank a clustering algorithm, tune hyperparameters, or recommend clustering pipeline configurations. As such, meta-feature selection should be informed by the specific downstream task, dataset domain and computational constraints [Rivolli et al., 2018, Reif et al., 2014, Castiello et al., 2005]. 11 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

To support interpretability and reuse, meta-features are frequently grouped into high-level families based on the type of information they encode. While multiple taxonomies exist in the literature [Castiello et al., 2005, Reif et al., 2014, Rivolli et al., 2018], the six families outlined below cover the most commonly used descriptors across AutoClustering frameworks analysed in this work. 

Simple/General. This family of meta-features, is composed of basic univariate statistics computed over the input features, such as mean, variance, minimum, and maximum. These provide coarse yet computationally efficient summaries of the data distribution and are especially useful in high-dimensional or resource-constrained scenarios. They were employed in early AutoClustering efforts such as de Souto et al. [2008], Nascimento et al. [2009], and remain widely adopted in more recent work [Gabbay et al., 2021b, Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023b, da Silva et al., 2024b] due to their general applicability Liu et al. [2021]. 

Statistical. Offers a more nuanced view of dataset structure by capturing relationships between features or distribu-tional shape. Common examples include skewness, kurtosis, pairwise correlation, and covariance. These descriptors are useful for identifying feature redundancy, symmetry, and marginal dependencies. They are mathematically straightfor-ward and interpretable [Castiello et al., 2005], which makes them a staple in most of the AutoClustering frameworks. 

Information-theoretical. Quantifies the amount of information or uncertainty associated with the features or feature combinations. Measures such as entropy, mutual information, and signal-to-noise ratios fall under this category [Castiello et al., 2005]. They are particularly appropriate to describe categorical attributes, but can also represent continuous values. In AutoClustering, [Ferrari and de Castro, 2012] were among the first to incorporate this family, drawing directly on the StatLog [Michie et al., 1995] and METAL [Kalousis and Hilario, 2000] meta-feature sets. Later on, [Pimentel and de Carvalho, 2019] expanded the original meta-features used in [de Souto et al., 2008] by adding more meta-features families, including a number of information-theoretical descriptors. Other works, such as [Vukicevic et al., 2016] and [da Silva et al., 2024b], have continued to leverage and refine these features, demonstrating their ongoing relevance for characterizing dataset complexity in unsupervised settings. 

Landmarker. Originally proposed by Pfahringer et al. [2000] in supervised learning, landmarkers characterize datasets by measuring the behaviour of simple, fast models. In unsupervised settings, where accuracy-based metrics are unavailable, this idea is adapted by running lightweight clustering algorithms and evaluating their partitions using CVIs such as SIL, DBS, or CHS. These meta-features capture how different clustering biases interact with the data, providing structural information that goes beyond purely statistical descriptors and helping meta-models infer which algorithms are likely to perform well. Owing to their interpretability and strong predictive value, landmarkers have become increasingly prominent in recent AutoClustering frameworks [Pimentel and de Carvalho, 2018, Liu et al., 2021, ElShawi and Sakr, 2022a, Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023b], now ranking as the second most commonly used meta-feature family after statistical descriptors. 

Model-based. They are derived from models trained on the dataset, capturing properties of those models in response to the base datasets. In supervised settings, this typically includes indicators like tree depth, number of rules, or number of support vectors [Vanschoren, 2018]. In AutoClustering, model-based meta-features can reflect clustering structure, geometric properties, or algorithmic behaviour beyond simple partitioning outcomes. For instance, the MARCO-GE framework [Cohen-Shapira and Rokach, 2021] applies this idea by encoding char-acteristics of a graph convolutional neural network (GCNN) trained on the dataset, using the learned topology and connectivity patterns as descriptors of the underlying base data manifold. Similarly, the AutoCluster system [Liu et al., 2021] extracts model-based features by applying three different clustering algorithms: KMeans, Agglomerative, and OPTICS. Then, it records characteristics of their output, such as the compactness of KMeans clusters, the number of leaves in the hierarchical tree produced by Agglomerative clustering, and the reachability plot derived from OPTICS. These features serve to encapsulate structural complexity and clustering behaviour, enabling the meta-model to better understand which algorithms could align with the a new data’s structure. 

Complexity. This family of meta-features captures the intrinsic difficulty of clustering a dataset. They include measures such as feature space overlap, Fisher discriminant ratio, density discontinuities, and boundary ambiguity [Ho and Basu, 2002, Lorena et al., 2019, Vanschoren, 2018]. These descriptors quantify properties like how well-separated the data instances are or how clearly defined the cluster boundaries appear. In the context of AutoClustering, this family remains somewhat under explored because they are generally more computationally expensive than simple or statistical meta-features. Nevertheless, it has been used in exploratory and competitive systems. For instance, [Adam and Blockeel, 2015] introduce the Constraint-Based Overlapping (CBO) value, designed to quantify ambiguity 12 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

between clusters and serving as a proxy for dataset complexity. Other systems that incorporate complexity meta-features include Pimentel and de Carvalho [2019], Treder-Tschechlov et al. [2023b], and da Silva et al. [2024b]. Overall, these families provide a structured way to reason about and compare meta-feature sets across AutoClustering frameworks. As we will see in the next subsection, different systems emphasize different families based on their design goals and target domains. 

5.3 Meta-Feature Usage Across AutoClustering Frameworks 

Figure 1 summarizes the presence of each meta-feature family across the AutoClustering frameworks. Each cell indicates the number of features used per category. Simple Statistical Information-theoretical Landmarkers Model-based Complexity                                                                                                          

> Meta-Feature Families
> de Souto et al. (2008)
> Nascimento et al. (2009)
> Soares et al. (2009)
> Ferrari and de Castro (2012)
> Ferrari and De Castro (2015)
> Adam and Blockeel (2015)
> Vukicevic et al. (2016)
> Van Craenendonck and Blockeel (2017)
> Pimentel and de Carvalho (2018)
> Pimentel and De Carvalho (2019)
> Pimentel and de Carvalho (2019)
> Poulakis et al. (2020)
> ElShawi et al. (2021)
> Liu et al. (2021)
> Tschechlov et al. (2021)
> Cohen-Shapira and Rokach (2021)
> Fernandes et al. (2021)
> Gabbay et al. (2021b)
> ElShawi and Sakr (2022a)
> ElShawi and Sakr (2022b)
> Treder-Tschechlov et al. (2023a)
> AutoClustering Frameworks
> 340000
> 340000
> 090000
> 532000
> 019 0000
> 000001
> 341400
> 000000
> 019 010 00
> 021 010 00
> 329 5602
> 00010 00
> 019 0000
> 812 0040
> 000000
> 000040
> 470036
> 200900
> 019 0000
> 019 0900
> 140102
> Meta-Feature Families across AutoClustering Frameworks
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Count of Meta-Features

Figure 1: Heatmap showing the distribution of meta-feature families across various AutoClustering frameworks. The color intensity corresponds to the number of meta-features in each family for each framework. The frameworks are sorted ascending by publication date. The early studies, such as de Souto et al. [2008] and Nascimento et al. [2009], primarily focused on biological datasets characterized by high dimensionality, motivating the use of simple and statistical meta-features to capture distributional nuances. Subsequent works gradually incorporated landmarkers and more sophisticated information-theoretical measures to better characterize dataset structure. UCI datasets and other common benchmarks became widely adopted from around 2015 onward, facilitating broader system comparisons. Recent frameworks increasingly combine multiple meta-feature families, reflecting a trend towards richer meta-descriptions aimed at improving clustering pipeline selection and interpretability. An analysis of the meta-feature usage across AutoClustering frameworks reveals several consistent trends. First, statistical meta-features are by far the most widely adopted across systems. Their general-purpose applicability, low computational overhead, and ease of extraction make them a default choice for describing dataset distributions and 13 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

structures. Similarly, landmarking features have grown in popularity, particularly in frameworks developed after 2018. These features offer a practical means of capturing structural signals via the performance of simple clustering algorithms and are attractive due to their low cost and compatibility with unsupervised settings. Model-based and complexity-related meta-features are comparatively rare, likely due to higher computation costs and limited support in standard meta-learning toolkits. Still, they may capture complementary signals about dataset geometry and clustering difficulty, making them promising targets for future work. Simple and information-theoretic features appear more often, typically within larger sets, providing compact and interpretable summaries but offering limited discriminative power when used in isolation. 

6 Explainability of Meta-Models 

This section analyses how AutoClustering meta-models use dataset meta-features to produce pipeline decisions. Since recommendations are made in the meta-feature space (datasets as instances), we adopt two complementary explanation scopes: a global view to characterise the dominant decision logic learned across datasets, and a local view to justify and inspect individual recommendations. Accordingly, we use DPG to reveal rule-like global structure and interactions, and SHAP to quantify instance-level feature attributions. 

6.1 Global Explanation 

The global analysis addresses two questions: (i) which meta-feature families consistently drive meta-model behaviour, and (ii) how stable these reliance patterns are across frameworks with different design choices (meta-model type, dataset sources, and meta-feature sets). To support cross-framework comparison, we summarise global importance in terms of DPG predicates ranked by LRC, and we report both the most influential and least influential predicates to expose concentration and redundancy effects. 

6.1.1 Framework Selection and Experimental Setup 

To analyse the global explainability of AutoClustering systems, we selected four representative frameworks: Au-toClust [Poulakis et al., 2020], AutoCluster [Liu et al., 2021], ML2DAC [Treder-Tschechlov et al., 2023a], and PoAC [da Silva et al., 2024b]. These frameworks were chosen based on two key criteria: (1) their reliance on meta-modeling, as opposed to meta-embedding approaches (see Section 3.1 for a discussion of these paradigms), and (2) their reproducibility, specifically, whether they provided access to the meta-feature space and trained meta-models or at least the data required to reconstruct them. While several frameworks described in the previous section use meta-learning, many did not offer sufficient information to reconstruct the meta-space or presented reproducibility issues. This limited their inclusion in our experiments. 

6.1.2 Discriminative Power of Meta-Features 

To assess the discriminative power of meta-features in AutoClustering, we analysed the ten most and least central predicates of the meta-model for each framework, ranked according to their LRC as computed by the DPG. 

AutoClust. By design, AutoClust relies exclusively on a compact set of landmarker-based meta-features, consisting solely of internal Cluster Validity Indices (CVIs), including SIL , DBS , ch , dunn , cop , and related measures. Despite the limited size of this feature set, a clear differentiation in discriminative power emerges when predicates are ranked by LRC. A small subset of CVIs—most notably SIL , DBS , and ch —consistently occupies the top-ranked positions, indicating a strong influence on the decision paths extracted from the DPGs. Conversely, other indices such as dunn , cop , and the 

c-index predominantly appear among the bottom-ranked predicates, suggesting a comparatively minor contribution to the framework’s inferences. Although the LRC distribution is relatively balanced due to the homogeneous nature of the feature family, the consistent dominance of only a few CVIs indicates redundancy within the set. This observation suggests that even in tightly constrained, landmarker-based systems, not all theoretically well-established metrics provide meaningful discriminative power in practice, and that selective pruning could improve both interpretability and computational efficiency. 

AutoCluster. In contrast, AutoCluster primarily relies on statistical and simple dataset descriptors, such as mean.sd ,

iq_range.sd , and nr_num . These low-cost meta-features consistently appear among the most influential predicates, 14 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

highlighting their strong discriminative capacity despite their simplicity. Although model-based meta-features form a central part of AutoCluster’s original design, they are largely absent from the top-ranked predicates, with the notable exception of reachability > 7.51 .This threshold indicates that datasets exceeding a moderate reachability value carry discriminative information relevant to AutoCluster’s decision-making. By comparison, other model-based predicates, such as reachability ≤ 52.03 

and n_leaves > 3000 , appear among the bottom-ranked predicates. These extreme or highly dataset-specific thresholds likely limit their usefulness for general discrimination, explaining their low LRC values. The bottom-ranked predicates are again dominated by statistical descriptors, indicating that even within a favoured feature family, discriminative power is unevenly distributed. Overall, these findings suggest that AutoCluster’s meta-model effectively concentrates on a small subset of stable, inexpensive features, while more complex descriptors contribute marginally, raising questions regarding the cost-effectiveness of their inclusion. 

PoAC and ML2DAC. Conversely to both AutoClust and AutoCluster, PoAC adopts a more balanced design, incorporating meta-features from all five major families. However, despite the explicit inclusion of complexity-based 

meta-features, none appear among the top-ranked predicates. A similar pattern is observed for ML2DAC, which includes two complexity-based features that likewise fail to achieve high LRC scores. The consistent absence of complexity-based features from the most influential predicates suggests that, despite their theoretical appeal, such features may be either too computationally expensive or too unstable across datasets to provide robust discriminative value. This observation motivates a closer examination of their practical utility. We investigate this issue further in Section 7, where ablated versions of PoAC’s meta-model are evaluated after removing time-intensive meta-features, allowing us to assess the resulting impact on predictive performance. A complementary view is provided in the Appendix 8, which groups the top predicates by meta-feature and indicates the degree of overlap across frameworks. Several features, such as SIL , dbi , t_mean.sd , and iq_range , appear in multiple frameworks, often with different threshold splits. This recurrence signals that certain descriptors (especially those related to internal structure and data dispersion) are broadly informative, regardless of the framework’s modeling paradigm. Overall, while AutoClustering frameworks tend to adopt large and diverse meta-feature sets, only a narrow subset tends to drive model behaviour. The consistent underuse of certain families (notably complexity and model-based features), as well as the repeated reliance on a few general-purpose descriptors, motivates future work on meta-feature selection, redundancy reduction, and the development of more adaptive feature design strategies guided by model explainability. 

6.2 Local Explainability of Meta-Model Decisions 

While global explanations capture dominant patterns, AutoClustering systems are ultimately used on individual datasets. We therefore complement the global analysis with local explanations to answer: why did the meta-model produce this recommendation for this dataset? Using SHAP, we quantify the contribution of each meta-feature value to a specific prediction in the meta-feature space. In addition to supporting case-by-case justification, this local view helps identify regime shifts where the model relies on different signals under different expected performance levels, and it can reveal whether global prominence translates into local impact. 

ML2DAC: Explaining Meta-Model Preferences for CVIs. Since ML2DAC casts the meta-modeling task as a classification problem, where the predicted classes correspond to different internal validation criteria (CH, DBCV, SIL and COP), we use SHAP to quantify how each meta-feature contributes to these CVI recommendations. As shown in Figure 3, DBCV and CH appear as the most frequently predicted CVIs, dominating the SHAP impact across top-ranked features. This suggests that ML2DAC implicitly favors these indices, possibly due to their consistent signal across datasets or stronger correlations with certain statistical descriptors. Moreover, we observe distinct feature-to-class affinities: for instance, mad.mean and iq_range.sd are predominantly linked to DBCV recommendations, while 

var.sd and cor.sd tend to drive CH predictions. Conversely, COP surfaces far less frequently, and only a handful of features, such as skewness.mean , exhibit meaningful association with it. These patterns indicate that ML2DAC’s classification meta-model not only relies on a compact set of high-impact statistical features, but also aligns those selectively with the characteristics emphasized by individual CVIs. 

PoAC employs regression to predict clustering quality (ARI) based on an ensemble of meta-features and internal validation metrics. To understand which meta-features PoAC’s model f (x) prioritizes when assigning high ARI scores, we performed a cohort-level SHAP analysis on its recommended pipelines for 25 UCI datasets (sourced from da Silva et al. [2025]). 15 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT sil > -0.24 

> dbi <= 1.38
> ch <= -12.63
> ch > -12.63
> cop > 0.36
> di > -0.44
> di <= -0.39
> cji <= -1.36
> cop <= 1.04
> sil <= -0.18
> iq_range.sd > 0.78
> nr_num > 6.0 (autocluster)
> mad.mean > 3.05
> eigenvalues.mean > 14.07
> inst_to_attr <= 416.66
> reachability > 7.51
> min.mean > -12.96
> cor.sd > 0.04
> mean.sd > 1.06
> eigenvalues.mean > 34.64
> mean.sd > 0.52
> t_mean.sd > 0.66
> nr_num > 6.0 (ml2dac)
> var.sd > 4.44
> sd.sd > 0.31
> var.sd > 2.27
> attr_conc.sd > 0.0
> median.sd > 1.37
> mad.mean > 5.68
> cov.sd > 1.38
> iq_range.mean > 0.12
> dbs > 3.61
> cohesiveness.mean > 216.71
> sil > -0.11
> t_mean.sd > 0.06
> dbs <= 17.61
> nr_attr <= 61.0
> iq_range.mean <= 0.12
> cohesiveness.mean > 577.58
> wg_dist.sd <= 0.23

Predicates 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Normalized LRC

AutoClust AutoCluster ML2DAC PoAC 

Meta-Feature Categories 

complexity 

information-theoretical 

landmarkers 

model-based 

simple 

statistical 

(a) Top 10 most relevant meta-feature predicates per AutoClustering framework based on LRC. cop > 0.36 

> di > -0.44
> di <= -0.39
> cji <= -1.36
> cop <= 1.04
> sil <= -0.18
> dbcv > 0.04
> dbi > 0.62
> dbcv <= 0.11
> cji > -1.61
> cov.mean > 3.71
> iq_range.sd <= 1.9
> nr_num <= 6.0
> min.sd > 0.4
> reachability <= 52.03
> var.sd > 4.64
> n_leaves > 3000.0
> cov.sd > 2.82
> sd.sd <= 1.03
> compactness <= 463.96
> skewness.mean <= -0.01
> mad.sd > 1.02
> t_mean.sd <= 2.59
> min.sd <= 0.75
> eigenvalues.mean > 34.75
> range.sd <= 3.06
> kurtosis.mean > -1.08
> eigenvalues.mean <= 34.75
> eigenvalues.mean <= 34.77
> wg_dist.mean > 0.5
> attr_ent.sd <= 0.06
> cohesiveness.mean > 87.4
> one_itemset.mean <= 0.09
> wg_dist.mean > 0.73
> var.mean <= 0.01
> attr_ent.sd <= 0.16
> t_mean.mean <= 0.53
> wg_dist.sd <= 0.27
> t3 > 0.01

Predicates 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

> Normalized LRC

AutoClust AutoCluster ML2DAC PoAC 

Meta-Feature Categories 

complexity 

information-theoretical 

landmarkers 

model-based 

simple 

statistical 

(b) The 10 least relevant meta-feature predicates per framework, based on LRC. 

Figure 2: Comparison of top and bottom meta-feature predicates per AutoClustering framework ( AutoClust , AutoCluster ,

ML2DAC , PoAC ) based on LRC. Top predicates (a) highlight features most embedded in the information flow, while bottom predicates (b) reflect less influential or potentially redundant aspects. Bars are color-coded by meta-feature category. Figure 4 shows that PoAC’s predictions are primarily influenced by two internal validation metrics, SIL and DBS ,both of which exhibit large SHAP magnitudes (up to +0 .5). This indicates that the model relies strongly on internal consistency signals to infer clustering quality, even though these metrics are not explicitly part of its supervised training objective. While Figure 4 does not provide causal explanations, they do reveal clear trends. Higher values of SIL are generally associated with increased predicted ARI, whereas higher values of DBS tend to decrease it. This aligns with standard interpretations in clustering evaluation, where well-separated clusters (high SIL ) are preferred and scattered or over-lapping clusters (high DBS ) are penalized. The model appears to have internalized these domain heuristics during training. Other meta-features, including statistical descriptors such as nr_attr and wg_dist.mean , show negligible impact on predictions (with absolute SHAP values below 0.1). This indicates that PoAC’s regression model concentrates its 16 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Figure 3: SHAP summary plot for ML2DAC showing the average contribution of each meta-feature to the model’s CVI recommendation. Colors denote the predicted CVI (CH, DBCV, SIL, COP). decision boundary around a narrow subset of influential signals, potentially limiting its sensitivity to broader dataset characteristics. To further understand PoAC’s shifting reliance on meta-features across performance regimes, we compared SHAP explanations for two pipelines applied to the thy dataset—one with high predicted ARI ( f (x)=0.871) and one with low (f (x)=0.336). As seen in Figure 5, the high-performing pipeline strongly leverages internal validation metrics: SIL 

contributes +0 .45 , followed by modest positive influence from features like DBS , mad.mean , and wg_dist.mean . This confirms the model’s dependence on internal consistency signals when assigning high ARI scores. By comparison, the low-scoring pipeline shows weakened influence from SIL and DBS , with sparsity.sd and sparsity.mean emerging as context-specific signals. Their small but nonzero contributions reflect a pivot in PoAC’s inference strategy: in the absence of strong internal validation cues, dataset-inherent properties such as attribute sparsity take on explanatory 17 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Figure 4: Cohort-level SHAP summary plot analysing PoAC’s recommended clustering pipelines across 25 datasets. Each point represents a dataset/pipeline meta-feature value (color: red=high, blue=low) and its impact on the prediction (x-axis: SHAP value). Meta-features are ranked by mean absolute SHAP value. weight. This contrast illustrates how PoAC dynamically adjusts its feature importance profile based on the expected clustering quality. 

7 Meta-model Ablation 

This section evaluates whether the explanation evidence reported in Section 6 can be used to make AutoClustering systems more efficient. In practice, meta-feature extraction is part of the inference pipeline: it must be executed whenever a new dataset arrives, and it can dominate end-to-end latency in time-sensitive or large-scale settings [Brazdil et al., 2022, Reif et al., 2012]. At the same time, our global analysis indicates that meta-model decisions are often driven by a small subset of descriptors, suggesting that some features are redundant or weakly used. We therefore perform a controlled ablation study to quantify the trade-off between meta-feature extraction cost and predictive performance, and to assess whether explainability-guided pruning yields practical gains without materially degrading accuracy. 

7.1 Ablation Setup 

We focus on PoAC [da Silva et al., 2024b] because it provides a complete and reproducible meta-feature space and meta-model training pipeline. We evaluate three versions of the PoAC meta-feature set on the same 6,000 synthetic datasets released with the framework [da Silva et al., 2024b]. The three sets are: (i) PoAC Full , the original set of 39 meta-features; (ii) PoAC DPG , a reduced set of 24 meta-features obtained by filtering descriptors whose associated predicates have negligible LRC; and (iii) PoAC Core , a compact set composed of the 10 most central meta-features according to average LRC. This design isolates the effect of feature selection while keeping the learning algorithm and evaluation protocol unchanged. 18 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 0.175 0.200 0.225 0.250 0.275 0.300 0.325 0.350    

> 28 other features
> attr_conc.sd
> eigenvalues.sd
> mad.mean
> wg_dist.sd
> sil
> sd.mean
> iq_range.mean
> nr_attr
> sparsity.mean
> sparsity.sd
> dbs
> 28 other features
> attr_conc.sd
> eigenvalues.sd
> mad.mean
> wg_dist.sd
> sil
> sd.mean
> iq_range.mean
> nr_attr
> sparsity.mean
> sparsity.sd
> dbs +0.15
> +0.02
> +0.02
> +0.02
> +0.01
> +0.01
> 0.12
> 0.03
> 0.01
> 0.01
> 0.01
> 0.01
> E[f(X)] = 0.301
> f(x)= 0.336

(a) Low predicted ARI pipeline ( f (x) = 0 .336 ) for thy .0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9     

> 28 other features
> wg_dist.sd
> median.sd
> cohesiveness.sd
> wg_dist.mean
> t4
> nr_attr
> mad.mean
> iq_range.mean
> nr_cor_attr
> dbs
> sil
> 28 other features
> wg_dist.sd
> median.sd
> cohesiveness.sd
> wg_dist.mean
> t4
> nr_attr
> mad.mean
> iq_range.mean
> nr_cor_attr
> dbs
> sil +0.45
> +0.15
> +0.01
> +0.01
> +0.01
> 0.02
> 0.01
> 0.01
> 0
> 0
> 0
> 0
> E[f(X)] = 0.301
> f(x)= 0.871

(b) High predicted ARI pipeline ( f (x) = 0 .871 ) for thy .

Figure 5: SHAP explanations for two PoAC-predicted pipelines on the thy dataset, representing low and high clustering quality. Figure 6 reports the total extraction time for each set across the 6,000 datasets. PoAC Full requires approximately 4 h 54 m, while PoAC DPG remains comparable at 4 h 49 m. By contrast, PoAC Core reduces extraction time to under 7 minutes, illustrating that a small subset of descriptors accounts for most of the computational cost. 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 

> Dataset Index (Sorted by Size)
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> Execution Time in Seconds
> Feature Set
> poac_core
> poac_dpg
> poac_full

Figure 6: Ablation experiment comparing the meta-feature extraction time across three different feature sets: (i) 

poac_full the complete set of 39 meta-features used by Poac; (ii) poac_dpg a reduced set of 24 meta-features with a minimum LRC value; (iii) poac_core a minimal set of the 10 most central meta-features based on LRC. 

7.2 Performance Impact 

To measure the effect on prediction quality, we train a Random Forest regressor on each feature subset and evaluate it with 10-fold cross-validation on the 100 synthetic test datasets provided by [da Silva et al., 2024b]. Table 3 summarises the results. As expected, PoAC Full provides the best overall performance. However, both reduced sets remain competitive: PoAC DPG increases RMSE by 6.3% and MAE by 8.3% relative to the full set, while PoAC Core yields 19 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

an RMSE increase of 12% and still achieves R2 > 0.82 . These results indicate that most of the predictive signal is retained after substantial feature reduction, especially when the retained features are chosen based on global relevance. 

Meta-Feature Set RMSE ↓ MAE ↓ R2 ↑ Extraction Time 

PoAC Full 0.0735 0.0521 0.8644 4h 54m PoAC DPG 0.0782 0.0564 0.8465 4h 49m PoAC CORE 0.0825 0.0600 0.8291 0h 7m 

Table 3: Cross-validated performance of Random Forest regressors using different feature subsets. Lower values are better for RMSE and MAE; higher values are better for R 2. The last column shows the total time required to extract each meta-feature set across all 6,000 datasets. The ablation study shows that explainability can be used as an engineering signal rather than a purely descriptive tool. Selecting features based on global relevance yields large reductions in extraction time while preserving most of the meta-model’s predictive accuracy, which is directly relevant for scaling meta-learning pipelines and for deployment in compute-constrained environments. 

8 Discussion 

This work addressed a practical gap in AutoClustering: understanding how dataset meta-features drive the recommen-dations produced by meta-models, and what this implies for transparency, reliability, and efficiency in unsupervised AutoML. While much prior work has focused on proposing new meta-features or improving predictive performance, the decision logic that links meta-features to recommended pipelines is rarely examined. By combining a unified meta-feature taxonomy with complementary global and local analyses, we provide a structured view of how current AutoClustering meta-models behave in practice. Across the analysed frameworks, three consistent observations emerge: (i) decision-making is concentrated in a small subset of descriptors despite large feature sets, (ii) many recommendations are strongly shaped by internal-validation signals and related systematic preference effects, and (iii) explanation evidence can be translated into concrete efficiency gains through feature-set reduction. Our global analysis using Decision Predicate Graphs reveals a striking concentration of influence across all examined frameworks. Despite the widespread adoption of large and diverse meta-feature sets, only a narrow subset consistently drives meta-model decisions. In particular, statistical descriptors and landmarker-based features dominate decision paths, while complexity-based and model-based meta-features are rarely influential. This pattern holds across frameworks with distinct design philosophies, suggesting that redundancy is not an isolated implementation artifact but a structural characteristic of current AutoClustering meta-models. These findings challenge the assumption that increasing meta-feature diversity necessarily improves generalization and instead point toward diminishing returns beyond a core set of stable descriptors. Local explainability analyses using SHAP further refine this picture by exposing how meta-features contribute to individual recommendations. For ML2DAC, we observe clear alignments between specific statistical descriptors and the preferred internal validation criteria, indicating that the meta-model learns feature-to-objective affinities rather than treating CVIs interchangeably. In PoAC, SHAP explanations reveal a strong dependence on internal validation signals, particularly SIL and DBS, when predicting clustering quality. While this behaviour aligns with established clustering heuristics, it also exposes an implicit bias toward internal consistency measures, potentially limiting sensitivity to broader dataset characteristics. Importantly, local explanations show that PoAC dynamically shifts its reliance on meta-features depending on the expected clustering quality, demonstrating that even compact decision logic can remain context-sensitive. Building on these insights, the meta-model ablation study provides concrete evidence that explainability can be leveraged not only for interpretation but also for optimization. By pruning meta-features based on global relevance scores, we achieve dramatic reductions in extraction time with only marginal losses in predictive performance. The most compact configuration, using fewer than one third of the original meta-features, preserves over 95 percent of the predictive accuracy while reducing extraction time by orders of magnitude. This result underscores a key practical implication of our analysis: explainability-driven ablation offers a principled pathway toward scalable and resource-efficient AutoML systems. Table 4 present a summary of our findings. Taken together, the findings suggest several design implications for future AutoClustering systems. First, explanation should be considered a design-time requirement, not only a post-hoc diagnostic: exposing dominant decision structures helps debugging and supports auditing of systematic preference effects. Second, meta-feature engineering should 20 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Table 4: Summary of findings for AutoClustering design.   

> Observation Why it matters
> Decision influence is concentrated in a small subset of meta-features (DPG). Large meta-feature sets often introduce redundancy and do not necessarily improve generalisation beyond a stable core set. Internal-validation signals strongly shape recommendations (SHAP), in-dicating systematic preference ef-fects. Recommendations may inherit assumptions encoded by CVIs and landmarkers, which can diverge from user intent or domain semantics in unsupervised settings. Global and local explanations pro-vide complementary evidence (DPG vs. SHAP). Global structure can highlight dominant decision logic, while local attributions justify individual recommendations and reveal regime-dependent feature re-liance. Explainability-guided pruning yields large efficiency gains with modest accuracy loss (ablation). Meta-feature extraction can dominate end-to-end runtime; pruning based on relevance provides a principled route to faster, more deployable systems.

be guided by measured contribution and cost: expensive descriptors should be included only when they provide demonstrable marginal benefit over the core set. Third, since internal-validation signals frequently dominate decisions, future work should study how meta-models balance CVI-based cues with broader dataset descriptors, especially when user intent or domain semantics differ from the geometric assumptions encoded by many CVIs. This study also has limitations. Our experiments are restricted to frameworks whose meta-feature spaces and trained meta-models could be reliably reconstructed, which reduces coverage of recent embedding-based approaches. In addition, the ablation study is conducted on the PoAC synthetic benchmark suite; although it enables controlled comparisons, transfer to fully real-world meta-datasets should be further validated. Finally, while DPG and SHAP provide complementary evidence, extending global structural analysis to neural or representation-learning meta-models remains an open direction. Addressing these points would broaden the applicability of the proposed analysis and strengthen guidance for next-generation AutoClustering systems. 

9 Conclusions 

This paper examined AutoClustering from the perspective of the meta-learning layer, asking how dataset meta-features actually drive the recommendations produced by clustering meta-models. We contributed (i) a structured taxonomy covering meta-features and dataset sources across 22 AutoClustering frameworks, (ii) a two-level explainability analysis that combines global decision structure extraction via Decision Predicate Graphs with local attributions via SHAP, and (iii) an explainability-guided ablation study showing that substantial reductions in meta-feature extraction cost can be achieved with only modest losses in predictive accuracy. Empirically, our results indicate that current AutoClustering meta-models concentrate their decisions on a small subset of largely statistical and landmarker-based descriptors, while more costly feature families are often weakly utilised. These findings suggest that explainability can serve as an engineering signal: it supports auditing of systematic preference effects, motivates principled meta-feature pruning, and helps move AutoClustering from opaque recommendation to inspectable decision-making. Future work should extend these analyses to embedding-based and neural meta-learning approaches and validate the proposed efficiency–accuracy trade-offs on broader real-world meta-datasets. 

References 

Randal S. Olson, Ryan J. Urbanowicz, Peter C. Andrews, Nicole A. Lavender, La Creis Kidd, and Jason H. Moore. Automating biomedical data science through tree-based pipeline optimization. In EvoApplications , 2016. URL 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9709316 .Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Automated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges, 2019. Frank Hutter, Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. An efficient approach for assessing hyperparameter importance. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 754–762, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/hutter14.html .21 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Joaquin Vanschoren. Meta-learning. In Automated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges , pages 35–61. Springer International Publishing Cham, 2019. Pavel Brazdil, Jan van Rijn, Carlos Soares, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Metalearning: Applications to Automated Machine Learning and Data Mining . Springer, 01 2022. ISBN 978-3-030-67023-8. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-67024-5. Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(55):1–21, 2019. Maroua Bahri, Flavia Salutari, Andrian Putina, and Mauro Sozio. Automl: state of the art with a focus on anomaly detection, challenges, and research directions. International Journal of Data Science and Analytics , 14(2):113–126, 2022. Ulrike Von Luxburg, Robert C Williamson, and Isabelle Guyon. Clustering: Science or art? In Proceedings of ICML workshop on unsupervised and transfer learning , pages 65–79. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2012. Maria Halkidi, Yannis Batistakis, and Michalis Vazirgiannis. On clustering validation techniques. Journal of intelligent information systems , 17:107–145, 2001. Lucas Vendramin, Ricardo JGB Campello, and Eduardo R Hruschka. Relative clustering validity criteria: A comparative overview. Statistical analysis and data mining: the ASA data science journal , 3(4):209–235, 2010. Marek Gagolewski, Maciej Bartoszuk, and Anna Cena. Are cluster validity measures (in) valid? Information Sciences ,581:620–636, 2021. Yannis Poulakis, Christos Doulkeridis, and Dimosthenis Kyriazis. A survey on automl methods and systems for clustering. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , 18(5):1–30, 2024. Miloš Kotlar, Marija Punt, Zaharije Radivojevi´ c, Miloš Cvetanovi´ c, and Veljko Milutinovi´ c. Novel meta-features for automated machine learning model selection in anomaly detection. IEEE Access , 9:89675–89687, 2021. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3090936. Adriano Rivolli, Luís P.F. Garcia, Carlos Soares, Joaquin Vanschoren, and André C.P.L.F. de Car-valho. Meta-features for meta-learning. Knowledge-Based Systems , 240:108101, 2022a. ISSN 0950-7051. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.108101. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0950705121011631 .J Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548 , 2018. Sarah Segel, Helena Graf, Alexander Tornede, Bernd Bischl, and Marius Lindauer. Symbolic explanations for hyperparameter optimization. 2023. Julia Moosbauer, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marius Lindauer, and Bernd Bischl. Improving accuracy of interpretability measures in hyperparameter optimization via bayesian algorithm execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05447 , 2022a. Julia Moosbauer. Towards explainable automated machine learning . PhD thesis, lmu, 2023. Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. Peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable artificial intelligence (xai). IEEE access , 6:52138–52160, 2018. Marius Lindauer, Florian Karl, Anne Klier, Julia Moosbauer, Alexander Tornede, Andreas Mueller, Frank Hutter, Matthias Feurer, and Bernd Bischl. Position: A call to action for a human-centered automl paradigm, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03348 .Matheus Camilo da Silva, Biagio Licari, Gabriel Marques Tavares, and Sylvio Barbon Junior. Benchmarking automl clustering frameworks. In AutoML Conference 2024 (ABCD Track) , 2024a. Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) , 54(6):1–35, 2021. Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classifica-tion. In Sorelle A. Friedler and Christo Wilson, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency , volume 81 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 77–91. PMLR, 23–24 Feb 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html .Leonardo Arrighi, Luca Pennella, Gabriel Marques Tavares, and Sylvio Barbon Junior. Decision predicate graphs: Enhancing interpretability in tree ensembles. In World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence , pages 311–332. Springer, 2024. Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. Matheus Camilo da Silva, Gabriel Marques Tavares, Eric Medvet, and Sylvio Barbon Junior. Problem-oriented automl in clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16218 , 2024b. 22 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In kdd , volume 96, pages 226–231, 1996. Hans-Peter Kriegel, Peer Kröger, Jörg Sander, and Arthur Zimek. Density-based clustering. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and knowledge discovery , 1(3):231–240, 2011. Ricardo Vilalta and Youssef Drissi. A perspective view and survey of meta-learning. Artificial Intelligence Review , 18 (2):77–95, 2002. Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural networks: A survey. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 44(9):5149–5169, 2022. Matthias Reif, Faisal Shafait, and Andreas Dengel. Meta-learning for evolutionary parameter optimization of classifiers. 

Machine Learning , 87(3):357–380, 2012. Nicolo Fusi, Rishit Sheth, and Nello Cristianini. Probabilistic matrix factorization for automated machine learning. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2018. Dennis Treder-Tschechlov, Manuel Fritz, Holger Schwarz, and Bernhard Mitschang. Ml2dac: Meta-learning to democratize automl for clustering analysis. Proc. ACM Manag. Data , 1(2), jun 2023a. doi:10.1145/3589289. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3589289 .Gerlise Chan, Tom Claassen, Holger Hoos, Tom Heskes, and Mitra Baratchi. Autocd: Automated machine learning for causal discovery algorithms. In AutoML 2024 Methods Track , 2024. Christian Lemke, Bogdan Gabrys, and Joachim M Buhmann. Metalearning: a survey of trends and technologies. 

Artificial Intelligence Review , 44(1):117–130, 2015. Marcilio C. P. de Souto, Ricardo B. C. Prudencio, Rodrigo G. F. Soares, Daniel S. A. de Araujo, Ivan G. Costa, Teresa B. Ludermir, and Alexander Schliep. Ranking and selecting clustering algorithms using a meta-learning approach. In 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence) , pages 3729–3735, 2008. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2008.4634333. André CA Nascimento, Ricardo BC Prudêncio, Marcilio CP De Souto, and Ivan G Costa. Mining rules for the automatic selection process of clustering methods applied to cancer gene expression data. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks , pages 20–29. Springer, 2009. Matthias Reif, Faisal Shafait, and Andreas Dengel. Automatic classifier selection for non-experts. Pattern Analysis and Applications , 17:83–96, 2014. Itay Gabbay, Bracha Shapira, and Lior Rokach. Isolation forests and landmarking-based representations for clustering algorithm recommendation using meta-learning. Information Sciences , 574:473–489, 2021a. ISSN 0020-0255. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.06.033. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0020025521006241 .Marcilio CP De Souto, Ivan G Costa, Daniel Sa De Araujo, Teresa B Ludermir, and Alexander Schliep. Clustering cancer gene expression data: a comparative study. BMC bioinformatics , 9:1–14, 2008. Bruno Almeida Pimentel and André CPLF de Carvalho. Statistical versus distance-based meta-features for clustering algorithm recommendation using meta-learning. In 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) ,pages 1–8. IEEE, 2018. Noy Cohen-Shapira and Lior Rokach. Automatic selection of clustering algorithms using supervised graph embedding. 

Information Sciences , 577:824–851, 2021. ISSN 0020-0255. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.08.028. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025521008288 .Antoine Adam and Hendrik Blockeel. Dealing with overlapping clustering: A constraint-based approach to algorithm selection. In Meta-learning and Algorithm Selection workshop-ECMLPKDD2015 , volume 1, pages 43–54. CEUR Workshop proceedings, 2015. Yannis Poulakis, Christos Doulkeridis, and Dimosthenis Kyriazis. Autoclust: A framework for automated clustering based on cluster validity indices. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) , pages 1220–1225. IEEE, 2020. Daniel G Ferrari and Leandro Nunes de Castro. Clustering algorithm recommendation: a meta-learning approach. In 

International Conference on Swarm, Evolutionary, and Memetic Computing , pages 143–150. Springer, 2012. Radwa ElShawi and Sherif Sakr. Tpe-autoclust: A tree-based pipline ensemble framework for automated clustering. In 

2022 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , pages 1144–1153. IEEE, 2022a. Alejandro Barredo Arrieta et al. Explainable artificial intelligence (xai): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible ai. Information Fusion , 58:82–115, 2020. 23 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

David Gunning, Mark Stefik, Jaesik Choi, Timothy Miller, Simone Stumpf, and Guang-Zhong Yang. Xai—explainable artificial intelligence. Science Robotics , 4(37):eaay7120, 2019. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aay7120. Giulia Vilone and Luca Longo. Notions of explainability and evaluation approaches for explainable artificial intelligence. 

Information Fusion , 76:89–106, December 2021. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.009. Luca Longo, Mario Brcic, Federico Cabitza, Jaesik Choi, Roberto Confalonieri, Javier Del Ser, Riccardo Guidotti, Yoichi Hayashi, Francisco Herrera, Andreas Holzinger, Richard Jiang, Hassan Khosravi, Freddy Lecue, Gianclaudio Malgieri, Andrés Páez, Wojciech Samek, Johannes Schneider, Timo Speith, and Simone Stumpf. Explainable artificial intelligence (xai) 2.0: A manifesto of open challenges and interdisciplinary research directions. Information Fusion , 106:102301, June 2024. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102301. Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue , 16(3):31–57, 2018. Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. “why should i trust you?” explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 1135–1144, 2016. Julia Moosbauer, Julia Herbinger, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marius Lindauer, and Bernd Bischl. Explaining hyperparameter optimization via partial dependence plots. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:2280–2291, 2021. Matteo Ceschin, Leonardo Arrighi, Luca Longo, and Sylvio Barbon Junior. Extending decision predicate graphs for comprehensive explanation of isolation forest. In World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence , pages 271–293. Springer, 2025. Jan N Van Rijn and Frank Hutter. Hyperparameter importance across datasets. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 2367–2376, 2018. Moncef Garouani, Adeel Ahmad, Mourad Bouneffa, Mohamed Hamlich, Gregory Bourguin, and Arnaud Lewandowski. Towards big industrial data mining through explainable automated machine learning. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology , 120(1):1169–1188, 2022. Philipp Probst, Anne-Laure Boulesteix, and Bernd Bischl. Tunability: Importance of hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(53):1–32, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/ v20/18-444.html .Honghe Jin. Hyperparameter importance for machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05132 , 2022. Shuhei Watanabe, Archit Bansal, and Frank Hutter. Ped-anova: Efficiently quantifying hyperparameter importance in arbitrary subspaces, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.10255 .Daphne Theodorakopoulos, Frederic Stahl, and Marius Lindauer. Hyperparameter Importance Analysis for Multi-Objective AutoML . IOS Press, October 2024. ISBN 9781643685489. doi:10.3233/faia240602. URL http: //dx.doi.org/10.3233/FAIA240602 .Julia Moosbauer, Julia Herbinger, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Marius Lindauer, and Bernd Bischl. Explaining hyperparameter optimization via partial dependence plots, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.04820 .Sina Sheikholeslami, Moritz Meister, Tianze Wang, Amir H. Payberah, Vladimir Vlassov, and Jim Dowling. Autoabla-tion: Automated parallel ablation studies for deep learning. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Machine Learning and Systems , EuroMLSys ’21, page 55–61, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450382984. doi:10.1145/3437984.3458834. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3437984.3458834 .André Biedenkapp, Joshua Marben, Marius Lindauer, and Frank Hutter. Cave: Configuration assessment, visualization and evaluation. In Roberto Battiti, Mauro Brunato, Ilias Kotsireas, and Panos M. Pardalos, editors, Learning and Intelligent Optimization , pages 115–130, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-05348-2. Rodrigo GF Soares, Teresa B Ludermir, and Francisco AT De Carvalho. An analysis of meta-learning techniques for ranking clustering algorithms applied to artificial data. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks ,pages 131–140. Springer, 2009. Luiz Henrique dos Santos Fernandes, Ana Carolina Lorena, and Kate Smith-Miles. Towards understanding clustering problems and algorithms: an instance space analysis. Algorithms , 14(3):95, 2021. Daniel Gomes Ferrari and Leandro Nunes De Castro. Clustering algorithm selection by meta-learning systems: A new distance-based problem characterization and ranking combination methods. Information Sciences , 301:181–194, 2015. Milan Vukicevic, Sandro Radovanovic, Boris Delibasic, and Milija Suknovic. Extending meta-learning framework for clustering gene expression data with component-based algorithm design and internal evaluation measures. 

International Journal of Data Mining and Bioinformatics , 14(2):101–119, 2016. 24 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Toon Van Craenendonck and Hendrik Blockeel. Constraint-based clustering selection. Machine Learning , 106(9): 1497–1521, 2017. Bruno Almeida Pimentel and Andre CPLF De Carvalho. A new data characterization for selecting clustering algorithms using meta-learning. Information Sciences , 477:203–219, 2019. Bruno Almeida Pimentel and André CPLF de Carvalho. Unsupervised meta-learning for clustering algorithm recom-mendation. In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019. Radwa ElShawi, Hudson Lekunze, and Sherif Sakr. csmartml: A meta learning-based framework for automated selection and hyperparameter tuning for clustering. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) ,pages 1119–1126, 2021. doi:10.1109/BigData52589.2021.9671542. Itay Gabbay, Bracha Shapira, and Lior Rokach. Isolation forests and landmarking-based representations for clustering algorithm recommendation using meta-learning. Information Sciences , 574:473–489, 2021b. Yue Liu, Shuang Li, and Wenjie Tian. Autocluster: Meta-learning based ensemble method for automated unsupervised clustering. In Kamal Karlapalem, Hong Cheng, Naren Ramakrishnan, R. K. Agrawal, P. Krishna Reddy, Jaideep Srivastava, and Tanmoy Chakraborty, editors, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 246–258, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-75768-7. Dennis Tschechlov, Manuel Fritz, Holger Schwarz, Y Velegrakis, D Zeinalipour-Yazti, P Chrysanthis, and F Guerra. Automl4clust: Efficient automl for clustering analyses. In EDBT , pages 343–348, 2021. Radwa ElShawi and Sherif Sakr. csmartml-glassbox: Increasing transparency and controllability in automated clustering. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , pages 47–54. IEEE, 2022b. Dennis Treder-Tschechlov, Manuel Fritz, Holger Schwarz, and Bernhard Mitschang. Ml2dac: Meta-learning to democratize automl for clustering analysis. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data , 1(2):1–26, 2023b. Markelle Kelly, Rachel Longjohn, and Kolby Nottingham. The uci machine learning repository, 2023. Joaquin Vanschoren, Jan N. van Rijn, Bernd Bischl, and Luis Torgo. Openml: Networked science in machine learning. 

SIGKDD Explorations , 15(2):49–60, 2013. doi:10.1145/2641190.2641198. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 2641190.2641198 .Julia Handl and Joshua Knowles. Cluster generators for large high-dimensional data sets with large numbers of clusters. 

Dimension , 2:20, 2005. Pasi Fränti and Sami Sieranoja. K-means properties on six clustering benchmark datasets, 2018. URL http: //cs.uef.fi/sipu/datasets/ .Tomas Barton. Clustering benchmarks, 2015. Alfred Ultsch. U*-matrix: a tool to visualize clusters in high dimensional data. Technical report, Univ., Fachbereich Mathematik und Informatik, 2003. Ciro Castiello, Giovanna Castellano, and Anna Maria Fanelli. Meta-data: Characterization of input features for meta-learning. In International conference on modeling decisions for artificial intelligence , pages 457–468. Springer, 2005. Adriano Rivolli, Luıs PF Garcia, Carlos Soares, Joaquin Vanschoren, and André CPLF de Carvalho. Towards reproducible empirical research in meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.10406 , pages 32–52, 2018. Adriano Rivolli, Luís PF Garcia, Carlos Soares, Joaquin Vanschoren, and André CPLF de Carvalho. Meta-features for meta-learning. Knowledge-Based Systems , 240:108101, 2022b. Fábio Pinto, Carlos Soares, and Joao Mendes-Moreira. Towards automatic generation of metafeatures. In Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 215–226. Springer, 2016. Donald Michie, David J Spiegelhalter, Charles C Taylor, and John Campbell. Machine learning, neural and statistical classification . Ellis Horwood, 1995. Alexandros Kalousis and Melanie Hilario. Model selection via meta-learning: a comparative study. In Proceedings 12th IEEE Internationals Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence. ICTAI 2000 , pages 406–413. IEEE, 2000. Bernhard Pfahringer, Hilan Bensusan, and Christophe G Giraud-Carrier. Meta-learning by landmarking various learning algorithms. In ICML , pages 743–750, 2000. Tin Kam Ho and M. Basu. Complexity measures of supervised classification problems. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 24(3):289–300, 2002. doi:10.1109/34.990132. Ana C Lorena, Luís PF Garcia, Jens Lehmann, Marcilio CP Souto, and Tin Kam Ho. How complex is your classification problem? a survey on measuring classification complexity. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 52(5):1–34, 2019. 25 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Matheus Camilo da Silva, Gabriel Marques Tavares, and Sylvio Barbon. Tpot-clustering. In 2025 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 1–8, 2025. doi:10.1109/IJCNN64981.2025.11228951. 26 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

A Appendix 

A.1 Meta-feature family coverage across frameworks 

Table 5 summarises the meta-feature families reported by the 22 AutoClustering frameworks reviewed in this study, grouped according to the taxonomy introduced in Section 5. Each entry corresponds to the number of meta-features in a given family explicitly used by the framework. The table is intended to support two purposes: (i) to provide a compact, reproducible record of how meta-feature families are instantiated in prior work, and (ii) to make the heterogeneity and redundancy of meta-feature design choices visible at a glance. Our results in Sections 6.1–7 qualify this assumption by showing that, even when many families are computed, meta-model behaviour often concentrates on a comparatively small core of influential descriptors. Table 5: Meta-feature family usage across AutoClustering frameworks (2008–2024).                                                                                                                                     

> Framework Simple Statistical Info.-Theoretical Landmarkers Model-Based Complexity
> Souto (2008) 340000Nascimento (2009) 340000Soares (2009) 090000Ferrari (2012) 532000Ferrari (2015) 019 0000CBOvalue (2015) 000001Vukicevic (2016) 341400COBS (2017) 000000Pimentel (2018) 019 010 00Pimentel (2019a) 021 010 00Pimentel (2019b) 329 5602Autoclust (2020) 00010 00cSmartML (2021) 019 0000AutoCluster (2021) 812 0040AutoML4Clust (2021) 000000Marco-GE (2021) 000040Fernandes (2021) 000000Gabbay (2021) 200900cSmartML-GB (2022) 019 0000TPE-Autoclust (2022) 019 0900ML2DAC (2023) 140102PoAC (2024) 410 6303

A.2 Top DPG predicates and cross-framework comparability 

Table 6 reports the ten most central predicates extracted by Decision Predicate Graphs (DPG) for each analysed framework, ranked by Local Reaching Centrality (LRC). Each predicate is a human-readable rule of the form feature 

◦ threshold that appears in the reconstructed global decision structure. We report both the original LRC values and a per-framework normalised version (max-normalised to 1.0) to support two complementary readings: (i) within-framework ranking , where normalised LRC highlights which predicates dominate a given model, and (ii) cross-framework inspection , where the predicate categories and recurring feature names provide a qualitative notion of common drivers across different meta-models. This table therefore complements Figure 2 by making the dominant decision rules explicit and by highlighting the degree to which current meta-models concentrate on a small number of stable, repeatedly used descriptors. In the main text, these observations motivate the local analyses (Section 6) and the explainability-guided ablation study (Section 7), which evaluate whether the globally prominent signals also drive individual recommendations and whether weakly used descriptors can be removed with limited performance impact. 

A.3 AutoCluster meta-feature implementation details 

Table 7 lists the 24 meta-features implemented in AutoCluster, grouped by category. We include this table for two reasons. First, AutoCluster is frequently referenced as a representative meta-learning approach for clustering recommendation, yet publications often describe its descriptors only at a high level. Second, our explainability results 27 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Table 6: Top meta-feature predicates per AutoClustering framework based on original and normalized LRC. 

Framework Predicate LRC LRC normalized MF Category 

autoclust SIL > -0.24 33.0543 1.000 Landmarkers autoclust DBI <= 1.38 30.2646 0.7678 Landmarkers autoclust CH <= -12.63 29.9616 0.7426 Landmarkers autoclust CH > -12.63 29.1075 0.6715 Landmarkers autoclust COP > 0.36 27.9701 0.5768 Landmarkers autoclust DI > -0.44 27.6708 0.5519 Landmarkers autoclust DI <= -0.39 26.4897 0.4536 Landmarkers autoclust CJI <= -1.36 26.2989 0.4377 Landmarkers autoclust COP <= 1.04 25.6228 0.3814 Landmarkers autoclust SIL <= -0.18 25.5206 0.3729 Landmarkers autocluster iq_range.sd > 0.78 0.7413 1.000 Statistical autocluster nr_num > 6.0 0.5581 0.7046 Simple autocluster mad.mean > 3.05 0.5454 0.6841 Statistical autocluster eigenvalues.mean > 14.07 0.4513 0.5325 Statistical autocluster inst_to_attr <= 416.66 0.4256 0.4910 Simple autocluster reachability > 7.51 0.4255 0.4908 Landmarkers autocluster min.mean > -12.96 0.3120 0.3080 Statistical autocluster cor.sd > 0.04 0.3057 0.2978 Statistical autocluster mean.sd > 1.06 0.2779 0.2530 Statistical autocluster eigenvalues.mean > 34.64 0.2667 0.2349 Statistical ml2dac mean.sd > 0.52 0.8927 1.000 Statistical ml2dac t_mean.sd > 0.66 0.8179 0.8942 Statistical ml2dac nr_num > 6.0 0.6177 0.6113 Simple ml2dac var.sd > 4.44 0.4743 0.4085 Statistical ml2dac sd.sd > 0.31 0.4238 0.3372 Statistical ml2dac var.sd > 2.27 0.3803 0.2756 Statistical ml2dac attr_conc.sd > 0.0 0.3635 0.2519 Information-theoretical ml2dac median.sd > 1.37 0.3446 0.2252 Statistical ml2dac mad.mean > 5.68 0.2976 0.1588 Statistical ml2dac cov.sd > 1.38 0.2930 0.1522 Statistical poac iq_range.mean > 0.12 3.5425 1.000 Statistical poac DBS > 3.61 3.4105 0.8972 Landmarkers poac cohesiveness.mean > 216.71 3.1642 0.7055 Information-theoretical poac SIL > -0.11 3.1161 0.6681 Landmarkers poac t_mean.sd > 0.06 3.0821 0.6416 Statistical poac DBS <= 17.61 2.9620 0.5481 Landmarkers poac nr_attr <= 61.0 2.9261 0.5202 Simple poac iq_range.mean <= 0.12 2.8692 0.4758 Statistical poac cohesiveness.mean > 577.58 2.8539 0.4640 Information-theoretical poac wg_dist.sd <= 0.23 2.8518 0.4623 Information-theoretical 

(Section 6.1) depend on how these features are instantiated, since DPG predicates and SHAP attributions operate directly on the computed meta-feature values. 

A.4 Cross-framework overlap of influential predicates 

Table 8 aggregates the most relevant DPG predicates by meta-feature family and meta-feature name, and reports in which frameworks each predicate appears. This table complements Table 6 by shifting the focus from per-framework rankings to cross-framework overlap : rather than listing the top predicates separately for each meta-model, it highlights which meta-features recur as influential signals across different AutoClustering designs. 28 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

Table 7: The implemented meta-features in AutoCluster. 

Category No. Meta-feature 

Simple 1 Number of instances 2 Log number of instances 3 Number of features 4 Log number of features 5 Dataset ratio 6 Log dataset ratio 7 Inverse dataset ratio 8 Inverse log dataset ratio Statistical 9 Kurtosis max 10 Kurtosis min 11 Kurtosis mean 12 Kurtosis standard deviation 13 Skewness max 14 Skewness min 15 Skewness mean 16 Skewness standard deviation PCA 17 PCA 95% explained variance 18 Kurtosis of the first principal component 19 Skewness of the first principal component Data Distribution 20 Hopkins statistic Landmarker 21 Distance to closest cluster center (Kmeans) 22 Number of leaves (Agglomerative Clustering) 23 Maximum reachability distance (OPTICS) 24 Maximum core distance (OPTICS) 29 Explaining AutoClustering A P REPRINT 

> Table 8: Grouped Predicates by Meta-Feature Category and Meta-Feature Name across AutoClustering Frameworks
> MF Category  MF  Predicate(s)  Framework(s)
> Landmarkers
> SIL  SIL > -0.24 , SIL <= -0.18 , SIL > -1.06  autoclust, poac
> dbi  dbi <= -1.38  autoclust
> ch  ch <= -2.63 , ch >= -2.63  autoclust
> cop  cop <= -0.36 , cop <= -3.06  autoclust
> di  di > -0.44 , di <= -3.9  autoclust
> DBS  DBS > 2.67  poac
> reachability  reachability >= -7.51  autocluster
> cohesiveness.mean  cohesiveness.mean > 3.61 , cohesiveness.mean <= 577.58  poac
> cji  cji <= -1.36  autoclust
> t_mean.sd  t_mean.sd > -0.11 , t_mean.sd > 0.06 , t_mean.sd > 0.66  poac, ml2dac Statistical
> iq_range  iq_range.sd > 0.78 , iq_range.mean > 0.12 , iq_range.mean <= 0.12  autocluster, poac
> mad.mean  mad.mean > 1.95 , mad.mean > 3.7 , mad.mean > 5.68  autocluster, ml2dac
> mean.sd  mean.sd > 1.06 , mean.sd > 0.52  autocluster, ml2dac
> eigenvalues.mean  eigenvalues.mean >= 14.07 , eigenvalues.mean > 3.64 , eigenvalues.mean > 34.64
> autocluster
> inst_to_attr  inst_to_attr >= 4.16 , inst_to_attr <= 6.0 , inst_to_attr <= 416.66  autocluster, poac
> min.mean  min.mean > -2.0 , min.mean > -12.96  autocluster
> conf.sd  conf.sd > 0.44  autocluster
> cor.sd  cor.sd > 0.04  autocluster
> var.sd  var.sd > 2.27 , var.sd > 4.44  ml2dac
> sd.sd  sd.sd > 0.44 , sd.sd > 0.31  ml2dac
> median.sd  median.sd > 7.0 , median.sd > 1.37  ml2dac
> cov.sd  cov.sd > 1.38  ml2dac Simple
> nr_num  nr_num > 6  autocluster, ml2dac
> nr_attr  nr_attr <= 61.0  poac Info-Theoretical  attr_conc.sd  attr_conc.sd > 2.27 , attr_conc.sd > 0.0  ml2dac
> wg_dist.sd  wg_dist.sd <= -0.23 , wg_dist.sd <= 0.23  poac

30