Title: Clarify, Abstain or Answer? Strategising in Conversation with Belief-Augmented Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25831v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 02:17:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Clarify, Abstain or Answer? Strategising in Conversation with Belief-Augmented Generation 

Joris Baan M, Wilker Aziz M, Barbara Plank U , Raquel Fernández M

> M

University of Amsterdam, UMCML Munich, LMU Munich 

{j.s.baan,w.aziz,raquel.fernandez}@uva.nl , b.plank@lmu.de 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) define a dis-tribution over text, which can be viewed as a probabilistic representation of uncertainty: sampling K responses yields a belief state —responses a model deems plausible. Existing work exploits this representation for narrow tasks like either decoding or selective predic-tion, and often requires manual interventions, not controlling generation directly. We propose Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG): ground-ing LLMs in their own belief state via the prompt and letting them reason over these K

samples to decide on a conversational strategy: answer, clarify, or abstain. In a multi-turn am-biguous QA setting, we find that LLMs by default rarely clarify or abstain, ignoring un-certainty about the input or facts. BAG im-proves QA accuracy across six models and yields strategy decisions more faithful to the belief state than prompt-only baselines. Disen-tangling when to clarify from when to abstain, however, remains challenging. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are statistical mod-els that autoregressively define a distribution over text. This can be viewed as a probabilistic represen-tation of uncertainty or belief (Baan et al., 2023). By drawing multiple samples we obtain a textual representation, i.e., belief state : responses a model deems plausible under a given prompt. Such representations are routinely and effec-tively used in decoding by selecting the highest expected utility or majority generation (Eikema and Aziz, 2020; Wang et al., 2023); in selective prediction when entropy across semantic clusters of generations is high (Kuhn et al., 2023b); or to communicate uncertainty reflective of the relative frequency of a claim in the belief state (Yona et al., 2024; Eikema et al., 2025). However, these applications require manual in-terventions ( e.g., decoders, uncertainty quantifiers, 

Figure 1: Turn 1 : User asks a potentially ambiguous question. Turn 2 : BAG samples K responses, analyses them, and formulates a strategy and response. Turn 3: BAG asked a clarification question so we simulate a user answer. Turn 4 : Final answer, optionally with another round of BAG. Real Qwen3-14B example. 

selective prediction heuristics, or finetuning) and focus on single, narrow decision-making tasks. Fur-thermore, we argue that it is unlikely that LLMs can ‘introspect’ or exploit their own probabilis-tic representation of uncertainty, since there is no mechanism in training or inference supporting this. Indeed, initial empirical evidence indicates that LLMs do not communicate uncertainty faithful to their distribution (Yona et al., 2024; Kirchhof et al., 2025). In this paper, we propose to give LLMs access to their own probabilistic belief state to power richer conversational strategies and im-prove responses in a multi-turn ambiguous question answering (QA) environment; see Figure 1. The key idea is simple: let LLMs reason over their own belief state, obtained via sampling, guid-ing them to clarify, abstain or answer directly— harnessing their strong ability to reason about avail-able textual evidence as demonstrated in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG; Lewis et al., 2020). We call this Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG), 1

> arXiv:2605.25831v1 [cs.CL] 25 May 2026

grounding responses in the belief state (rather than external documents in RAG) via the prompt, letting the LLM decide when to answer, what strategy to follow, and how to formulate the answer all at once. BAG requires no training, no external data, and can be applied to any model, including closed models. We find that the six LLMs in our experiments by default rarely clarify or abstain and ignore un-certainty in the input ( e.g., ambiguity) and about facts. Belief-augmented generation improves QA performance, leading to strategies more faithful to probabilistic uncertainty. However, recognis-ing when to clarify vs abstain remains challenging. Upon publication, we will release our code and an online tool to explore BAG’s output and conversa-tions (see Appendix Figure 15 for a screenshot). 

2 Related Work 

Decoding. One of the earliest works that exploit a textual representation of probabilistic belief ( i.e., 

K sampled generations) is Minimum Bayes Risk decoding (MBR), which selects the generation that best represents the entire set, demonstrating im-proved response quality (Eikema and Aziz, 2020; Suzgun et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2025). Similarly, self-consistency samples multiple reasoning chains and pick the majority answer (Wang et al., 2023; Bertsch et al., 2023). Both can be viewed as test-time compute scaling (Snell et al., 2025). 

Selective prediction. Kuhn et al. (2023b); Far-quhar et al. (2024) instead capitalise on the idea that semantically distinct claims in the belief state may be indicative of error ( i.e., model or epistemic uncertainty)—an intuition widely used to detect hallucinations (Geng et al., 2024; Vashurin et al., 2025). Others view variation in belief states as uncertainty about the input ( i.e., data or aleatoric uncertainty; Giulianelli et al., 2023; Baan et al., 2024), and there have been efforts to disentangle these sources (Cole et al., 2023; Hou et al., 2024). However, both decoding and selective prediction methods rely on hand-crafted features and their end goal is to predict error or select a generation rather than directly controlling generation. 

Faithful uncertainty. Another line of research guides models to communicate their uncertainty faithfully, i.e., hedge or strengthen a claim such that it reflects the relative frequency of that claim in the belief state (Yona et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Eikema et al., 2025). Most similar to our work is Kirchhof et al. (2025), who propose to communi-cate the full internal distribution over possible an-swers rather than hedging a single answer, and find directly conditioning on K samples in the prompt most effective. We go beyond hedging and let mod-els reason over their own belief state to decide on more complex conversational strategies. Also sim-ilar is Nan et al. (2025) who condition a bigger, auxiliary model on another model’s belief state to analyse the source of its uncertainty. We instead let the same model reason about its own uncertainty to directly inform its generation process. 

Conversational strategies. LLMs use a limited range of conversational strategies and often an-swer directly, failing to recognize ambiguity or ask clarification questions, instead implicitly as-suming an interpretation (Deng et al., 2023; Shaikh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Testoni et al., 2025). While there have been attempts to remedy this via prompting (Kuhn et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2024) and fine-tuning (Andukuri et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025), the belief state has been under-explored. Testoni and Fernández (2024) suggest that hu-man clarification questions as supervision for de-ciding when and how to clarify may not be ideal to resolve model uncertainty, which is echoed by Kim et al. (2024) who finetune on questions ‘per-ceived’ by a model as ambiguous, and Zhang et al. (2025) who construct clarification questions via an external model prompted to separate K sampled generations. Zhang and Choi (2025) predict am-biguity via entropy over multiple simulated user responses without exploiting them for how to clar-ify, and do not allow abstaining. We focus on clarification to address ambiguity, but other valid strategies ( e.g., long form answers) are fully compatible with BAG (Berant et al., 2025; Saparina and Lapata, 2025). Crucially, unlike clas-sical selective prediction, BAG guides models to abstain with a direct response to the user based on the belief state (see the example in Figure 2), and the abstain strategy can easily be enhanced with faithfully communicating uncertainty, or fetching external information, i.e., deciding when to RAG. We are not aware of published work combining di-rect answer, clarification and abstention strategies. 

3 Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG) 

The goal of BAG is to feed a textual representa-tion of probabilistic belief directly into the prompt, guiding models to improve their responses by mak-2Figure 2: Three real examples of Qwen3-14B output when strategising about the best conversational strategy based on the user’s question and its own belief state (which we omit for brevity) using BAG2. User only sees the response .

ing belief-informed decisions. We capitalise on the observation that sample diversity is often charac-teristic of different sources of uncertainty and, as such, is informative of when and how to clarify, abstain, or answer. 

3.1 Constructing the Belief State 

Suppose a model LLM θ with parameters θ de-fines a distribution Pθ(Y |X = x) over responses 

Y ∈ X given input X = x ∈ X , where X is the space of strings. We take the stance that, for any input X = x, the probability measure Pθ under a given sampling algorithm is a representation of the LLM’s uncertainty about the response Y , spec-ifying the space of responses plausible under the model (Baan et al., 2023). To summarise the predictive distribution for a given input X = x one can draw multiple samples using Monte-Carlo (MC) simulation. Practitioners often reduce this set of strings to a single number to power a decision making tool, like what generation to pick (Eikema and Aziz, 2020; Wu et al., 2025) or when to abstain (Farquhar et al., 2024; Vashurin et al., 2025). With BAG we retain the full set of K samples as the belief state Bθ(x) := ( Y (1) , . . . , Y (K)), where 

Y (k) ∼ Pθ. Interestingly, this representation not only captures diversity across generations that a model deems plausible, but also linguistic cues within generations, like hedging, refusals, clarifica-tions, knowledge cut-offs, or nuanced acknowledg-ments of ambiguity. 

3.2 Prompting for Conversational Strategies 

BAG is a two-stage approach. After a model is shown a question to obtain multiple responses, they are included in a new prompt to decide on and ex-ecute a conversational strategy. This prompt in-cludes the user question x and belief state B and defines the allowed strategies, output format and how to analyse the belief state to arrive at a strategy. A powerful property of BAG is the ability to capture multiple intuitions behind popular uncer-tainty quantification methods in text directly in this prompt. We explore four intuitions: (1) inconsis-tent facts among generations point to hallucinations and indicate a form of epistemic uncertainty that should lead to abstaining (akin to semantic entropy; Kuhn et al., 2023b), (2) generations that address different interpretations of the question should lead to a clarification question, (3) generations that are largely consistent should lead to a direct answer, and (4), direct answers should represent the full belief state (akin to MBR; Eikema and Aziz, 2020). We discuss the exact prompts in Section 4.2. 

4 Experimental Setup 

We now describe the dataset we use and how we instantiate BAG in the present experiments. 

4.1 Dataset 

We use AmbigQA (Min et al., 2020)—which re-annotates Natural Questions (NQ; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), a dataset of real Google Search queries—because it contains uncertainty arising from the input, like ambiguity and underspecifica-tion, but also from models, due to the closed-book QA task that forces models to retrieve facts from their parameters. AmbigQA is the most widely used dataset in am-biguity and clarification research (e.g., Gao et al., 2021; Min et al., 2021; Cole et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Zhang and Choi, 2025; Berant et al., 2025), and has been sourced for sev-eral new datasets targeting fine-grained ambiguity (Zhang et al., 2024), long-form answers (Stelmakh et al., 2022), clarification questions (Lee et al., 32023), source citing (Gao et al., 2023), and am-biguity in retrieval-augmented QA (Li et al., 2025). 

User intents. Crucially, AmbigQA is one of the only datasets that annotates each question with all possible answers, using Wikipedia Search, and pro-vides multiple disambiguated questions for them. For instance, “Who is the female singer on Gimme Shelter?” yields two disambiguated pairs: Who was the female singer on the recorded version of Gimme Shelter? → Merry Clayton and Who was the female singer on Gimme Shelter on tour? →

Lisa Fischer. Following recent work, we treat each disambiguation-answer pair as a separate user in-tent (Zhang et al., 2025; Zhang and Choi, 2025; Berant et al., 2025). 

Statistics. We evaluate on the full validation set (the test set is not public), filtering out 170 questions with conflicting annotations, resulting in 1,832 questions. There are 58.5% ambiguous questions with three intents on average. See Ap-pendix A for more statistics. 

4.2 Instantiating BAG Conversational Strategies. We experiment with strategies that address the two major sources of uncertainty (Baan et al., 2023): from data ( e.g., the input: clarify ) and the model ( e.g., internal facts: 

abstain ). With little uncertainty, models can an-swer directly . We leave other strategies—like re-trieving external information instead of abstaining (using BAG to decide when to RAG), or long-form answers instead of clarifying—to future work. 

BAG prompts. We test three prompts with slightly different instructions for how to analyse the belief state (BAG1-3). BAG1 in Appendix Figure 6d shows the most basic variant, focusing on can-didate answer consistency. BAG2 in Appendix Fig-ure 7 uses more detailed instructions, uncertainty-specific language, includes the Minimum Bayes Risk-like intuition, and further delineates when to abstain versus clarify. BAG3 in Appendix Figure 8 extends it with a two-step instruction: first clus-ter generations, then conjecture if multiple clusters represent different interpretations of the question or just factual inconsistencies ( i.e., hallucinations). 

BAG+. If BAG decides to clarify, we can aug-ment the final response again—sampling K new generations given the three-turn history—and in-struct to abstain or answer. We call this version BAG+, see the prompt in Appendix Figure 9. 

Models. We test models of various size and fo-cus: the 7B and 13B OLMo2-instruct, 7B OLMo3-instruct, 8B and 14B Qwen3, and Gemini-2.5-Flash. 1 We use K = 10 unbiased samples to construct the belief state and use each model’s rec-ommended decoding setting (temperature, top-k,top-p and min-p) to generate user-facing responses. 

5 Evaluation 

To evaluate the potential for clarification and con-versational strategies with and without belief states we introduce four generation settings. Appendix Figure 6 provides an overview of the prompts. 

Direct generation. The standard baseline gen-erates a response given the original question and the disambiguation oracle given an (annotated) disambiguated question, if one exists, or the origi-nal question otherwise (collapsing to the standard baseline). We consider this an oracle for when and how to clarify, taking ambiguity out of the equation and evaluating if models have the relevant factual knowledge to answer a particular intent. 

Augmentation strategies. We guide models to-wards conversational strategies and simulate inter-actions with a user. Initial responses and responses following clarification are evaluated against one specific user intent. Abstentions are excluded. 

Strategy-Augmented Generation (SAG) is a prompt-only variant and Belief-Augmented Gen-eration (BAG) extends it by conditioning on the belief state. Like BAG+ , SAG+ also augments the final response after clarifications with strategies, but via prompting alone. 

Simulating Interaction. When a model asks a clarification question, we prompt Gemini-2.5-flash to role-play a user and provide it the user intent (unseen by the model under evaluation): a disam-biguated version of the question if the annotation exists, and the reference answer if the question is not ambiguous. We design a conservative prompt (Figure 10) that responds with “I don’t know” if the clarification question is unanswerable or off topic to avoid rewarding bad clarification questions. Appendix B provides an error analysis, but we gen-erally find high-quality user answers. We limit the conversation to a single interaction, i.e., four turns: user question, model question, user answer, final model answer, see Figure 1 for an example. 

> 1We disable thinking mode because of the extremely large token cost, especially in Olmo3 and Qwen3.

4Direct Generation Augmented Generation                                                          

> One intent Any intent One intent Standard Disambig Standard Disambig SAG+ BAG1+ BAG2+ BAG3+ OLMo2-7B 33.9 36.3 44.8 41.2 42.5 44.7 42.8 41.7 OLMo2-13B 45.3 49.6 59.2 55.9 46.0 54.9 55.6 55.1 OLMo3-7B 24.7 25.2 32.4 29.9 26.4 39.8 41.8 52.9 Qwen3-8B 33.1 33.7 43.2 40.3 34.4 60.2 45.0 40.8 Qwen3-14B 40.1 42.8 52.4 49.3 43.6 63.8 58.8 60.4 Gemini-2.5-Flash 59.1 68.7 75.6 74.2 67.1 68.8 69.8 68.4

Table 1: Accuracy on AmbigQA. Belief-augmented generation (BAG+) performs better than standard generation, the prompt-only variant (SAG+), and often even the disambiguation oracle. Colours are row-normalised. 

5.1 Metrics 

We measure QA accuracy with a reference-based 

LLM judge: Gemini-Flash-2.5; see Appendix Fig-ure 11 for the prompt. A small manual analysis detailed in Appendix C reveals a 97% correctness rate, though, like most QA datasets, the references can be time-sensitive (Pletenev et al., 2025). For the direct generation settings, we evaluate ambiguous questions with multiple intents against 

one , randomly chosen intent and any intent. 

One intent. This is the core metric evaluating whether models give the correct answer to a spe-cific (randomly sampled) user intent. This metric is strict and may be unfair without the potential for interaction, i.e., it may reject generations that an-swer another plausible intent, even though a knowl-edgable user might judge the answer’s relevance themselves, potentially following up by making their intent more explicit. 

Any intent. Do models give a correct answer w.r.t. any of the possible intents? We consider this an upper bound that does not care about ambiguity. 

6 Results 

6.1 Direct Generation 

We first analyse direct generations results with no possibility to clarify or abstain; see Table 1, left. Colours are row-normalised to emphasise the dif-ferences between generation settings, not models. 

Disambiguations cannot fix lack of knowledge. 

The disambiguation oracle yields relatively small improvements over the standard single intent base-line for some models ( e.g., Qwen3-8B), and much larger improvements for others ( e.g., Gemini-2.5-Flash). This demonstrates that some models are unable to exploit disambiguations due to a lack of factual knowledge, rather than an inability to handle ambiguity, and indicates varying and some-times limited potential for clarification, further mo-tivating why BAG supports both clarification and abstention. 

Specific intents are difficult. The gap between the standard one vs. any intent metric reflects the in-herent difficulty of recovering a specific user intent without interaction or disambiguation—a model may give a perfectly reasonable answer while miss-ing the target interpretation. Still, the one intent metric is valuable when considering that users may ambiguously inquire with a specific intent in mind, especially if they cannot foresee which interpreta-tion is salient to the model. 

Models presuppose a “salient” interpretation. 

The disambiguation oracle’s improvement from the one intent to any intent metric indicates that models may presuppose a salient interpretation so strongly that they ignore the disambiguation, per-haps not having the relevant factual knowledge to support other intents. This aligns with Sedova et al. (2024) who find biases toward preferred readings of entities that correlate with the frequency of those readings in training data. This may also limit the potential of clarification interactions for changing such salient interpretations. 2

Performance differences across models. 

Gemini-2.5-Flash is the best performing model with 59.1% accuracy on the one intent metric, followed by Olmo2, which, surprisingly, out-performs Qwen3 and Olmo3, though this is consistent with PopQA results reported by Olmo et al. (2025) and may reflect the newer Qwen3’s and Olmo3’s relative focus on reasoning and instruction following over factual knowledge. 

> 2To investigate to what extent interpretations salient to models align with interpretations salient to humans, we need more and more diverse annotations than AmbigQA offers.

5Figure 3: The contribution of each strategy to BAG+’s total accuracy increase (shown on the x-axis). Abstain is the driving force for Qwen3, while for Gemini the contributions are more balanced. 

Gemini-2.5-flash is also substantially better at exploiting disambiguations with an increase in accuracy to 68.7%. 

6.2 Augmented Generation 

The results in Table 1 (right) focus on BAG+ and SAG+. Results for BAG are in the Appendix. Both augmentation strategies outperform the standard direct generation baseline, and all BAG1-3+ vari-ants outperform prompt-only SAG+ (except for Olmo2-7B-BAG3+). Interestingly, BAG+ often outperforms—sometimes substantially—the disam-biguation oracle (except for Gemini) due to its abil-ity to go beyond ambiguity alone: by analysing its belief state, the model can formulate an abstain response when judging uncertainty to be due to hallucinations rather than ambiguity, and commu-nicate this to the user. Applying BAG once in turn 2 (Appendix Table 3) we observe consistent improvements over SAG for at least two variants, and sometimes improve-ments over the disambiguation oracle. BAG+ is particularly useful because models may still lack factual knowledge to answer after clarification— something we also observed for the disambiguation oracle—which BAG+ picks up on in its updated belief state. 

6.2.1 Decomposing BAG Performance 

To understand how each strategy contributes, we decompose BAG+’s accuracy improvement over standard direct generation with the one intent met-ric in Figure 3. Orange shows the contribution of abstaining (by not counting those questions to-wards accuracy); green the improvement of the final answer after clarification over the baseline on the clarify-subset; and blue of the direct answers relative to the standard baseline on the direct-subset. Every strategy contributes positively but to varying degree. For Qwen, abstaining is the driving force behind its accuracy improvement, which is in line with its low baseline and disambiguation oracle performance. See Appendix Figures 12 and 13 for other models. This decomposition captures both how often a strategy is chosen and the quality of their responses. We next zoom in on routing behaviour, i.e., the cho-sen strategies. Figure 4 shows the frequency of each strategy per model and prompt. While the di-rect answer strategy is generally most often chosen, there are big differences across models. This is due to structurally different belief states with varying sample consistency and verbosity, which we further explore in Section 7. There are also differences across prompts. These are partly by design: e.g., BAG3 instructs models to cluster generations and conjecture if and which interpretation of the user’s question might lead to each cluster. Models can almost always come up with such interpretations, which explains the high rate of clarification. However, instruction follow-ing is also a factor: Gemini-2.5-Flash—the best instruction follower—shows substantially less vari-ation across BAG prompt variants. We next investigate strategy routing in terms of baseline accuracy and ambiguity. 

Accuracy. Table 2 shows direct generation base-line accuracy on each strategy subset. This tells us if the harder questions are indeed being routed to clarify or abstain, while the easier ones are an-swered directly. Indeed, baseline accuracy on the direct answer subset acc(D) is much higher accu-racy than the abstain subset, sometimes as much as 2-3x, whereas the clarified-subset accuracy lies in between. This confirms that strategy-augmented generation leads to sensible decisions. Also, belief-augmented prompts make better routing decisions than the prompt-only SAG variant, demonstrated by higher accuracy on the direct and lower accu-racy on the abstain subset (except for the oldest and smallest Olmo2-7B). 

Ambiguity. The clarify subsets contain most of the ambiguous questions across models, shown by the amb(C) column being dark blue. However, the subsets still contain only 51-76% ambiguous ques-tions. This is consistent with related work showing that detecting ambiguity and when to clarify is a very challenging task (Zhang et al., 2024; Tanjim 6Figure 4: The strategies that models pick can vary a lot based on the model class and instructions. The direct answer strategy is generally most frequently chosen. 

et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025). We posit that am-biguity detection in factual QA is inherently very difficult: recognizing multiple intents given a de-ceptively straightforward question requires both an understanding of ambiguity and highly specialised factual knowledge ( e.g., that a different person per-formed a song on tour), and we suspect that even humans would struggle to mark these questions as ambiguous. That said, since LLMs are increasingly used as a substitute for search engines (Chatterji et al., 2025), the bar may arguably be higher.                                                                              

> acc(C) acc(D) acc(A) amb(C) amb(D) amb(A) OL2 7B S33.5 37.4 25.0 53.8 58.9 51.3 B28.7 45.8 31.5 55.1 52.5 54.4 OL2 13B S37.9 49.8 31.4 51.1 57.0 47.1 B37.5 57.0 29.4 56.4 51.5 53.2 OL3 7B S15.4 28.0 16.6 59.6 53.8 57.4 B13.9 36.9 11.1 55.9 54.3 48.7 Qw3 8B S13.5 36.1 13.9 65.2 54.3 45.5 B13.2 57.2 8.6 57.0 55.2 51.0 Qw3 14B S19.7 45.1 18.6 67.9 54.1 50.2 B16.5 68.5 12.2 61.3 53.7 53.8 Gem 2.5F S37.5 63.1 27.3 76.7 52.8 44.2 B33.5 67.3 19.5 63.9 53.6 45.1

Table 2: Evaluating strategy routing. Left: baseline 

acc uracy on each subset ( Clarification / Direct / Abstain; 

e.g., acc(C) is baseline accuracy on questions models decide to clarify). Right: % of amb iguous questions in each subset. Colours are row normalized. S denotes 

SAG; B the average across BAG1-3. 

6.3 Effect of Clarification 

The ideal conditions to clarify are rather specific: (1) a direct answer would have been wrong, (2) the clarification question is relevant and a user would be able to answer it, (3) without the user’s answer, a model could not give the correct answer ( e.g., 

RAG would not help since a model does not know what information to fetch or fetches conflicting in-formation), and finally (4) the model has the factual knowledge to answer the disambiguated question. From Section 6.1 we know that condition (1) is often met (direct generation accuracy is low) and condition (4) is not (factual knowledge rather than ambiguity is often the problem, for which abstain is a better strategy). This severely limits the potential for clarification, which we confirm in Figure 3. We will investigate condition (2) and (3) next. 

Qualitative analysis. Belief states display both 

interpretation variation due to multiple plausible interpretations of the question, and hallucination variation due to inconsistent facts, falling neatly on opposite ends of the data-model uncertainty spec-trum (Baan et al., 2023). Interpretation variation is addressed by interacting with the user, and halluci-nation variation by abstaining. However, we find that detecting this difference is challenging. By design, BAG guides models to formulate a clarification question based on their belief state. When the belief state contains multiple plausible answers, each contextualised ( e.g., , "in the US ,..." vs "in Canada , ..." , or "the FIFA world cup ..." 

vs "The rugby world cup..." ), the clarifications are generally useful, like the examples in Figures 1-2. However, models sometimes come up with non-existent ambiguity to explain hallucination vari-ation, especially if generations are not meaning-fully contextualised. For example, conjuring non-existing adaptations of a movie in which differ-ent actors play the same character to explain men-tions of those actors in the belief state. Put dif-ferently: clarification questions reflect what Kim et al. (2024) call perceived ambiguity that does not necessarily align with real-world human ambigu-ity. While such clarification questions are truthful reflections of what models deem plausible—and arguably a better strategy than responding with one of the incorrect responses—they may still confuse a user. 

6.4 Brevity-inducing Prompt 

BAG’s computational cost is K samples plus the prompt to reason over them. 3 To reduce the size of 

> 3Interestingly, Qwen3 thinking mode consumes 7x more output tokens than direct generation, for just 2 more accuracy points. This cost is not much higher than sampling 10 gen-

7belief states, and therefore token cost, we study the effect of two brevity-inducing prompts: "Please provide a concise answer to the following ques-tion:" , and "Please provide a short answer of at most 1 sentence to the following question" .They reduce average generation length by up to a factor 10 without severely impacting accuracy (Appendix Figure 6). However, the verbal cues for how models interpret a question ( e.g., "the FIFA world cup was in ..." ) are often lost (examples in Appendix Table 4), reducing the means by which users can judge an answer, and BAG a belief state. 

7 Faithfulness 

We evaluated BAG in terms of QA performance, but equally important is: are its strategic decisions faithful to its internal distribution? We cluster generations on the main answer they assert and compute semantic entropy (Kuhn et al., 2023b) with Gemini-2.5-Flash: We find that be-lief states range from just a single answer to ten totally distinct answers. For smaller models, be-lief states are almost uniformly distributed across this range, while Gemini-2.5-Flash has many more single-answer belief states; about 50%; see Ap-pendix Figure 16 for more details. 

BAG’s strategies are more faithful. Our hypoth-esis is that models will choose the direct answer strategy for lower entropy, and clarify or abstain for higher entropy belief states. Indeed, Figure 5 con-firms this for Qwen3-14B and Gemini-2.5-Flash with BAG. Interestingly, the prompt-only SAG is not aligned with belief state entropy, providing fur-ther evidence that prompt-based uncertainty meth-ods do not exploit the predictive distribution. We observe similar patterns for Olmo3 and Qwen3-8B, but not for Olmo2, which we explain by its limited ability to follow instructions. 

Baselines rarely clarify or abstain. Direct gen-eration without any augmentation strategy rarely clarifies or abstains at all: classifying generations with Gemini-2.5-Flash we find they only do so on 3% of the questions. A small manual analysis (Appendix Figure 14) confirms this, aligning with findings from previous work (Deng et al., 2023; Shaikh et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Testoni et al., 2025). This confirms that direct generation is even less faithful to the internal distribution.  

> erations, which, unlike thinking, is parallelisable. This puts BAG’s costs in perspective.
> Figure 5: Routing decisions vs belief state entropy: BAG is more faithful to the predictive distribution than SAG, answering directly when entropy is low, and increasingly clarifying and abstaining as entropy in-creases.

Clarification reduces entropy. We sample K re-sponses after clarification interactions (similar to BAG+), cluster them, and compute the difference between their semantic answer entropy and entropy of the turn 2 responses reported earlier. We find that clarification reduces entropy for all models. Averaged across BAG1-3, Gemini has the largest reduction of 54%, followed by Olmo2-13B at 20%, Qwen3-14B at 18%, Qwen3-8B at 16%, Olmo2-7B at 14%, and Olmo3-7B at 1.7%. This aligns with the disambiguation oracle results, which indicated that some models do not have the factual knowl-edge to exploit even annotated disambiguations. 

8 Conclusion 

We introduced Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG), a training-free approach that grounds LLMs in their own belief state —-K sampled responses— and lets them reason over it to answer directly, clar-ify, or abstain. In a multi-turn AmbigQA envi-ronment, BAG improves QA accuracy across six models and produces strategy decisions more faith-ful to the belief state than prompt-only baselines, while standard direct generation rarely clarifies or abstains at all. All three strategies contribute to BAG’s gains, though their relative weight varies across models and prompts. Distinguishing inter-pretation variation from hallucination variation in the belief state—and thus when to clarify versus abstain—remains challenging. BAG combines a probabilistic view of LLMs with their modern instruction and reasoning capa-bilities. Promising extensions include richer strate-gies ( e.g., when to retrieve external information or call tools) and belief states ( e.g., with thinking traces), and prompts that more explicitly exploit verbal uncertainty cues. 89 Limitations 

While AmbigQA is the perfect choice to simulate different user intents because it provides multiple disambiguation annotations—and is similarly used by many related studies because there are virtually no alternatives providing such ground truths—its reference answers can be outdated and the disam-biguations slightly artificial. Rather than reflecting the actual intent of the user who asked her question to Google Search, which is impossible to recon-struct after the fact, AmbigQA annotators instead collect all the possible answers that can be found when searching Wikipedia and retroactively create a (minimally edited) disambiguated version of the original question that would lead to each answer. An important avenue of research is therefore to collect new datasets with real world questions and intents that correspond to actual user intents, ide-ally from users with diverse cultural backgrounds (e.g., AmbigQA is very US-centered), which also allows comparison between models’ suppositions and whether they align with dominant user intents. Another limitation is the quality of the belief states, i.e., the model’s representation of uncer-tainty. While belief states provide richer insight into the range of responses that a model deems plau-sible, and are successfully exploited for decision making tasks like decoding or selective prediction, they still reflect the responses plausible under a model, and those are in no way guaranteed to be coherent with the external world ( e.g., highly con-sistent belief states with a single main claim can still be factually incorrect). A complementary av-enue of research is therefore to improve the quality of belief states, which can then be more effectively exploited with methods such as BAG. 

References 

Chinmaya Andukuri, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Ger-stenberg, and Noah Goodman. 2024. STar-GATE: Teaching language models to ask clarifying questions. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Joris Baan, Nico Daheim, Evgenia Ilia, Dennis Ul-mer, Haau-Sing Li, Raquel Fernández, Barbara Plank, Rico Sennrich, Chrysoula Zerva, and Wilker Aziz. 2023. Uncertainty in natural language gener-ation: From theory to applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15703 .Joris Baan, Raquel Fernández, Barbara Plank, and Wilker Aziz. 2024. Interpreting predictive proba-bilities: Model confidence or human label variation? In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Euro-pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 268–277, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jonathan Berant, Maximillian Chen, Adam Fisch, Reza Aghajani, Fantine Huot, Mirella Lapata, and Ja-cob Eisenstein. 2025. Learning steerable clarifica-tion policies with collaborative self-play. Preprint ,arXiv:2512.04068. Amanda Bertsch, Alex Xie, Graham Neubig, and Matthew Gormley. 2023. It’s MBR all the way down: Modern generation techniques through the lens of minimum Bayes risk. In Proceedings of the Big Picture Workshop , pages 108–122, Singapore. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Aaron Chatterji, Thomas Cunningham, David J Dem-ing, Zoe Hitzig, Christopher Ong, Carl Yan Shan, and Kevin Wadman. 2025. How people use chatgpt. Working Paper 34255, National Bureau of Economic Research. Maximillian Chen, Ruoxi Sun, Tomas Pfister, and Sercan O Arik. 2025. Learning to clarify: Multi-turn conversations with action-based contrastive self-training. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jeremy Cole, Michael Zhang, Daniel Gillick, Julian Eisenschlos, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Jacob Eisenstein. 2023. Selectively answering ambiguous questions. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 530–543, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yang Deng, Lizi Liao, Liang Chen, Hongru Wang, Wenqiang Lei, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2023. Prompt-ing and evaluating large language models for proac-tive dialogues: Clarification, target-guided, and non-collaboration. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 10602–10621, Singapore. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Bryan Eikema and Wilker Aziz. 2020. Is MAP decoding all you need? the inadequacy of the mode in neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 4506–4520, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-national Committee on Computational Linguistics. Bryan Eikema, Evgenia Ilia, José GC de Souza, Chrysoula Zerva, and Wilker Aziz. 2025. Teaching language models to faithfully express their uncer-tainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12587 .Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and Yarin Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in large language models using semantic entropy. Nature ,630(8017):625–630. 

9Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6465–6488, Singapore. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Yifan Gao, Henghui Zhu, Patrick Ng, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Zhiguo Wang, Feng Nan, De-jiao Zhang, Ramesh Nallapati, Andrew O. Arnold, and Bing Xiang. 2021. Answering ambiguous ques-tions through generative evidence fusion and round-trip prediction. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3263–3276, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiahui Geng, Fengyu Cai, Yuxia Wang, Heinz Koeppl, Preslav Nakov, and Iryna Gurevych. 2024. A sur-vey of confidence estimation and calibration in large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6577–6595, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mario Giulianelli, Joris Baan, Wilker Aziz, Raquel Fernández, and Barbara Plank. 2023. What comes next? evaluating uncertainty in neural text generators against human production variability. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14349–14371, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Bairu Hou, Yujian Liu, Kaizhi Qian, Jacob Andreas, Shiyu Chang, and Yang Zhang. 2024. Decompos-ing uncertainty for large language models through input clarification ensembling. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML’24. JMLR.org. Hyuhng Joon Kim, Youna Kim, Cheonbok Park, Jun-yeob Kim, Choonghyun Park, Kang Min Yoo, Sang-goo Lee, and Taeuk Kim. 2024. Aligning language models to explicitly handle ambiguity. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1989–2007, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Kirchhof, Luca Füger, Adam Golinski, Ee-shan Gunesh Dhekane, Arno Blaas, and Sinead Williamson. 2025. Self-reflective uncertainties: Do llms know their internal answer distribution? In 

ICML 2025 Workshop on Reliable and Responsible Foundation Models .Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023a. Clam: Selective clarification for ambiguous ques-tions with generative language models. Workshop on Challenges in Deployable Generative AI at Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023b. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for un-certainty estimation in natural language generation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-field, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Ken-ton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natu-ral questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 7:452–466. Dongryeol Lee, Segwang Kim, Minwoo Lee, Hwan-hee Lee, Joonsuk Park, Sang-Woo Lee, and Kyomin Jung. 2023. Asking clarification questions to handle ambiguity in open-domain QA. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 11526–11544, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Zongxi Li, Yang Li, Haoran Xie, and S. Joe Qin. 2025. CondAmbigQA: A benchmark and dataset for con-ditional ambiguous question answering. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2269–2288, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sewon Min, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, Kristina Toutanova, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Joint passage ranking for diverse multi-answer retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6997–7008, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-public. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. AmbigQA: Answering am-biguous open-domain questions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5783– 5797, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Yang Nan, Pengfei He, Ravi Tandon, and Han Xu. 2025. Can multiple responses from an LLM reveal the sources of its uncertainty? In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 ,pages 15551–15569, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Team Olmo, Allyson Ettinger, Amanda Bertsch, Bailey Kuehl, David Graham, David Heineman, Dirk Groen-

10 eveld, Faeze Brahman, Finbarr Timbers, Hamish Ivi-son, and 1 others. 2025. Olmo 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13961 .Sergey Pletenev, Maria Marina, Nikolay Ivanov, Daria Galimzianova, Nikita Krayko, Mikhail Salnikov, Vasily Konovalov, Alexander Panchenko, and Viktor Moskvoretskii. 2025. Will it still be true tomorrow? multilingual evergreen question classification to im-prove trustworthy QA. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 8614–8631, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Irina Saparina and Mirella Lapata. 2025. Reasoning about intent for ambiguous requests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10453 .Anastasiia Sedova, Robert Litschko, Diego Frassinelli, Benjamin Roth, and Barbara Plank. 2024. To know or not to know? analyzing self-consistency of large language models under ambiguity. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 17203–17217, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Omar Shaikh, Kristina Gligoric, Ashna Khetan, Matthias Gerstgrasser, Diyi Yang, and Dan Jurafsky. 2024. Grounding gaps in language model genera-tions. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6279–6296, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Charlie Victor Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Avi-ral Kumar. 2025. Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling param-eters for reasoning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Ivan Stelmakh, Yi Luan, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2022. ASQA: Factoid questions meet long-form answers. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8273–8288, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Mirac Suzgun, Luke Melas-Kyriazi, and Dan Jurafsky. 2023. Follow the wisdom of the crowd: Effective text generation via minimum Bayes risk decoding. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 4265–4293, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mehrab Tanjim, Yeonjun In, Xiang Chen, Victor Bursz-tyn, Ryan A. Rossi, Sungchul Kim, Guang-Jie Ren, Vaishnavi Muppala, Shun Jiang, Yongsung Kim, and Chanyoung Park. 2025. Disambiguation in conver-sational question answering in the era of LLMs and agents: A survey. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9548–9561, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Alberto Testoni and Raquel Fernández. 2024. Asking the right question at the right time: Human and model uncertainty guidance to ask clarification questions. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Euro-pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 258–275, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alberto Testoni, Barbara Plank, and Raquel Fernán-dez. 2025. RAcQUEt: Unveiling the dangers of overlooked referential ambiguity in visual LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 23638–23658, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Roman Vashurin, Ekaterina Fadeeva, Artem Vazhentsev, Lyudmila Rvanova, Daniil Vasilev, Akim Tsvigun, Sergey Petrakov, Rui Xing, Abdelrahman Sadallah, Kirill Grishchenkov, Alexander Panchenko, Timothy Baldwin, Preslav Nakov, Maxim Panov, and Artem Shelmanov. 2025. Benchmarking uncertainty quan-tification methods for large language models with LM-polygraph. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 13:220–248. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Ian Wu, Patrick Fernandes, Amanda Bertsch, Seungone Kim, Sina Khoshfetrat Pakazad, and Graham Neubig. 2025. Better instruction-following through minimum bayes risk. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Tianyang Xu, Shujin Wu, Shizhe Diao, Xiaoze Liu, Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, and Jing Gao. 2024. SaySelf: Teaching LLMs to express confidence with self-reflective rationales. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 5985–5998, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, and Mor Geva. 2024. Can large language models faithfully express their intrin-sic uncertainty in words? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7752–7764, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael JQ Zhang and Eunsol Choi. 2025. Clarify when necessary: Resolving ambiguity through in-teraction with LMs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 5526–5543, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael JQ Zhang, W. Bradley Knox, and Eunsol Choi. 2025. Modeling future conversation turns to teach LLMs to ask clarifying questions. In The Thirteenth 

11 International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Tong Zhang, Peixin Qin, Yang Deng, Chen Huang, Wen-qiang Lei, Junhong Liu, Dingnan Jin, Hongru Liang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. CLAMBER: A bench-mark of identifying and clarifying ambiguous infor-mation needs in large language models. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 10746–10766, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. 

A Dataset Statistics 

Each AmbigQA question is annotated with a sin-gle answer ( i.e., intent), marking the question as unambiguous, or multiple disambiguated question-answer pairs ( i.e., , intents), marking it as ambigu-ous. The dataset contains 10,036 train and 2,002 development questions, with 10,251 and 3,312 an-notations respectively (multiple annotators may an-notate the same question). The development set has a higher ambiguity rate (58.5% vs. 47.3% for train) and annotation clash rate ( i.e., questions with both an ambiguous and unambiguous annotation: 8.5% vs. 0.1% for train—we filter those questions out). Questions average 9.0 words and answers 2.5 words across both splits. Ambiguous questions have on average 3.17 (±2.03) intents in dev and and 2.94 (±1.33) in train. 

B LLM User Answer Simulator Error Analysis 

The user answer simulation prompt for Gemini-2.5-flash is shown in Figure 10. We find that sim-ulated user answers are generally of high quality. The user simulator is explicitly instructed not to reveal the reference answer and only to answer the clarification question. Nevertheless, references oc-casionally leak through. On average, across all assistant models and prompts, the user answer con-tains the reference answer for 1.7% of clarification questions. However, some clarification questions already contain the reference answer themselves, which is not a leak on the user simulator’s part. Excluding those cases, only 0.7% of user answers constitute true leaks. To assess their impact on our results, we count how often leaks co-occur with a positive clarification flip (direct answer incorrect → final answer correct), finding this in only 1.9% of such flips. We therefore conclude that reference leaks do not meaningfully inflate the reported clarification gains. The prompt instructs the user simulator not to answer clarification questions that are irrelevant to its intent or off-topic, to avoid rewarding bad CQs with useful additional information about the users intent. On average, about 5% of the user responses are an exact match with "I don’t know". This simulation strategy is very conservative, and we suspect real users to be much more helpful. For example, consider the AmbigQA question 

"What is the dog called in midsomer murders?" 

with intent "What is the dog’s breed called in midsomer murders?" and the model’s clarification question "There isn’t a single dog that consistently appears throughout all of Midsomer Murders with one name, as there have been different dogs belong-ing to the various DCI Barnabys. To give you the most accurate answer, could you tell me which DCI Barnaby you’re thinking of (Tom Barnaby, played by John Nettles, or John Barnaby, played by Neil Dudgeon)?" . The user simulator answers "I don’t know" , with the following reasoning "Internal rea-soning: The user is asking about the dog’s breed, not its name. The AI’s clarification question is about the DCI Barnaby to identify the dog’s name. Since the user is asking about the breed, the spe-cific DCI Barnaby is not relevant to the breed of dog. Therefore, the AI’s clarification question is not helpful for the user’s actual question." . A real user might just respond with the much more helpful 

"Actually, I’m looking for the breed" .

C LLM Judge Error Analysis 

Figure 11 shows the two prompts we use for the reference-based LLM judge. We generally find the judge verdicts of Gemini-2.5-Flash about whether a generation is correct with respect to a reference of high quality, and manually evaluate 30 direct generation answers from Olmo2-13B against the same single reference answer that the judge is eval-uating against (the 1 intent setting, i.e., leftmost prompt in Figure 11). We find just one error, i.e., asuccess rate of 97%. This error is actually an interesting case where the judge ignores the reference and uses its own knowledge to judge the generation as correct for the question "The cat in the hat boy and girl?". In fact, the generation does correctly answer another (much more obvious) interpretation of the ques-tion (the boy and the girl characters are unnamed), 12 (A) D IRECT BASELINE 

> Who was the female singer on Gimme Shelter?

(B) D ISAMBIGUATION UPPER BOUND 

> Who was the female singer on the recorded version of Gimme Shelter?

(C) S TRATEGY -A UGMENTED GENERATION (SAG) 

> # [1. Setting] You are an AI assistant and your goal is to answer a user 's question directly, ask a clarification question, or abstain. # [3. Strategies \& Instructions] - A direct answer is effective when the question is clear and you know the right answer. - A clarification question is effective if it resolves ambiguity or underspecification in the user question, and if the user can answer it without needing to know the answer to their own question. - Abstaining is effective if the question is clear but you don 't know the right answer. # [4. Context] User question: Who was the female singer on Gimme Shelter? # [5. Output format] Format your response as: STRATEGY: [DIRECT_ANSWER/CLARIFICATION_QUESTION/ABSTAIN] REASONING: [...] RESPONSE: [...]

(D) B ELIEF -A UGMENTED GENERATION (BAG) 

> # [1. Setting] (same as SAG) # [2. Belief state] Below, you are given {K} candidate answers to the user 's question. Consider these your state of knowledge and decide on your next action based on the following criteria: # [3. Strategy \& Instructions] - A direct answer is effective when the question is clear and the candidate answers are consistent. - A clarification question is effective if it resolves ambiguity or underspecification in the user question, and if the user can answer it without needing to know the answer to their own question. - Abstaining is effective if the question is clear but the candidate answers are too contradictory to be reliable. # [4. Context] User question: Who was the female singer on Gimme Shelter? Candidate answers: {A_1, A_2, ..., A_K} # [5. Output format] (same as SAG)

Figure 6: The four generation settings. The direct generation baseline (a) uses the original question. The disam-biguation upper bound (b) uses a disambiguation annotation. The SAG baseline (c) prompts for conversational strategies without a belief state. BAG (d) extends SAG by conditioning on K generation samples. See Fig 7 and 8 for other two BAG variants. 

while being explicit about doing so, which makes it hard to fault the generation. This is a limitation of single-intent evaluation setting, because a real user might be able to judge that the generation is answering a different interpretation of the question than what they actually intended ( e.g., the anno-tated disambiguation "Who plays the girl in the 2003 Cat in the Hat film?"), and would potentially follow up to clarify this to the model. 

C.1 Reference Quality 

A more important limitation of the LLM judge is not its ability to judge whether a generation contains a reference, but the quality of the Am-bigQA reference itself. In Table 5 we charac-terise several types of questions and their annotated disambiguation-reference pairs. One notable cat-egory is questions with answers that change over time. 

Outdated references. This problem is universal across QA datasets and discussed by Pletenev et al. (2025). We apply their pretrained classifier to filter out time-sensitive questions, and find it discards about 30%. When we filter those out, QA accu-racy increases with a few points across all models and configurations, but the relative differences be-tween generation settings remain the same. We hypothesise that the effect is so small because all methods are impacted equally by the filtering. We choose not to include these results in the paper because we manually observed that many subtly non-mutable questions are also being filtered out (e.g., , "Who did Samuel L. Jackson play in Star Wars?", or "Who played James Bond in Licence to Kill?"). 

Artificial ambiguity. One issue with the dataset is that the disambiguation annotations reflect what annotators could find on Wikipedia rather than what interpretation users genuinely meant when they asked their question to Google Search. 

D Conversational Strategies without Augmentation 

To get a sense of how standard models employ conversational actions, we select 33 random Am-bigQA questions with multiple reference answers from the train set and inspect generations from the smallest OLMO 2-7 B-INSTRUCT and QWEN 3-8 B

(non-thinking mode) models. We annotate one each generation with: clarifi-cation question , refusal , multiple answers , (par-tially) contextualised answer , or direct answer 

without any interpretation context. Figure 14 shows that models use a narrow range 13 Direct Generation Augmented Generation 

1 intent any intent 1 intent Standard Disambig Standard Disambig SAG BAG1 BAG2 BAG3 OLMo2-7B 33.9 36.3 44.8 41.2 35.7 37.0 39.7 35.4 OLMo2-13B 45.3 49.6 59.2 55.9 44.4 51.7 51.8 47.4 OLMo3-7B 24.7 25.2 32.4 29.9 26.5 31.5 31.0 26.7 Qwen3-8B 33.1 33.7 43.2 40.3 33.6 58.8 35.1 32.6 Qwen3-14B 40.1 42.8 52.4 49.3 42.5 60.6 45.5 42.6 Gemini-2.5-Flash 59.1 68.7 75.6 74.2 65.6 67.9 67.2 66.0 

Table 3: BAG QA performance on 1832 AmbigQA-dev questions without applying BAG a second time ( i.e., BAG+). Colors per-row normalized. 

Question Verbose generation (excerpt) Single-sentence generation 

Which is the most popu-lated country in Europe? “. . . Russia was Europe’s most populous coun-try, although it’s important to note that part of Russia lies within Asia .. . . ” “Russia is the most populous country in Eu-rope.” Who has the record for the most strikeouts? “The all-time Major League Baseball record for the most strikeouts by a pitcher is held by Nolan Ryan with 5,714 strikeouts.. . . ” “Nolan Ryan holds the MLB record for most strikeouts with 5,714.” When do we celebrate Veterans Day this year? “Veterans Day is observed on November 11 each year in the United States .. . . ” “Veterans Day will be celebrated on November 11, 2023.” When did Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 1 come out? “. . . was released on November 19, 2010, in the United States .. . . ” “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 1 was released on November 19, 2010.” When did the first episode of Dragon Ball air? “The first episode of ‘Dragon Ball’ aired on February 26, 1986.. . . ” “The first episode of ‘Dragon Ball’ aired in Japan on February 26, 1986.” 

Table 4: Effect of brevity-inducing prompts on ambiguity acknowledgement for olmo2-13b-instruct . Bold text marks phrases that explicitly resolve an interpretation. When prompted for single-sentence answers, the model drops disambiguating context in four out of five cases, committing to an interpretation without signalling it. 

of conversational actions and rarely clarify or refuse. They mostly answer directly ( > 94% ), which we can further break down into (partially) contextualising their answer by assuming a specific interpretation of the question ( 45 − 54% e.g., "In the US ..." ), giving multiple answers ( ∼ 24 − 30% ), or answering directly without acknowledging am-biguity in any way ( 15 − 20% ). 14 You are a helpful AI assistant in conversation with a user that asked a question. Below, you are given {len(belief_samples)} sampled generations from a language model given the user 'squestion. Consider these your belief state - a representation of your uncertainty about the answer. Your job is to analyze these generations and choose one of three strategies: - DIRECT_ANSWER: The generations converge on the same answer - there is no meaningful uncertainty. Synthesize the most representative response from your belief state, at roughly the same length as the individual generations. - CLARIFICATION_QUESTION: The generations reflect multiple semantically distinct but plausible answers, indicating the question is ambiguous or underspecified. Ask a clarification question that the user can answer by specifying their intent. Never ask the user to answer their own question. - ABSTAIN: The generations are factually contradictory and inconsistent due to your lack of knowledge, AND no useful clarification question exists that would resolve the uncertainty. Politely decline to answer. User question: {question} Candidate answers: {belief_state_text} Format your output as: STRATEGY: [DIRECT_ANSWER/CLARIFICATION_QUESTION/ABSTAIN] REASONING: [A compact reasoning chain explaining your decision] RESPONSE: [Your response to the user 's question based on the (hidden) candidate answers, following your chosen strategy.] Please provide your output. 

Figure 7: Prompt variant BAG2. 

You are a helpful AI assistant in conversation with a user. Below are {K} candidate answers representing your belief state - your uncertainty about the answer to the user '

s question. Analyze them in two steps, then choose a strategy and respond. Step 1 - Cluster by meaning: Group the answers by what they assert. Ignore surface variation (wording, punctuation ); group by the underlying fact or claim. Give each group a letter label and a representative answer. Step 2 - Interpret each cluster: For each group, ask: "What interpretation of the user 's question would naturally lead to this answer?" Write one interpretation per group. If you cannot identify any coherent interpretation for a group, mark it "uninterpretable." Step 3 - Choose a strategy: - DIRECT_ANSWER: there is only 1 meaningful cluster, or all clusters share a single interpretation. Give a complete, direct answer synthesized from the dominant cluster. - CLARIFICATION_QUESTION: there are 2-3 clusters, each with a distinct coherent interpretation, and the user can specify their intent without already knowing the answer. Ask about the user 's context or purpose - do NOT simply ask "do you mean X or Y?", instead ask about the situation or intent that would determine which interpretation applies. - ABSTAIN: clusters are uninterpretable, too numerous to resolve, or no clarification question could realistically distinguish them. Politely decline. User question: {question} Candidate answers: {belief_state_text} Format your output as: CLUSTERS: [one line per group, e.g. "A ({{k}}/{n}): < representative answer>"] INTERPRETATIONS: [one line per group, e.g. "A -> <what interpretation of the question leads here>"] STRATEGY: [DIRECT_ANSWER / CLARIFICATION_QUESTION / ABSTAIN] REASONING: [one compact sentence explaining your routing decision] RESPONSE: [your response to the user - they do not see the candidate answers, clusters, or reasoning] 

Figure 8: Prompt variant BAG3. 

15 Below are {n} candidate answers representing your belief state - independent attempts at answering the original question given our conversation so far. Determine whether your belief state shows enough consensus to give a confident answer, or whether the candidates diverge too much (indicating you are guessing rather than knowing). Step 1 - Assess consensus: Do the {n} candidate answers agree on the same core factual claim? Ignore minor surface differences in wording - focus on whether they assert the same fact. Count how many samples support the most common claim. Step 2 - Route: - DIRECT_ANSWER: The candidates largely agree (> 70% support the same claim). Synthesize a single confident answer based on the consensus. - ABSTAIN: The candidates make multiple different factual claims with no clear majority. This means you are uncertain and should not guess. Politely decline. Candidate answers: {belief_state_text} Format your output as: CONSENSUS: [one line: "X/{n} candidates agree on: <the claim >" or "no consensus - candidates split across N different claims"] STRATEGY: [DIRECT_ANSWER / ABSTAIN] REASONING: [one compact sentence explaining your decision] RESPONSE: [your answer to the user if DIRECT_ANSWER, or a polite decline if ABSTAIN] 

Figure 9: Prompt for applying BAG a second time after the clarification interaction with the user, to determine whether to reply or abstain after all, because the dia-logue history does not reduce uncertainty sufficiently. This prompt contains an example for how to use an ex-plicit threshold in the prompt: if there are less than 7/10 consistent answers the instruction is to abstain. 

16 Pretend you are roleplaying a user that asked a question to an AI assistant. The AI assistant asked a clarification question. Your task is to formulate the user 's response to this clarification question given secret additional context. You will be given a disambiguated version of the user question to help resolve any ambiguity or underspecification. Rules: - Never reveal the final answer to the user question, only answer the AI 'sclarification question. - If the AI 's clarification question is impossible to answer or not helpful, please respond "I don 't know". User question (turn 1): {question} Secret disambiguated user question: {disambig_question} AI clarification question (turn 2): {clarification_question} User answer (turn 3): [your answer] Format your response as: REASONING: [A compact reasoning chain explaining your answer] USER ANSWER: [Your simulated user answer to the AI 's clarification question] Pretend you are roleplaying a user that asked a question to an AI assistant. The AI assistant asked a clarification question. Your task is to formulate the user 's response to this clarification question given secret additional context. You will be given the final reference answer to the user question to help resolve any ambiguity or underspecification. Rules: - Never reveal the final answer to the user question, only answer the AI 'sclarification question. - If the AI 's clarification question is impossible to answer or not helpful, please respond "I don 't know". User question (turn 1): {question} Secret final reference answer: {reference} AI clarification question (turn 2): {clarification_question} User answer (turn 3): [your answer] Format your response as: REASONING: [A compact reasoning chain explaining your answer] USER ANSWER: [Your simulated user answer to the AI 's clarification question (DON 'T MENTION {reference})] 

Figure 10: The two prompts for the user simulator LLM. The two prompts differ in the secret context provided: for ambiguous questions (left), we give a disambiguated version of the question; for non-ambiguous questions (right) we give the reference answer itself with an explicit instruction not to reveal it. 

Your task is to evaluate whether a model answer correctly responds to a factual question. Correct answer: {ref_text} The correct answer above is ground truth - treat it as authoritative regardless of your own knowledge. Guidelines: - CORRECT ("yes"): the model directly asserts the correct answer as its main claim. Semantically equivalent forms are accepted (abbreviations, name variants, different date formats, singular/plural). - INCORRECT ("no"): the model (a) states a different answer as its main claim, (b) mentions the correct answer only incidentally (e.g. as one item in a list, in a historical aside, or as a counterexample without endorsing it), or (c) is too vague or non-committal to constitute a clear answer. Question: {question} Model answer: {candidate} Respond in this exact format: REASONING: [one sentence explaining your decision] VERDICT: yes / no Your task is to evaluate whether a model answer correctly responds to a factual question. This question has multiple valid interpretations. The model answer is correct if it directly asserts ANY ONE of the following correct answers as its main claim: {refs_block} The correct answers above are ground truth - treat them as authoritative regardless of your own knowledge. Guidelines: - CORRECT ("yes"): the model directly asserts any one correct answer as its main claim. Semantically equivalent forms are accepted (abbreviations, name variants, different date formats, singular/plural). - INCORRECT ("no"): the model (a) states a different answer as its main claim for none of the interpretations, (b) mentions a correct answer only incidentally (e.g. as one item in a list, in a historical aside, or as a counterexample without endorsing it), or (c) is too vague or non-committal to constitute a clear answer. Question: {question} Model answer: {candidate} Respond in this exact format: REASONING: [one sentence explaining your decision] VERDICT: yes / no 

Figure 11: The two prompts for the LLM judge. On the left is the prompt to assess against a single user intent, the right assesses against any of the intents. 

17 # Type Original question Annotated disambiguations & ref answers 

1 Genuine Who made the song “These Boots Are Made for Walkin’ ’? 

wrote → Lee Hazlewood sang → Nancy Sinatra 2 Genuine Who the female singer on Gimme Shel-ter? 

recorded version → Merry Clayton on tour → Lisa Fischer 3 Time-sensitive Who is the current chairman of the African Union Commission? 

became chairman in 2017 → Moussa Faki became chairman in 2012 → Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma became chairman in 2008 → Jean Ping 4 Time-sensitive When did the current queen of England take the throne? 

[single answer] → 6 February 1952 (outdated since 2022) 

5 Missing ambiguity When was the movie Rudolph the red-nosed reindier made 

original short → 1948 remake → 1998 (misses iconic 1964 Rank-in/Bass TV special) 

6 Missing ambiguity What channel is the new show FBI on? [single answer] → CBS (US-centric; varies by country) 

7 Granularity ‘In which episode of Smallville does Jonathan die? 

title → reckoning number → season 5 episode 12 8 Granularity What do the symbols on the Indian flag represent? 

the wheel → Dharma Chakra the saffron stripe → courage and sacrifice the white stripe → peace and truth the green stripe → faith and chivalry the Calcutta flag lotuses → the eight provinces 8 Marginal interp. How long do contestants get to answer on Jeopardy? 

regular question → 5 seconds Final Jeopardy → 30 seconds 

online contestant test → 15 seconds 9 Marginal interp. What is the population of Venice Italy 2018? 

total population → 260.897 population density → 1,600/sq mi 

Table 5: AmbigQA examples. Examples 1–2 show genuine ambiguity well suited to clarification. Examples 3–4 show time sensitivity questions that are annotated as ambiguity, and can also become outdated. Example 5–6 shows ambiguity the dataset misses , e.g., due to US-centric annotations. Examples 7–8 show overly granular disambiguations. Example 9–10 includes a marginal interpretation alongside a very salient one. 

18 Direct Generation Augmented Generation 

1 intent any intent 1 intent Standard Disambig Standard Disambig words SAG+ BAG1+ BAG2+ BAG3+ OLMo2-7B free 33.9 36.3 44.8 41.2 149.9 41.5 44.7 42.8 41.7 concise 31.9 34.7 42.5 40.4 42.9 41.5 45.1 44.5 43.7 sentence 31.8 34.1 41.6 39.2 13.5 41.5 42.7 47.4 42.8 OLMo2-13B free 45.3 49.6 59.2 55.9 146.3 46.8 54.9 55.6 55.1 concise 43.4 45.9 56.7 53.5 53.0 46.8 53.7 55.8 55.0 sentence 42.3 46.3 55.4 53.3 14.6 46.8 54.0 53.4 55.8 OLMo3-7B free 24.7 25.2 32.4 29.9 125.5 29.5 39.8 41.8 52.9 concise 26.5 27.0 34.9 31.7 35.3 29.5 46.8 51.6 52.9 sentence 24.5 26.0 33.0 31.3 14.0 29.5 43.8 51.1 49.9 Qwen3-8B free 33.1 33.7 43.2 40.3 111.0 34.6 60.2 45.0 40.8 concise 32.0 34.3 41.6 40.5 18.3 34.6 49.7 43.2 39.2 sentence 30.6 33.6 40.5 38.5 13.3 34.6 46.1 40.4 38.8 Qwen3-14B free 40.1 42.8 52.4 49.3 99.3 42.8 63.8 58.8 60.4 concise 39.6 42.4 52.0 49.6 23.6 42.8 60.4 59.2 57.2 sentence 37.5 41.6 49.8 48.4 14.7 42.8 52.6 54.9 54.8 Gemini-2.5-Flash free 59.1 68.7 75.6 74.2 46.5 67.4 68.8 69.8 68.4 concise 52.4 61.6 67.9 66.8 5.9 67.4 63.2 63.9 63.0 sentence 55.6 66.2 71.4 70.4 12.7 67.4 67.0 65.5 65.7 

Table 6: QA performance on 1832 AmbigQA-dev questions for all brevity-inducing settings. Colors per-row normalized. We can see that direct generation accuracy is not greatly impacted, but that the average direct generation length is, and therefore the belief state, with about a factor 10 for the open models from no (free) to sentence brevity. However, brevity-inducing prompts do affect BAG+ accuracy. There may be a trade-off between the size and complexity of belief states, and corresponding difficulties of analysing such large context windows, especially for smaller older models like Olmo2-7B, whereas, bigger models may more easily leverage the extra context. 

19 Figure 12: The contribution of each strategy to BAG+’s total accuracy increase (shown on the x-axis) for all models. 

Figure 13: The contribution of each strategy to BAG’s (so no second round of BAG for the final turn) total accuracy increase (shown on the x-axis) for all models. 

Figure 14: Strategy distribution for olmo2-7b-instruct 

and qwen3-8b (non-thinking) generations on 33 am-biguous AmbigQA questions with multiple intents. We manually annotated the generations with a single strat-egy each. 

20 Figure 15: A screenshot of our online visualisation tool to qualitatively inspect belief states, BAG output, clarification interactions, baselines, upperounds, LLM judge verdicts, etc. This screenshot shows just part of the page, there is more information when scrolling down. The belief state is also collapsed but can be viewed in its entirety. 

21 Figure 16: The distribution of belief state entropies across models. 

Figure 17: Uncertainty reduction after a clarification interaction for every model/prompt: largest for Gemini and smallest for Olmo3. 

22