Title: Tele-Catch: Adaptive Teleoperation for Dexterous Dynamic 3D Object Catching

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28427v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:07:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Tele-Catch: Adaptive Teleoperation for Dexterous Dynamic 3D Object Catching 

Weiguang Zhao 1,4, Junting Dong 2,†, Rui Zhang 4,†, Kailin Li 2, Qin Zhao 2,3,Kaizhu Huang 51University of Liverpool, 2Shanghai AI Lab, 3Zhejiang University 

> 4

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, 5Duke Kunshan University 

Abstract. Teleoperation is a key paradigm for transferring human dex-terity to robots, yet most prior work targets objects that are initially static, such as grasping or manipulation. Dynamic object catch, where objects move before contact, remains underexplored. Pure teleoperation in this task often fails due to timing, pose, and force errors, highlight-ing the need for shared autonomy that combines human input with autonomous policies. To this end, we present Tele-Catch, a systematic framework for dexterous hand teleoperation in dynamic object catching. At its core, we design DAIM, a dynamics-aware adaptive integration mechanism that realizes shared autonomy by fusing glove-based teleop-eration signals into the diffusion policy denoising process. It adaptively modulates control based on the interaction object state. To improve pol-icy robustness, we introduce DP-U3R, which integrates unsupervised geometric representations from point cloud observations into diffusion policy learning, enabling geometry-aware decision making. Extensive ex-periments demonstrate that Tele-Catch significantly improves accuracy and robustness in dynamic catching tasks, while also exhibiting consis-tent gains across distinct dexterous hand embodiments and previously unseen object categories. 

Keywords: Teleoperation · Diffusion Policy · Point Cloud 

## 1 Introduction 

Robotic teleoperation is a fundamental paradigm for transferring human dex-terity to robotic systems [10, 11, 13, 16], enabling applications in human–robot collaboration, remote operation, and industrial automation. Most existing re-search has concentrated on manipulating objects that are initially static, in-cluding grasping, manipulation, and in-hand adjustment [17,22,33]. In contrast, dynamic object interaction, in particular the real-time catching of free-falling or moving objects, remains underexplored despite its importance, as such capabil-ity is frequently required in human–object interaction and manipulation tasks. Furthermore, whereas fully automated policies are typically limited to predefined behavior patterns, shared autonomy with teleoperation offers the flexibility to  

> †

Corresponding author 

> arXiv:2603.28427v1 [cs.RO] 30 Mar 2026

2(a) Retargeting  (b) Teleoperation with static object  (c)Teleoperation with dynamic object    

> Challenges 1: Interaction timing Challenges 2: Interaction pose estimation
> Challenges 3: Interaction force regulation Challenges 4: Retargeting errors
> Close early Incorrect pose
> Retargeting error Excessive force

Fig. 1: Teleoperation in Dexterous Manipulation. (a) Retargeting maps human hand motions to robotic hands for teleoperation. (b) Teleoperation with static object interac-tion. (c) Teleoperation with dynamic object interaction (our focus). Four representative cases illustrate the key challenges in teleoperation with dynamic objects: (1) grasping too early, (2) incorrect grasp pose, (3) excessive grasping force, and (4) retargeting errors between human and robotic hands, all of which eventually cause the object to slip or fall. 

adapt to diverse tasks based on human intent. In this work, we conduct system-atic studies of multi-fingered dexterous hand teleoperation for dynamic object catching. Despite its promise, pure teleoperation (based solely on retargeting) for dy-namic object catching faces several fundamental challenges, as summarized in Fig. 1. (1) Interaction timing is highly sensitive in dynamic scenarios, where even slight delays or premature actions frequently lead to failure. (2) Interac-tion pose estimation remains challenging, as rapid object movement hinder the reliable perception of feasible contact configurations. (3) Interaction force regu-lation is difficult, since insufficient force often results in slippage, while excessive force destabilizes the manipulation. (4) Retargeting errors arise from the struc-tural mismatch between human hands and robotic hands, which become more pronounced under fast motions [32]. To this end, we turn to learning-based frameworks as a potential foundation for reliable control. Reinforcement Learn-ing (RL) [19] and Diffusion Policy (DP) [7,35] demonstrate strong capabilities in acquiring stable dynamic manipulation strategies, while teleoperation provides adaptability and flexibility. This motivates the inquiry into whether teleopera-tion inputs can be incorporated into learned frameworks to ensure robustness and stability in dynamic object catching. In this regard, we introduce Tele-Catch, a shared-autonomy framework for dexterous hand teleoperation in dynamic object catching. The core of our shared autonomy is DAIM, a dynamics-aware adaptive integration mechanism that fuses glove-based teleoperation inputs into the diffusion denoising steps while adapting the integration strength to the object’s dynamic state. In particu-lar, the cosine schedule used in DAIM allows the teleoperation influence to 3

increase smoothly over diffusion steps, avoiding abrupt changes and ensuring stable shared autonomy. This design yields a smooth and flexible control scheme that balances robustness from the learned policy with adaptability from teleop-eration input. To further enhance policy robustness and generalization, we develop DP-U3R, which augments the diffusion policy with unsupervised 3D point-cloud representations. Specifically, point-cloud observations are perturbed with Gaus-sian noise and processed by an encoder to extract both point-wise geometric features and pooled global structure, which are combined through attention to yield geometry-aware representations. To save the calculation cost, only global structure features are integrated into the observation space of the diffusion pol-icy, enabling it to leverage geometric priors for more accurate action generation. Extensive experiments on mainstream data and robotic platforms validate the ef-fectiveness and generalization of our method, showing substantial improvements in teleoperated dynamic object catching. The contributions of our work are as follows: 

– We introduce Tele-Catch, pioneering the systematic study of dexterous hand teleoperation for dynamic object catching and opening a new direction be-yond static grasping tasks. 

– We design a dynamics-aware adaptive integration mechanism that smoothly blends glove teleoperation with learned policies, improving stability under diverse motion conditions. 

– We develop a concise yet effective modular DP-U3R, which incorporates unsupervised point-cloud geometric representations into the diffusion policy, enhancing its robustness and generalization. 

– Experiments conducted on representative data and hardware platforms con-firm the robustness and transferability of our approach, yielding notable gains in teleoperation. 

## 2 Related Work 

Tab. 1 provides an overview of representative methods that are closest to our task and method. Prior work either tackles dynamic catching with low-DoF end-effectors or focuses on static dexterous manipulation with limited generalization and without shared autonomy. In contrast, our approach uniquely combines adaptive shared autonomy, 3D perception, and multi-hand generalization for dynamic dexterous catching. We elaborate on the detailed differences in the remainder of this section. 

Teleoperation and Shared Autonomy. Teleoperation is an important paradigm for transferring human dexterity to robotic systems, and existing ap-proaches include motion-based [30, 36], vision-based [6, 12, 21], and exoskeleton-based [1,8] methods. For instance, Doglove [36] enables low-cost dexterous hand control without additional visual systems or learned policies. ByteDexter [29] uses the Manus glove with optimization-based retargeting to control a 20-DoF 4Method Venue Shared-Aut. Deployment Dynamic-Cat. Visual Unseen-Obj. Hand-Types DOF DSA [25] TRO’16 ✗ Sim.+Real ✓ 2D ✗ Single 16 Bi-DexHands [2] TPAMI’23 ✗ Sim. ✓ 3D ✗ Single 16 DP3 [35] RSS’24 ✗ Sim.+Real ✗ 3D ✗ Single 16 DexterityGen [33] RSS’25 Fixed Sim.+Real ✗ ✗ ✓ Single 16 DexHandDiff [23] CVPR’25 ✗ Sim. ✗ ✗ ✗ Single 24         

> Tele-Catch (Ours) –Adaptive Sim.+Real ✓3D ✓Multi 16/24

Table 1: Comparison with main related work. Shared-Aut. is Shared-Autonomy. And Obj. stands for Objects. Dynamic-Cat. denotes Dynamic-Catching Task. Sim. and Real denote deployment in simulation and on real robots, respectively. 

hand for real-time in-hand manipulation and long-horizon tasks. Furthermore, DexterityGen [33] injects teleoperation weights into diffusion denoising for in-hand manipulation, but its fixed hard threshold can cause abrupt arbitration, and it does not explicitly leverage visual observations to ground denoising. In contrast, our Tele-Catch introduces a dynamics-aware adaptive integra-tion mechanism that enables smooth and stable coordination between glove-based teleoperation and learned policies (Eq. 11–14), where the intervention is scheduled along denoising steps and further adjusted by object dynamics. We additionally incorporate 3D point-cloud observations (via DP-U3R) to provide geometry-aware guidance, improving stability under varying motion conditions. On the other hand, most prior work [29, 33] still focuses on static object manip-ulation, and very few studies explore teleoperation with dynamic objects such as catching or handover. To fill this gap, we introduce Tele-Catch, a systematic study of dexterous hand teleoperation for dynamic object catching. 

Dexterous Hand Manipulation. Recent research on dexterous hand ma-nipulation can be categorized into control-driven, learning-driven, and human-in-the-loop. Control-driven approaches [14, 18, 25] rely on explicit physical models and advanced controllers such as model predictive control to manage multi-contact dynamics, enabling stable in-hand manipulation in both simulation and real-world tests. Learning-driven approaches [20,34] leverage data-driven strate-gies, including RL, imitation learning, and diffusion-based generative models, achieving robust dexterity and improved generalization across diverse manipula-tion tasks. Finally, human-in-the-loop approaches [24,27] integrate human guid-ance through teleoperation interfaces—such as motion-capture gloves, vision-based tracking, or exoskeleton devices—providing intuitive control of dexterous hands and generating high-quality demonstrations that enhance adaptation for complex manipulation scenarios. In this work, we attempt to optimize the learn-ing policy to assist and enhance teleoperation. 

Point Cloud Representation for Embodied AI. Recent works [5, 31] recognize that 3D point clouds, with their inherent state representations, effec-tively improve multi-fingered hand manipulation and teleoperation. Specifically, DP3 [35] develops a visual imitation learning algorithm that integrates 3D vi-sual representations with diffusion policies. It effectively handles various robotic tasks and achieves strong generalization with few demonstrations. In addition, ViViDex [4] proposes a vision-based framework that transforms depth-based point clouds into hand-centric coordinates to better capture hand–object ge-ometry, enabling robust visual policies for multi-finger control without relying 5

on privileged object states. In human-in-the-loop settings, teleoperation systems have begun to incorporate point clouds for state estimation and policy learning – for example, CordViP [9] utilizes accurate object pose and robot proprioception to produce interaction-aware point clouds of the hand and object, and pretrains an observation encoder on hand–object contact correspondences to guide a DP. In contrast, our work seeks to obtain self-supervised geometric features from dynamic object point clouds and incorporate them into the DP to enhance the system robustness. 

## 3 Preliminaries 

Reinforcement Learning (RL). RL provides a framework for sequential decision-making, where an agent learns to maximize long-term returns through interac-tion with the environment [3]. At each timestep t, the agent observes a state 

st, samples an action at ∼ πθ (at|st), receives a reward rt, and transitions to the next state st+1 . The optimization objective is the expected discounted return J(θ) = Eπθ

hPTt=0 γtrt

i

, where γ ∈ (0 , 1) denotes the discount factor. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [26] is a widely used algorithm for contin-uous control, improves upon standard policy gradients with a clipped surrogate objective that stabilizes training by constraining policy updates. PPO updates the RL policy by the clipped surrogate loss:        

> LCLIP (θ) = Et
> h
> min  rt(θ) ˆAt,clip (rt(θ),1−ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
> i
> ,

with probability ratio rt(θ) = πθ (at|st)  

> πθold (at|st)

and advantage estimate ˆAt. The reward function encodes task-specific objectives, thereby shaping the learned policy be-havior. 

Diffusion Policy (DP). DP [7] is built upon the framework of the denois-ing diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [15], where the diffusion mechanism is applied to action trajectories instead of raw data. DDPM processes data by gradually adding Gaussian noise and training a neural network to reverse this process. In inference, a sample is drawn from pure noise and iteratively denoised. DP adapts this principle to action trajectories, enabling multimodal and tempo-rally coherent control generation. Formally, given a clean sample x0, the forward diffusion process produces noisy versions xk:        

> q(xk|xk−1) = N
> p 1−βkxk−1, β kI
> 
> ,(1)

where βk is the variance schedule at step k. After sufficient steps ( k = K), the data becomes nearly Gaussian noise. The reverse process, parameterized by a neural network ϵθ , predicts either the clean data or the added noise:            

> pθ(xk−1|xk) = N(μθ(xk, k ), Σ θ).(2)

By iteratively denoising from noise xK ∼ N (0 , I ), DDPMs recover samples con-sistent with the training distribution. This mechanism provides the foundation for DP. 6…

> Reward
> Updating
> RL Policy
> (a) Train RL Policy
> RL Policy
> Quality Eval
> Save Sequence
> N
> Y

# …

# …

> Point Cloud Sequence
> State&Action Sequence
> (b) Data Collection
> State&Action
> Sequence
> Perturbation
> DP
> P
> Recon. Loss
> Noise
> Mse Loss
> A
> (c) Train DP-U3R
> DP
> DAIM

…   

> State Seq.
> Action
> (d) Teleoperation
> PPPooling
> Trainable
> Frozen
> AAttention
> Concat
> Delete

# …

# …

# …

> 𝑎𝑎  𝑡𝑡
> 𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑡
> ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑝𝑝 𝑡𝑡
> 𝑓𝑓 𝑡𝑡
> 𝑔𝑔

Fig. 2: Our Method. For clarity, we present our framework by dividing it into four components: (a) Train RL Policy (b) Data Collection (c) Train DP-U3R (d) Teleoper-ation. Recon. stands for Reconstruction and Seq. is Sequence. 

## 4 Method 

4.1 Problem statement 

We investigate dynamic object catching under teleoperation, where a dexterous robotic hand, controlled by a real-world teleoperation glove, is required to cap-ture moving objects within a simulated environment. Let the state and point cloud at time t be st ∈ S and pt ∈ P , the glove input ht ∈ H , and the hand action at ∈ A , with transitions governed by st+1 ∼ P (st+1 | st, a t), which encode objectives such as successful catching and stability. The objective of Tele-Catch is to learn a shared-autonomy policy πθ (at | st, p t, h t) that enables a dexterous hand to stably catch free-falling or dynamically moving objects. Given the envi-ronment state st, point cloud pt, glove input ht, and hand action at, the policy is trained to ensure robustness and adaptability under dynamic conditions. 

4.2 Overview 

As shown in Fig. 2, our framework consists of four stages. (a) We first train an RL policy in simulation to acquire stable dynamic catching skills. (b) The trained policy is then adopted to collect large-scale trajectories of state–action pairs and point cloud observations, which are filtered by the designed quality evaluation. (c) These collected data are used to train our DP-U3R, where point clouds are perturbed, encoded, and fused via pooling and attention to provide geometry-aware features that enhance the diffusion policy. (d) During teleoperation, we develop the DAIM that injects glove signals into the denoising process, adaptively balancing DP-derived policy stability with human guidance based on object dynamics and diffusion steps. 7

4.3 Train RL Policy 

In the first stage, we employ the PPO algorithm to train an RL policy for dynamic object catching. PPO is selected due to its stability and effective-ness in high-dimensional continuous control, making it well-suited for dexter-ous hand manipulation tasks. To guide learning, we design a composite reward function tailored to the catching task, which integrates distance, orientation, and fingertip–object contact terms, along with penalties on fingertip velocities, action magnitude, torque, and energy consumption. A one-time drop penalty is further introduced for catastrophic failure. The complete reward is defined as a weighted sum: 

R = λdist Rdist + λrot Rrot + λftip-dist Rftip-dist 

− λdrop Pdrop − λlin Pftip-linvel − λang Pftip-angvel 

− λact Paction − λtorque Ptorque − λpower Ppower ,

(3) 

where Rdist , R rot , R ftip-dist represent distance, orientation alignment, and fingertip– object distance rewards, respectively. The penalty terms Pftip-linvel , P ftip-angvel ,

Paction , Ptorque , Ppower regulate motion smoothness, torque load, and energy ef-ficiency, while Pdrop penalizes object fall. Each component is weighted by its coefficient λ, which specifies its relative importance. The exact numerical values of all coefficients are summarized in Appendix. 7.2. 

4.4 Data Collection 

We construct a dataset of dynamic catching trajectories using the trained RL policy. Let the environment state at time t be st ∈ S , which contains the object pose, velocity, and proprioceptive information of the robotic hand. A depth cam-era is mounted in the environment to provide a point cloud observation pt ∈ P ,representing the 3D geometry of the scene at time t. The hand action is denoted by at ∈ A , corresponding to the joint commands executed by the robotic hand. Thus, each trajectory can be formalized as a sequence 

τ = {(st, p t, a t)}Tt=0 . (4) 

To ensure the quality of the collected data, we define a quality evaluation function Q(τ ) for each trajectory. A trajectory is accepted only if it satisfies two conditions: (i) the object is not dropped during the interaction, and (ii) the final object–palm distance is below a predefined threshold δ. Formally, 

Q(τ ) = 1

h

no_drop (τ ) ∧ ∥ pobj  

> T

− ppalm  

> T

∥2 < δ 

i

, (5) 

where pobj  

> T

and ppalm  

> T

denote the positions of the object and the palm center at the final timestep T . Only trajectories with Q(τ ) = 1 are retained and stored, while the rest are discarded. This quality-controlled process produces a dataset of reliable state–action–point cloud sequences, which subsequently serves as the foundation for training diffusion-based policies. 8

4.5 Diffusion Policy with Unsupervised 3D Representation (DP-U3R) 

Additionally, we train our proposed DP-U3R. Let the (state, point cloud, action) sequence collected from RL be denoted as τs = {(st, p t, a t)}Tt=0 . Each point cloud 

pt is perturbed with Gaussian noise ξt ∼ N (0 , σ 2I) to encourage robust feature learning, yielding ˜pt = pt + ξt. The perturbed point cloud is encoded by an encoder E(·), producing per-point features fi,t ∈ Rd. A global feature vector 

f gt ∈ Rd is then obtained by a pooling operator P (·):

fi,t = E(˜ pt); f gt = P ({fi,t }Mp

> i=1

), (6) 

where Mp is the number of points in the cloud. An attention module A(·)

fuses local features with the global representation, yielding the final embedding 

zt ∈ Rd:

zt = A({fi,t }Mp

> i=1

, f gt ). (7) 

The embedding feature zt will be used to predict and reconstruct the point cloud ˆpt. The diffusion policy receives the augmented state ˜st = [ st, f gt ] along with the action sequence to model the denoising process. DP-U3R is optimized by two complementary objectives. The first is the point cloud reconstruction loss, defined as the L2 distance between the original point cloud pt and reconstruction 

ˆpt:

Lrecon = 1

MpMp

X

> i=1

∥pi,t − ˆpi,t ∥22. (8) 

The second is the noise prediction loss for the diffusion model. At each step t,the policy predicts Gaussian noise ˆϵt from the noisy action ˜at, while the ground truth noise is ϵt ∼ N (0 , I ). The loss is given by: 

Lnoise = Et,ϵ t∼N (0 ,I )

∥ϵt − ˆϵt∥22

. (9) 

The overall training objective is a weighted sum of the two terms: 

L = λrecon Lrecon + λnoise Lnoise , (10) 

where λrecon and λnoise control the balance between unsupervised learning and diffusion policy optimization. 

4.6 Dynamics-Aware Adaptive Integration Mechanism (DAIM) 

In the final stage, we integrate teleoperation signals from a real glove interface into the diffusion policy via our proposed DAIM. Let the action predicted by the diffusion policy at step k be ˆxk, and the reference action derived from glove input 

ht be xref . Since diffusion policies operate as conditional denoisers, injecting ht

at inference only modifies the conditioning and does not alter the underlying diffusion prior; empirically, we observe stable denoising across all settings. The integrated action ˜xk is obtained by a convex combination of the two signals: 

˜xk = ˆ xk + α(k) ( xref − ˆxk ), (11) 9

where α(k) ∈ [0 , 1] controls the degree of teleoperation intervention. The tem-poral schedule of α(k) is defined as:       

> α(k) = αmax ·
> 
> 1−cos
> πk
> 2K
> 
> ,(12)

where K denotes the denoising horizon. The maximum integration weight αmax 

is determined adaptively based on object dynamics:      

> αmax =sigmoid (u0−u),(13)

where u0 is the adjustment coefficient and the dynamic factor u is computed as       

> u=βv· ∥v∥
> v0
> +βω· ∥ω∥
> ω0
> ,(14)

where v and ω denote the linear and angular velocities of the object, respec-tively, and v0, ω 0 are normalization constants. βv , β ω balance the contribution of translational and rotational dynamics. Intuitively, our DAIM adaptively adjusts the strength of teleoperation guidance according to both the diffusion step k and the current object dynamics (v, ω ). When the object moves rapidly, the system relies more on the diffusion policy for stability; when the motion is slower, the teleoperation input is granted more influence. We choose cosine and sigmoid schedules because they preserve the monotonicity and smoothness required by the diffusion process, ensuring that teleoperation acts as a stable conditional guidance rather than a disruptive perturbation. 

## 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experiment settings Simulation Settings. As illustrated in Fig. 3, our simulation experimental setup integrates both hardware and simulation components. On the hardware side, we employ a Manus glove(Fig. 3(a)), which captures human hand kinemat-ics, including finger joint angles and overall hand pose, providing high-fidelity teleoperation signals. Additionally, all training and inference is conducted on one single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. In simulation, we adopt Isaac Gym as the physics engine, and model the manipulator with a ShadowHand (Fig. 3(b)), a five-finger dexterous robotic hand with 24 degrees of freedom, and a Linkerhand (Fig. 3(c)), a five-finger dexterous robotic hand with 16 degrees of freedom. To provide visual observations, we place an RGB-D camera in the environment, and the captured depth maps are converted into point clouds (Fig. 3(d)), which are uniformly downsampled to 1,300 points per frame. The experimental objects (Fig. 3(e)) are drawn from the public DexGraspNet dataset [28]. 

Sim2Real Settings. As shown in Fig. 4(a), we set up a real-world validation scenario (Xhand left hand + Manus glove + RealSense 435 RGB-D + UR arm). We pre-trained our policy using the Xhand URDF and then deployed it for real-world testing. It is an important and promising direction to explore obtaining 10 (a) Manus Glove  (b) Shadowhand  (d) Point Cloud  (e) Objects (c) LinkerHand 

Fig. 3: Simulation Settings 

the accurate object state in the real world. We recommend using 2D/3D track-ing/pose estimation methods to measure object state. In our real-world system, we use the lightweight TrackerCSRT for object tracking and state estimation. As depicted in Fig. 4(b), the estimated values for sampled frames are recorded in the top-left corner. Frame:  1 Frame:  4 Frame:  7 

> (a) Real World Setting (b)Object State Information

Fig. 4: Sim2Real Settings 

Implementation Details. During RL data collection, we construct training and validation sets with a ratio of 5:1. Specifically, for each object category, we sample 5,000 successful trajectories as training data and 1,000 successful trajectories as validation data. For point cloud processing, the encoder outputs per-point features, and the global feature dimension is set to 256. The hyper-parameters for DAIM are fixed as βv = 10 , βω = 0 .1, u0 = 1 .0, v0 = 1 .0, and 

w0 = 10 . In our DP-U3R training, the loss weights are set as λrecon = 1 .0 and 

λnoise = 1 .0. The detailed RL reward coefficients and their formulations are re-ported in Appendix. 7.2. Similar to DP/DP3, our inference time is 41.4 ms with 10 denoise steps on a single RTX 4090. And the glove costs 9.2 ms. The video latency comes from simulation and inference on the same GPU, with the simula-tion dt setting. The detailed setting of the PPO and the Isaac Gym is recorded in the Tab. 7 and Tab. 8 in the Appendix. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following prior work [19, 33, 35] in dexterous manipula-tion, we adopt Success Rate (%) as the primary evaluation metric, where a trial is considered successful if the robotic hand catches the object and maintains stable contact for a fixed duration. We provide the operator with a 15-minute familiarization period before the evaluation. For teleoperation, each object is tested 15 times, and the average success rate is reported. Moreover, we evaluate the denoising accuracy of the diffusion policy via the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between predicted denoised actions and ground-truth actions, which directly re-flects the precision of action prediction. 11 

5.2 Experiment Results 

Our goal is to improve teleoperation via shared autonomy, not to optimize the catching task itself. We report our results in Tab. 2. Pure Teleoperation (Tele-Pure) with glove retargeting attains only 35.3% due to timing, force, and map-ping errors, whereas our Tele-Catch improves performance to 54.7%, with no-table gains on dynamic objects such as Truck and Teapot. Overall, these results validate our dynamics-aware integration while highlighting that human-in-the-loop dynamic catching remains challenging and merits further study.                   

> Methods Ball Bear Cookie Cup Fish Ipod Showerhead Teapot Truck Vase Mean ↑
> Tele-Pure 20.0 46.7 80.0 26.7 6.7 13.3 60.0 33.3 46.7 20.0 35.3 Tele-Catch 46.7 53.3 80.0 46.7 20.0 13.3 80.0 86.7 73.3 46.7 54.7

Table 2: Success rate (SR) comparison on all classes. Tele-Pure abbreviates Pure Teleoperation. 

We find that many failures can be traced back to the four challenges sum-marized in Fig. 1, including timing, pose alignment, contact force control, and retargeting errors; in particular, thin objects with sharp edges (e.g., Ipod and Fish, Fig. 3) remain challenging: their corners often contact first during falling, causing high-impulse rebounds before a stable enclosure can be formed, which leads to frequent drop failures.                               

> Ball Bear Cookie Cup Fish Ipod Showerhead Teapot Truck Vase DP 0.152 0.145 0.158 0.139 0.136 0.155 0.156 0.156 0.161 0.140 DP3 0.150 0.143 0.157 0.133 0.136 0.155 0.159 0.152 0.159 0.136 DP-U3R 0.150 0.142 0.155 0.129 0.136 0.154 0.154 0.152 0.158 0.134

Table 3: Action noise MSE results across different objects. Open-Loop RL Tele-Pure Tele-Catch(DP [7]) # Tele-Catch(DP3 [35]) Tele-Catch(DP-U3R) SR ↑ 46. 7 33.3 46.7 60.0 66.7 73.3 

Table 4: Success rate (SR) comparison on Truck. # stands for our baseline. 

Tab. 3 reports the action-noise MSE for each object. Overall, DP-U3R shows lower errors on most categories and smaller fluctuations across objects than the standard diffusion policy and DP3, indicating more reliable denoising and stronger robustness to diverse geometries and dynamics. Since DP3 augments DP with additional 3D cues and DP-U3R further integrates unsupervised point-cloud representations, the results suggest that richer 3D information improves action denoising quality. This improvement also transfers to task performance. In Tab. 4, Pure Tele-operation achieves 46.7% SR, matching the open-loop DexGraspNet-based base-line [28]. With shared autonomy, Tele-Catch improves SR to 60.0%, 66.7%, and 73.3% when using DP, DP3, and DP-U3R, respectively, where Tele-Catch(DP) serves as our ablation baseline for backbone comparison. DexterityGen [33] does not release its training or evaluation code, so we exclude it from quantitative comparisons under our setting. These results imply that Tele-Catch stabilizes noisy teleoperation commands and reduces timing errors, and that stronger dif-fusion backbones further improve robustness. 12 Tele. Guide Response Point Cloud  

> Time
> Fig. 5: Qualitative analysis. The top row shows the teleoperation glove guidance, the middle row depicts the corresponding robotic hand responses in simulation, and the bottom row illustrates the synchronized point-cloud observations. Together, these visu-alizations demonstrate how Tele-Catch integrates human teleoperation with geometry-aware policy control to achieve stable dynamic object catching over time.

We provide the qualitative analysis of Tele-Catch in Fig.5, showing how glove inputs, robotic responses, and point cloud observations evolve during dynamic catching. Our method benefits from DP-U3R priors, which provide stable guid-ance during unstable object motion and ensure more reliable catching. Sup-plementary video further illustrates this contrast, highlighting the failures of direct teleoperation and the stable performance of Tele-Catch. The supplemen-tary video also demonstrates that our framework can effectively mitigate the four challenges identified in the Section. 1. 

5.3 Sim2Real Analysis 

Real-world validation is important, and we acknowledge that teleoperation with dynamic objects is still in early stages. Following prior work [34][3][28], our ex-periments are mainly conducted in simulation. However, our method is designed to be transferable to real-world settings. Here we make an attempt to validate our method in the real-world system.  

> Fig. 6: Sim2Real analysis

We provide a complete, unedited test clip recorded by the RealSense camera, which clearly shows the object, the dexterous hand, and the teleoperation glove throughout the interaction (Fig. 6). Real-world teleoperation exhibits the same 13 

challenges described in our paper, often more severely due to light, sensing noise, and contact variability (Fig. 7); thus we prioritize refining and stress-testing in simulation before scaling up hardware evaluations.  

> Fig. 7: Failure case

5.4 Generalization Analysis 

Beyond evaluating Tele-Catch under its standard training and execution set-ting, we further study two complementary aspects of generalization (Tab. 5): (i) cross-embodiment transfer, where Tele-Catch is deployed on a new dexterous hand with different kinematics with retraining, and (ii) unseen-category general-ization, where the method is tested on novel object categories without retraining.                       

> Objects ShadowHand LinkerHand-L20 Seen Unseen Tele-Pure Tele-Catch Teapot ✓✓33.3 86.7
> Teapot ✓✓40.0 73.3
> Eraser ✓✓53.3 66.7
> Telephone ✓✓46.7 53.3
> Bottle ✓✓20.0 33.3
> Table 5: Generalization analysis.

Cross-embodiment transfer. We evaluate the cross-embodiment perfor-mance by transferring Tele-Catch from ShadowHand to LinkerHand-L20. Since the kinematics differ, this setting requires retraining the policy on the target embodiment. Tele-Catch consistently improves success rates compared with pure teleoperation (73.3% vs. 40.0% on Teapot), indicating effective cross-embodiment transfer with retraining. This highlights the flexibility of Tele-Catch for adapting to new robotic hardware once retrained. 

Unseen category generalization. We further evaluate Tele-Catch on un-seen object categories without retraining, including Eraser, Telephone, and Bot-tle. The method consistently outperforms direct teleoperation (e.g., 66.7% vs. 53.3% on Eraser), demonstrating non-trivial zero-shot generalization to novel categories. These results suggest that increasing category coverage during train-ing may further improve performance on everyday objects. 

Object motion diversity. We clarify that our motion diversity comes from RL data collection and goes beyond pure free-fall; for example, adding an initial x-axis velocity yields a 66.7% success rate on Teapot. 

5.5 Sensitivity Analysis 

We assign a smaller weight to βω because the object angular velocity tends to change abruptly during collisions and is generally harder to estimate reli-ably; down-weighting it makes the controller less sensitive to noisy angular-velocity estimates. On Teapot, sweeping βv ∈ { 1, 10 , 20 } yields success rates 14 

of 60 .0/86 .7/86 .7, while sweeping βω ∈ { 0.05 , 0.1, 0.15 } yields 66 .7/86 .7/86 .7.When βv or βω is set too large, the teleoperation command is overly attenuated, leading to conservative responses and degraded catching performance. In our formulation, the blending coefficient α is determined by these β weights—larger 

β results in stronger attenuation (smaller α), whereas smaller β preserves more of the user command. As illustrated in Fig. 8, we conduct a sensitivity analysis focusing on the ring finger position under teleoperation guidance. We press the ring finger to observe the corresponding deformation of the dexterous hand’s ring finger. During the unstable phase of object motion, the robotic hand mainly relies on the diffusion policy to stabilize its response, which enables reliable catching despite rapid dynamics. Once the object is successfully secured and enters a stable state, the teleoperation input gradually becomes dominant, leading the ring finger to bend downward according to the glove command. This behavior highlights the adaptive nature of DAIM, where human guidance and the learned policy are dynamically weighted to ensure stability in catching and responsiveness in teleoperation. Tele. Guide Response  

> Time
> Fig. 8: Sensitivity analysis. The orange ellipse highlights the variation of the ring finger.

## 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced Tele-Catch, the systematic study of dexterous hand teleoperation for dynamic object catching within a shared-autonomy framework. At its core, Tele-Catch leverages DAIM, a dynamics-aware adaptive integration mechanism that fuses glove-based teleoperation inputs into the diffusion pol-icy’s denoising process, ensuring smooth and adaptive control under varying ob-ject dynamics. To further enhance robustness and generalization, we proposed DP-U3R, which augments diffusion policy learning with unsupervised 3D point cloud representations, enabling geometry-aware decision making. Experiments demonstrate that Tele-Catch significantly improves success rates over baselines, achieving robust performance across diverse objects and conditions. Moreover, the analysis highlights both the effectiveness of our contributions and the re-maining challenges of this new task, pointing to substantial opportunities for future research. 15 

## 7 Appendix 

7.1 Discussion Why Teleoperation? Teleoperation remains a widely adopted and practically valuable paradigm in robotics, enabling human intent to guide manipulation in complex and uncertain scenarios. Our work specifically focuses on improv-ing dynamic object interaction under teleoperation, rather than pursuing fully autonomous solutions. Purely automated dynamic catching cannot be directly substituted into teleoperation pipelines due to inherent retargeting discrepancies, embodiment mismatch, and the difficulty of tightly aligning autonomous actions with human control intent. In contrast, Tele-Catch is designed to enhance tele-operation: it leverages automation not to replace the human, but to compensate for timing, pose, and force errors that frequently occur during human–robot dynamic interaction. Thus, our framework adopts a shared-automation formula-tion in which autonomous policy priors strengthen stability while teleoperation retains high-level control authority. 

7.2 RL Reward Design Details 

In this section, we provide the detailed definitions of all reward and penalty terms used in PPO training. The corresponding coefficients are listed in Tab. 6. The fingertip–object distance reward encourages the robotic hand to reduce the spatial gap between its fingertips and the target, thereby accelerating the con-vergence toward feasible grasp configurations. This guidance not only expedites the catching process but also improves grasp reliability by ensuring timely con-tact with the moving object. In addition, the fingertip velocity penalties regulate the linear and angular speeds of the fingers, discouraging excessively aggressive motions. By enforcing smoother trajectories, these penalties mitigate overshoot-ing and reduce slippage risks, thereby promoting stable and physically plausible catches. Our reward design enables PPO to learn policies that achieve high catching success but also maintain efficiency and physical plausibility.                              

> Component Symbol Coefficient Coefficient Value
> Hand–object distance reward Rdist λdist 10.0 Object orientation reward Rrot λrot 0.1 Fingertip–object distance reward Rftip-dist λftip-dist 10.0 Fingertip linear velocity penalty Pftip-linvel λlin 0.3 Fingertip angular velocity penalty Pftip-angvel λang 0.03 Action penalty Paction λact 2e−4
> Torque penalty Ptorque λtorque 2e−4
> Power penalty Ppower λpower 2e−4
> Drop penalty (one-time) Pdrop λdrop 1.0

Table 6: Reward components and coefficients used in our RL training. 

Reward and Penalty Formulations Let phand ∈ R3 be the palm position, 

pobj ∈ R3 the object position, qobj the object orientation quaternion, qtarget the 16 

desired target orientation, ptip ,i the position of the i-th fingertip, vtip ,i its linear velocity, ωtip ,i its angular velocity, at the control action at time t, τt the applied torque vector, and ˙θt,j the angular velocity of the j-th joint. 

– Hand–object distance reward: 

Rdist = −∥ phand − pobj ∥2

– Object orientation reward: 

Rrot = −∥ qobj − qtarget ∥

– Fingertip–object distance reward: For M fingertips, 

Rftip-dist = − 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

∥ptip ,i − pobj ∥2

– Fingertip linear velocity penalty: 

Pftip-linvel = 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

∥vtip ,i ∥2

– Fingertip angular velocity penalty: 

Pftip-angvel = 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

∥ωtip ,i ∥2

– Action penalty: 

Paction = ∥at∥22

– Torque penalty: 

Ptorque = ∥τt∥22

– Work penalty: 

Pwork = X

> j

|τt,j · ˙θt,j |

– Drop penalty: 

Pdrop = 100 

Reward and Penalty Records We provide the recorded reward and penalty curves during training, as illustrated in Fig. 9. The first row shows the major reward terms, including distance reward, rotation reward, and fingertip distance reward. These curves exhibit a clear upward trend and eventually stabilize, in-dicating that the policy successfully learns consistent catching strategies. The second row corresponds to the auxiliary penalties, such as fingertip linear and angular velocity penalties, torque and work penalties, and action penalties. Since these terms are primarily used to regularize energy consumption and finger mo-tion smoothness, they exhibit higher variability during training. Nevertheless, their overall trends remain bounded, suggesting that the learned policy main-tains stable control while avoiding excessive actuation effort. 17 

Fig. 9: PPO Reward and Penalty 

PPO hyperparameter setting For reproducibility, we summarize in Tab. 7 the hyperparameter configurations used in training our PPO-based RL base-line. The table includes general settings, policy network architectures, training schedules, optimization details, regularization terms, RL parameters, and logging options. These choices follow standard PPO practices with minor adjustments to ensure stable training in dynamic catching tasks. 

Category Hyperparameters 

General Random seed = 22, Observation clipping = 5.0, Action clipping = 1.0 Policy Network Actor hidden layers = [1024, 1024, 512] Critic hidden layers = [1024, 1024, 512], Activation = ELU Training Setup Maximum iterations = 6500, Schedule = adaptive, Save interval = 1000 Optimization Rollout steps = 8, Epochs per update = 5, Minibatches per epoch = 4 Max gradient norm = 1, Learning rate = 3 × 10 −4

Regularization Clipping range = 0.2, Entropy coefficient = 0, Target KL divergence = 0.016 RL Parameters Discount factor γ = 0 .96 , GAE parameter λ = 0 .95 , Initial noise std = 0.8 Logging Log interval = 1, Console logging = True 

Table 7: PPO hyperparameter setting. 

7.3 Simulation Simulation Setting For completeness, we list in Tab. 8 the key simulation parameters used in Isaac Gym during RL and evaluation. The table summarizes environment configurations, control settings, initialization noise, success criteria, randomization ranges, and physics engine details. These parameters ensure that the training environment is both diverse and stable, facilitating the learning of robust catching strategies. Such randomized yet bounded settings improve generalization by preventing the policy from overfitting to a single simulation condition.                 

> Category Key Parameters
> Environment numEnvs = 8192, envSpacing = 0.75, episodeLength = 50 Control dofSpeedScale = 20, controlFrequency = 60 Hz Noise (init/reset) posNoise = 0.01, dofPosRandom = 0.2 Task Success successTolerance = 0.1 Randomization hand/object mass [0.5, 1.5], friction [0.7, 1.3], object scale [0.95, 1.05] Physics (PhysX) solver = TGS, numPosIter = 8, contactOffset = 0.002, bounceThreshold = 0.2

Table 8: Isaac Gym simulation parameter setting. 

7.4 Pseudo-code of Proposed Method 

To provide a clear overview of our method, we present pseudo-code descriptions of the Tele-Catch pipeline. The framework consists of two complementary phases: 18 

a training phase (Alg. 1), where RL trajectories are collected and used to train our DP-U3R model, and an execution phase(Alg. 2), where the learned policy is integrated with teleoperation signals through DAIM. The pseudocode aims to clarify the data flow and algorithmic steps beyond the conceptual diagrams given in the main text. 

Training Stage. We employ PPO to generate successful dynamic catch-ing trajectories. These trajectories include state information, executed actions, and synchronized point cloud observations. The collected data are then used to train DP-U3R, which encodes noisy point clouds into geometric embeddings and optimizes a diffusion policy with both reconstruction and noise prediction losses. 

Algorithm 1 Training Stage: RL and DP-U3R 

Inputs: Simulator E, PPO config, point cloud pt

Outputs: DP-U3R policy πθ

1: procedure Stage 1: RL Training 

2: Train PPO in E to catch dynamic objects 3: Collect successful trajectories {(st, a t, p t)}

4: end procedure 

5: procedure Stage 2: DP-U3R Training 

6: Encode noisy point cloud pt into embedding zt

7: Train diffusion policy πθ (st, z t)

8: Optimize with reconstruction loss + noise prediction loss 9: end procedure 

Execution Stage. During execution, the trained DP-U3R is combined with glove-based teleoperation inputs using the dynamics-aware adaptive integration mechanism (DAIM). At each control step, the policy proposes an action from the encoded point cloud and state, while glove commands are retargeted to reference actions. DAIM dynamically fuses these two signals according to object dynamics and time step, enabling stable yet responsive teleoperation for dynamic catching. 

Algorithm 2 Execution Stage: Teleoperation with DAIM 

Inputs: Trained policy πθ , glove input ht, point cloud pt

Outputs: Executed action ˜xt

1: procedure Teleoperate 

2: for control step t = 1 . . . T do 

3: Observe (st, p t) and compute point cloud feature f gt

4: Generate policy action ˆxt ← πθ (st, f gt )

5: Retarget glove input xref from ht

6: Compute DAIM weight α(k) based on dynamics and step 7: Fuse actions: ˜xk = ˆ xk + α(k)( xref − ˆxk )

8: Execute action ˜xK on the hand 9: end for 

10: end procedure 19 

## References 

1. Chao, X., Mu, S., Liu, Y., Li, S., Lyu, C., Zhang, X.P., Ding, W.: Exo-viha: A cross-platform exoskeleton system with visual and haptic feedback for efficient dexterous skill learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01543 (2025) 2. Chen, Y., Geng, Y., Zhong, F., Ji, J., Jiang, J., Lu, Z., Dong, H., Yang, Y.: Bi-dexhands: Towards human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation. IEEE Trans-actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) 46 (5), 2804–2818 (2023) 3. Chen, Y., Yang, Y., Wu, T., Wang, S., Feng, X., Jiang, J., Lu, Z., McAleer, S.M., Dong, H., Zhu, S.C.: Towards human-level bimanual dexterous manipula-tion with reinforcement learning. In: Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS) (2022) 4. Chen, Z., Chen, S., Arlaud, E., Laptev, I., Schmid, C.: Vividex: Learning vision-based dexterous manipulation from human videos. In: International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 3336–3343 (2025) 5. Chen, Z., Yan, Q., Chen, Y., Wu, T., Zhang, J., Ding, Z., Li, J., Yang, Y., Dong, H.: Clutterdexgrasp: A sim-to-real system for general dexterous grasping in cluttered scenes. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) (2025) 6. Cheng, X., Li, J., Yang, S., Yang, G., Wang, X.: Open-television: Teleoperation with immersive active visual feedback. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). pp. 2729–2749 (2025) 7. Chi, C., Xu, Z., Feng, S., Cousineau, E., Du, Y., Burchfiel, B., Tedrake, R., Song, S.: Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR) (2023) 8. Dong, Y., Liu, X., Wan, J., Deng, Z.: Gex: Democratizing dexterity with fully-actuated dexterous hand and exoskeleton glove. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.04982 (2025) 9. Fu, Y., Feng, Q., Chen, N., Zhou, Z., Liu, M., Wu, M., Chen, T., Rong, S., Liu, J., Dong, H., et al.: Cordvip: Correspondence-based visuomotor policy for dexterous manipulation in real-world. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) (2025) 10. Fu, Z., Zhao, T.Z., Finn, C.: Mobile aloha: Learning bimanual mobile manipula-tion using low-cost whole-body teleoperation. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) (2024) 11. Hagita, N., Kanai, R., Ishiguro, H., Minamizawa, K., Arai, F., Shimpo, F., Mat-sumura, T., Yamanishi, Y.: Cybernetic avatars: Teleoperation technologies from in-body monitoring to social interaction. Science Robotics 9(96), 1842 (2024) 12. Handa, A., Van Wyk, K., Yang, W., Liang, J., Chao, Y.W., Wan, Q., Birchfield, S., Ratliff, N., Fox, D.: Dexpilot: Vision-based teleoperation of dexterous robotic hand-arm system. In: International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 9164–9170 (2020) 13. He, T., Luo, Z., Xiao, W., Zhang, C., Kitani, K., Liu, C., Shi, G.: Learning human-to-humanoid real-time whole-body teleoperation. In: International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 8944–8951 (2024) 14. Hess, A., Kübler, A.M., Forrai, B., Dogar, M., Katzschmann, R.K.: Sampling-based model predictive control for dexterous manipulation on a biomimetic tendon-driven hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.06183 (2024) 15. Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P.: Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In: Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS). pp. 6840–6851 (2020) 20 16. Honerkamp, D., Mahesheka, H., von Hartz, J.O., Welschehold, T., Valada, A.: Whole-body teleoperation for mobile manipulation at zero added cost. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L) (2025) 17. Huang, J., Chen, K., Zhou, J., Lin, X., Abbeel, P., Dou, Q., Liu, Y.: Dih-tele: Dexterous in-hand teleoperation framework for learning multiobjects manipulation with tactile sensing. IEEE Transactions on Mechatronics (TMech) (2025) 18. Jiang, Y., Yu, M., Zhu, X., Tomizuka, M., Li, X.: Contact-implicit model predictive control for dexterous in-hand manipulation: A long-horizon and robust approach. In: International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 5260– 5266 (2024) 19. Lan, F., Wang, S., Zhang, Y., Xu, H., Oseni, O.O., Zhang, Z., Gao, Y., Zhang, T.: Dexcatch: Learning to catch arbitrary objects with dexterous hands. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) (2024) 20. Li, K., Li, P., Liu, T., Li, Y., Huang, S.: Maniptrans: Efficient dexterous biman-ual manipulation transfer via residual learning. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR). pp. 6991–7003 (2025) 21. Li, S., Hendrich, N., Liang, H., Ruppel, P., Zhang, C., Zhang, J.: A dexterous hand-arm teleoperation system based on hand pose estimation and active vision. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics (TCYB) 54 (3), 1417–1428 (2022) 22. Li, S., Huang, Z., Chen, T., Du, T., Su, H., Tenenbaum, J.B., Gan, C.: Dexdeform: Dexterous deformable object manipulation with human demonstrations and differ-entiable physics. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2023) 23. Liang, Z., Mu, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, T., Shao, W., Zhan, W., Tomizuka, M., Luo, P., Ding, M.: Dexhanddiff: Interaction-aware diffusion planning for adaptive dexterous manipulation. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR). pp. 1745–1755 (2025) 24. Liu, X., Adalibieke, J., Han, Q., Qin, Y., Yi, L.: Dextrack: Towards generalizable neural tracking control for dexterous manipulation from human references. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) 25. Salehian, S.S.M., Khoramshahi, M., Billard, A.: A dynamical system approach for softly catching a flying object: Theory and experiment. IEEE Transactions on Robotics (T-RO) 32 (2), 462–471 (2016) 26. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O.: Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017) 27. Wang, Q., Zhang, H., Deng, C., You, Y., Dong, H., Zhu, Y., Guibas, L.: Sparsedff: Sparse-view feature distillation for one-shot dexterous manipulation. In: Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2024) 28. Wang, R., Zhang, J., Chen, J., Xu, Y., Li, P., Liu, T., Wang, H.: Dexgraspnet: A large-scale robotic dexterous grasp dataset for general objects based on simulation. In: International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 11359– 11366 (2023) 29. Wen, R., Zhang, J., Chen, G., Cui, Z., Du, M., Gou, Y., Han, Z., Hu, J., Huang, L., Niu, H., et al.: Dexterous teleoperation of 20-dof bytedexter hand via human motion retargeting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03227 (2025) 30. Xia, J., Li, Y., Zhu, Y., Wu, H., Wang, Y.: A teleoperation system for dexter-ous hand control. In: International Joint Conference on Robotics and Artificial Intelligence (JCRAI). pp. 216–221 (2024) 31. Yang, R., Chen, G., Wen, C., Gao, Y.: Fp3: A 3d foundation policy for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08950 (2025) 21 32. Yin, Z.H., Wang, C., Pineda, L., Bodduluri, K., Wu, T., Abbeel, P., Mukadam, M.: Geometric retargeting: A principled, ultrafast neural hand retargeting algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07541 (2025) 33. Yin, Z.H., Wang, C., Pineda, L., Hogan, F., Bodduluri, K., Sharma, A., Lancaster, P., Prasad, I., Kalakrishnan, M., Malik, J., et al.: Dexteritygen: Foundation con-troller for unprecedented dexterity. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) (2025) 34. Yuan, H., Zhou, B., Fu, Y., Lu, Z.: Cross-embodiment dexterous grasping with reinforcement learning. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) 35. Ze, Y., Zhang, G., Zhang, K., Hu, C., Wang, M., Xu, H.: 3d diffusion policy: Gen-eralizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) (2024) 36. Zhang, H., Hu, S., Yuan, Z., Xu, H.: Doglove: Dexterous manipulation with a low-cost open-source haptic force feedback glove. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07730 (2025)