Title: Reconfiguration of supernumerary robotic limbs for human augmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29808v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 01:21:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Reconfiguration of supernumerary robotic limbs for human augmentation 

## Mustafa Mete 1†, Anastasia Bolotnikova 1,2 †, Alexander Sch¨ ußler 1†,Jamie Paik 1* 

> 1

Reconfigurable Robotics Lab, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. 

> 2

Laboratory for Analysis and Architecture of Systems (LAAS), CNRS, Toulouse, France. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): jamie.paik@epfl.ch; Contributing authors: a.mustafamete@gmail.com; anastasia.bolotnikova@laas.fr; alexander.schuessler@epfl.ch; 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

Wearable robots aim to seamlessly adapt to humans and their environment with personalized interactions. Existing supernumerary robotic limbs (SRLs), which enhance the physical capabilities of humans with additional extremities, have thus far been developed primarily for task-specific applications in structured industrial settings, limiting their adaptability to dynamic and unstructured envi-ronments. Here, we introduce a novel reconfigurable SRL framework grounded in a quantitative analysis of human augmentation to guide the development of more adaptable SRLs for diverse scenarios. This framework captures how SRL config-uration shapes workspace extension and human–robot collaboration. We define human augmentation ratios to evaluate collaborative, visible extended, and non-visible extended workspaces, enabling systematic selection of SRL placement, morphology, and autonomy for a given task. Using these metrics, we demonstrate how quantitative augmentation analysis can guide the reconfiguration and control of SRLs to better match task requirements. We validate the proposed approach through experiments with a reconfigurable SRL composed of origami-inspired modular elements. Our results suggest that reconfigurable SRLs, informed by quantitative human augmentation analysis, offer a new perspective for providing adaptable human augmentation and assistance in everyday environments. 

Keywords: Human augmentation, Wearable robots, Robot design 

1

> arXiv:2603.29808v1 [cs.RO] 31 Mar 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Human augmentation with robotics focuses on extending the physical capabilities of humans beyond natural limitations for applications such as assistive robotics [1–4], surgery [5, 6], manufacturing [7–9], and space exploration [10, 11] (Fig. 1). 

Supernumerary robotic limbs (SRLs) are wearable robotic devices that extend human physical capabilities by adding artificial limbs to the human body [12–14]. These SRLs include additional fingers [15–20], arms [8–10, 21–27], tails [28], and legs [7, 29, 30]. Yet, current SRLs are primarily limited to structured industrial or laboratory environments due to challenges in adapting to different operators and environments under dynamic and unstructured conditions. Most existing SRLs are made mainly from rigid, bulky components, which limits their adaptability to the human body and the surrounding environment. This raises safety concerns and reduces wearability and user comfort in daily use. Researchers address this challenge by introducing soft SRLs [31–34], offering enhanced safety thanks to their inherent material-based compliance. However, these SRLs, made of fully soft bodies and actuators, suffer from significant undesired deformations, which pose control challenges, and they can be bulky due to components such as fluidic cables, valves, and compressors. As an alternative, researchers propose folding-based soft SRLs for more compact, lightweight, and structurally reconfigurable SRL designs [35–40], which improve SRL wearability and storage. However, optimal placement of these SRLs on the human body, as well as adaptation of their control to different configurations, scenarios, and tasks, remains a challenge. Previous research includes various control interfaces for SRLs, spanning a spectrum with two extreme cases: fully manual and fully autonomous control. We define fully manual control as control of each SRL degree of freedom (DoF) through human inten-tion for a specific task, whereas fully autonomous control refers to the SRL planning and taking actions for a task autonomously using embedded sensors, actuators, and processors. Control methods between these two extremes combine intention-detection interfaces with autonomous control. Manual control methods can generally be grouped into two categories [14, 41]: null-space control and skill-transfer control. In null-space control, users utilize DoFs that are not used for natural movement to control the SRLs. This enables true full-DoF extension of the human plus the SRL. Researchers explore neural interfaces [42, 43], muscular interfaces such as the diaphragm [21] and auricular muscles [44], and kine-matic interfaces such as arm motion [45] and fingertip forces [46]. However, the total motor-task null space is limited. When the task requires more DoFs than available null-space interfaces, users re-use existing body DoFs that are irrelevant to the desired task to control the SRL; this is referred to as skill-transfer control. Existing skill-transfer interfaces include joysticks [31], foot interfaces [15, 23, 24, 47], and electromyography (EMG) sensors [19, 48]. Both manual control methods require sensory feedback to exe-cute a task and impose a high cognitive load on the human operator during complex tasks. Autonomous control strategies, on the other hand, reduce the required control DoFs and cognitive load for human operators by autonomously executing entire tasks or sub-tasks, such as object detection [43, 49] and force assistance [47]. Although 2Fig. 1 Human augmentation with reconfigurable supernumerary robotic limbs. Human augmentation through supernumerary robotic limbs (SRLs) has the potential to provide personalized assistance across diverse scenarios. SRLs enhance human manipulation capabilities by enabling tasks such as object stabilization when the user’s arms are occupied. They support dentists and surgeons by facilitating multi-arm procedures and improving productivity in industrial contexts, such as crop planting. Reconfigurable SRLs adapt their morphology, placement, and level of autonomy to the task and scenario, providing assistance that ranges from manual to fully autonomous task execution. 

these strategies may offer significant benefits for full-DoF extension, they can fail in tasks requiring continuous knowledge of human intention and may reduce the sense of embodiment of extra limbs. Therefore, the ability to select across the spectrum of manual and autonomous control for different tasks remains necessary and is an ongoing challenge for SRL adaptability under unknown conditions. This study presents reconfigurable SRLs that adapt to varying users and tasks by introducing a human augmentation analysis and an SRL reconfiguration and control strategy. In the augmentation analysis, we quantify the extended and collaborative manipulation workspace of natural arms and SRLs as a function of SRL morphology, placement, and natural human sensory input, such as visual feedback. This analysis informs the reconfiguration and control strategies for adaptable SRLs. In the recon-figuration and control strategies, we choose the SRL structure, spatial distribution, placement on the body, and the level of autonomy between manual and autonomous control based on different users and tasks. To validate our approach on a real system, we propose a modular, origami-inspired robotic arm that provides high mechanical reconfigurability and improved wearability with a lightweight, compact form factor. Our quantitative experimental results validate the adaptability of the proposed SRL 3approach across tasks and scenarios, such as object picking, manipulation, and stabi-lization. By introducing adaptability to SRLs, our approach offers a new perspective on human augmentation and assistance in everyday environments (Fig. 1, Movie S1). 

# 2 Results 

## 2.1 Human Augmentation Analysis 

To effectively reconfigure SRL morphology, choose SRL placement on the human body, and select an appropriate control strategy, it is essential to understand and quan-tify SRL interaction with the human sensorimotor system. Prior work has studied workspace analysis of SRLs and the human wearer to inform SRL design [50, 51]. Yet, analyzing limb workspaces alone is not sufficient for selecting an optimal control method. To determine whether sensorimotor control of SRLs is feasible, we must know whether sufficient sensory feedback about the SRL position and state is available to perform a given task. We introduce a general human augmentation analysis that determines extended and collaborative workspaces while accounting for the human sensory-feedback workspace. For sensory feedback, we focus on visual feedback because it is a primary modality informing the user about the SRL position and state. Feedback could also be provided through other modalities, such as tactile feedback, or other sensing methods embedded in the SRL and conveyed to the human sensorimotor system. In such cases, the sensory-feedback workspace can be updated to incorporate the additional sensory information. We define the following workspaces. The augmented human workspace A is the union of the human arms workspace H and the SRL workspace R. The collabora-tive workspace C, defined as the intersection of R and H, is where collaborative tasks requiring two- or three-handed manipulation can be achieved. The visible extended workspace EV corresponds to the portion of the SRL workspace that extends the human workspace within the wearer’s visual field V , whereas the non-visible extended workspace ENV corresponds to the portion that extends the human workspace out-side the visual field V . In EV and C, the wearer can receive visual feedback and can therefore achieve sensorimotor control of the SRL. In contrast, in ENV , the wearer lacks visual feedback about the SRL and the task. Therefore, sensorimotor control is challenging and unreliable without additional feedback; thus autonomous control is typically required. This decomposition separates SRL workspace into regions where closed-loop human control is feasible versus regions better suited for autonomous behaviors. For the augmentation-ratio analysis, we consider SRLs as modular units with n

modules and kinematics M . We quantify the augmentation ratios as follows: 4re(n, M ) = A(n, M )

H ,re,v (n, M ) = EV (n, M ) ∪ HH ,rc(n, M ) = C(n, M )

H .

(1) The relations between the workspaces are formalized as follows: 

A = R ∪ H, C = R ∩ H, R = C ∪ EV ∪ ENV ,EV = ( R \ H) ∩ V, ENV = R \ (EV ∪ H). (2) The extension ratio, re, compares the augmented workspace A with the natural human workspace H and estimates the overall augmentation provided by a given SRL configuration. We also compute the visible extension ratio, re,v , which includes only the visible extended workspace EV together with H. The collaboration ratio, rc,measures how much of the SRL workspace overlaps with H, approximating the space in which collaborative tasks between the human arms and the SRL are possible. We also define the workspace ratios , wi,n , as a function of the number of modules 

n (from 1 to N ): 

wi,n = iR : i ∈ { C, E V, E NV }, n ∈ { 1, 2, ..., N }, X

> i

wi,n = 1 .0. (3) These ratios describe the relative distribution of C, EV, and ENV within R.In summary, the human augmentation ratios and SRL workspace ratios quan-tify workspace extension and collaboration across SRL configurations. The proposed reconfiguration and control strategy uses these quantities to adapt SRL structure and control accordingly. 

## 2.2 Reconfiguration Strategy 

Adapting SRL configurations to different tasks, as well as to distinct human kinemat-ics, requires a comprehensive strategy. We introduce a strategy that reconfigures the placement p and the number of modules n of the SRL based on the required reach-ability and task type. The human augmentation analysis provides the basis for this reconfiguration. To determine the optimal placement and configuration of the Robogami Third Arm for the desired task types, we run the augmentation analysis for our reconfigurable SRL (see ‘Robogami Third Arm: Design and Capacity’ in Methods) when attached to different locations on the body. We select four locations as examples (the chest, back, front of the leg, and side of the leg as seen in Fig. 2A) because these attachment scenarios span different combinations of collaborative workspace C, visible extended workspace EV, and non-visible extended workspace ENV , thereby capturing a range of augmentation tasks enabled by the SRL. 5A

> n=8 24p2

HE NV 

> 5

C

Supernumerary robotic limb configurations on the human body 

Leg front placement (p 3 )Back placement (p 2)

B Human augmentation ratios    

> Collaborative workspace ( C)
> Visible extended workspace ( EV)
> Human visual field ( V)
> Non-visible extended workspace ( ENV )
> Human workspace ( H)
> 25n=6 p3

EVCH 

> n=8 542p1

HC EV

Leg side placement (p 4 )   

> 25n=6 p4

EVCHENV 

Chest placement (p 1)Chest (p 1 )Leg side (p 4 )Back (p 2 )Human only (H) Leg front (p 3)Extension ratio r e1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Number of modules n Chest (p 1 )Leg side (p 4 )Back (p 2 )Human only (H) Leg front (p 3)Visible extension ratio r e,v 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Number of modules n Collaboration ratio r c0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Number of modules n Chest (p 1 )Leg side (p 4 )Back (p 2 )Leg front (p 3)

VV VVFig. 2 Human augmentation analysis. Different tasks and scenarios require varying configura-tions of SRLs. This analysis quantifies the impact of varying placement pj and morphology (number of modules n) of the SRL, as well as the human visual field V on human augmentation. ( A) The 4 different SRL configurations on the human body, which capture the range of potential augmentation tasks enabled by the SRL. The SRL is placed on the chest p1, back p2, front of the leg p3, and side of the leg p4. ( B) The human augmentation ratios as a function of the number of modules n for the 4 SRL configurations: Extension ratio re, visible extension ratio re,v , and collaboration ratio rc.

We calculate the augmentation ratios (Fig. 2B) for these scenarios using the Robogami Third Arm (with module kinematics M ) as a function of the number of modules n. These ratios are computed via a kinematics-based analysis of the human and Robogami Third Arm workspaces, where workspace volumes are estimated using the Robogami Third Arm’s forward kinematics and an average human body model. While we use average anthropometric data for the human model, the same calculation can be adapted to an individual user’s body dimensions. Details on the SRL workspace calculation are presented in the Methods (see ‘SRL Workspace Calculation’). The augmentation ratios highlight variability and trade-offs in workspace extension and human-SRL collaboration across attachment locations. 6We compute the workspace ratios, wi,n , to create workspace diagrams for the different SRL placements pj (Fig. 3). These diagrams provide the necessary insight to select the minimum number of modules required for the desired task types. For the chest scenario, p1, the workspace ratio for the collaborative workspace C

is wC = 1 .0 for n ≤ 4 modules (Fig. 3A). For n > 4, the Robogami Third Arm length exceeds the human arm length, and the robot workspace R consists of a combina-tion of collaborative workspace and visible extended workspace, R = C ∪ EV. As n

increases, the workspace ratio for the collaborative workspace, wC, decreases, while the workspace ratio for the visible extended workspace, wEV , increases. Thus, tasks that require extension of the human workspace require n > 4 modules. For the back scenario, p2, the workspace ratio for the non-visible extended workspace ENV is wENV = 1 .0 for n ≤ 6 (Fig. 3B). For n > 6 modules, the Robogami Third Arm reaches the human arms workspace H and begins to include a collabora-tive workspace. Thus, tasks that require both workspace extension and collaboration with the human arms require n > 6 modules. For placement on the front of the leg, p3, the robot workspace R consists of a combination of collaborative workspace and visible extended workspace, R = C ∪ EV.In contrast, for placement on the side of the leg, p4, the robot workspace R includes all three workspace types, R = C ∪EV ∪ENV . While visual feedback is available across the SRL workspace when placed at p3, it is not available for the ENV portion when placed at p4.In summary, reconfiguration based on the workspace ratios wi,n dictates SRL morphology and placement depending on the desired task and scenario. The human augmentation analysis ensures that reconfiguration decisions are grounded in aquantitative evaluation. 

## 2.3 Reconfigurable Supernumerary Robotic Limb 

SRL efficacy in dynamic and unstructured environments requires appropriate place-ment and storage across diverse locations on the human body without hindering the wearer’s movement. Therefore, SRLs should be lightweight, compact, and adaptable in placement and morphology. To address these challenges, we introduce a reconfig-urable SRL, referred to as the Robogami Third Arm , which leverages structural and spatial reconfiguration to enhance SRL adaptability (Movie S2). The Robogami Third Arm consists of origami-inspired robotic modules with 3 DoF [35, 36, 52, 53]. Each module’s parallel kinematic structure combines the Canfield joint principle with three origami waterbomb legs (Fig. S1). This origami-inspired design offers advantages in lightweight construction and reconfigurability compared with rigid SRLs. With an extension ratio of 3.5 between minimum and maximum SRL length, and a load-to-weight ratio of 2 using two modules, the Robogami Third Arm outperforms rigid SRLs and is comparable to current soft SRLs (Tab. S1). Its weight of 150-250 g per module improves wearer comfort and enables placement on various parts of the body, such as the chest, back, or leg. Structural reconfiguration from a flat state to an extended state improves wearability and usability in everyday scenarios. This reconfiguration also enables compact storage of the Robogami Third Arm on the body (Fig. S2). 7Workspace ratios w i,n 1.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 21 3 4 5 6 7 8Number of modules n 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0       

> 21345678

Number of modules n Workspace ratios w i,n 1.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Back placement (p 2)Chest placement (p 1)A B      

> 21345678

Number of modules n Workspace ratios w i,n 1.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Leg front placement (p 3)C      

> 21345678

Number of modules n Workspace ratios w i,n 1.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Leg side placement (p 4)D

wC,5 = 0.86 w EV,5 = 0.14 wENV,5 = 0.0 Increasing EV

CE V  

> Collaborative workspace ( C)Visible extended workspace ( EV)Non-visible extended workspace ( ENV )

SRL intersects with human workspace ( H)

CENV 

SRL exceeds length of human workspace ( H)

EV

C

Increasing EV

ENV 

CEV

SRL exceeds human workspace ( H) Increasing E V

Increasing C

SRL exceeds length of human workspace ( H)Fig. 3 Workspace analysis to inform the reconfiguration strategy. The SRL configuration, defined by the placement p and the number of modules n, must be selected according to the scenario and task requirements. Workspace analysis supports this selection by computing workspace ratios 

wi,n for the collaborative workspace ( C), the visible extended workspace ( EV), and the non-visible extended workspace ( ENV ). The 4 SRL configurations ( p1-p4) on the human body, that capture the range of potential augmentation tasks enabled by the SRL, are analyzed ( A-D). 

To spatially reconfigure the Robogami Third Arm for adaptation to different sce-narios and tasks, we leverage its modularity. Prior research has explored parallel distributions of Robogami modules [54, 55]; in contrast, this work uses a serial dis-tribution to construct the Robogami Third Arm. By stacking modules in series, we create Robogami arms of variable length (Fig. S3). Overall, the Robogami Third Arm combines structural and spatial reconfiguration through origami-inspired design and modularity to adapt to dynamic and unstructured environments. Further details on the Robogami Third Arm design and capacity are provided in ‘Robogami Third Arm: Design and Capacity’ in Methods. 82.4 Adaptable Control Strategy 

Effective task execution, either independently or in coordination with the human’s natural limbs, requires a control strategy that adapts to varying SRL configura-tions, scenarios, and tasks. Therefore, we introduce an adaptable control strategy that accounts for the SRL’s number of modules n, attachment location p, and kinematic constraints. This strategy consists of three components (Fig. 4A): (i) the reconfiguration strat-egy, (ii) level-of-autonomy selection, and (iii) the control policy. The reconfiguration strategy and the level-of-autonomy selection use the quantified human augmentation analysis together with task requirements to determine the SRL configuration and an appropriate autonomy level. Finally, the control policy uses the control-interface input 

u to generate and execute joint trajectories ( θd, ˙θd) for the SRL. To select the level of autonomy , we leverage the human augmentation anal-ysis together with task requirements. We divide tasks into collaborative and non-collaborative categories with task spaces TC and TN C , respectively, whose union defines the full task space T = TC ∪ TN C . For collaborative tasks, the SRL must coor-dinate closely with the natural limbs, requiring high-fidelity intention detection; thus, manual control is preferred. Non-collaborative tasks can be executed primarily by the SRL, enabling multitasking. For these tasks, either manual or autonomous control can be used depending on the availability of sensory feedback and the user’s preference. Based on the augmentation analysis, the user selects a suitable body position and reconfigures the SRL by adjusting its attachment location p and number of modules 

n to satisfy two conditions: (i) the collaborative task space must lie within the col-laborative workspace, and (ii) the overall task space must lie within the augmented workspace. If no SRL configuration satisfies these conditions, the user must change position relative to the task and repeat the search for a feasible configuration: 

TC ⊂ C and T ⊂ A (4) Given a feasible configuration, we select the autonomy level based on task type and sensory feedback. If the task is collaborative and TC ⊂ C, we select manual control because high intention detection is required. If the task is non-collaborative and lies in the non-visible extended workspace, TN C ⊂ ENV , we select autonomous control because sensory feedback is unavailable and explicit intention detection is not required. In the remaining cases, both manual and autonomous control are feasible; the user can bias toward autonomous control to reduce cognitive load or toward manual control to increase intentionality and the sense of embodiment. To demonstrate the proposed reconfiguration and adaptable control strategies, we consider three task scenarios (Fig. 4B): (i) holding and stabilizing a coffee cup while manipulating other objects with the natural hands, (ii) picking up objects from the floor and transferring them to the natural hands, and (iii) stirring a Swiss fondue while chopping other ingredients with the natural hands (Movie S3). While SRLs can support many tasks, these scenarios span different task types and task-space requirements, enabling validation of the proposed strategy. 9Robogami Third Arm 

(with 2 modules) 

θ, θ 

Reconfiguration strategy  

> Manual Autonomous

Level of autonomy selection 

SRL configuration 

θd, θ d

Control policy 

(θ d ,θ d  = f(u) 

> 50 Hz

Control input u

Joint space Scenario & task requirements 

Scenario & task Control strategy B Three task scenarios 

CT NC H V

Cup stabilization 

E V

C TCH VT NC 

Object picking 

> Human visual field ( V)
> Human workspace ( H)
> Non-collaborative task space ( TNC )Collaborative workspace ( C)
> Visible extended workspace ( EV)
> Non-visible extended workspace ( ENV )
> Collaborative task space ( TC)

Fondue stirring 

T NC H VENV A

> n=2 n=2 n=3

Fig. 4 Adaptable control strategy. (A) Overview of the adaptable control strategy and its main components: the reconfiguration strategy to determine the SRL configuration based on scenario and task requirements; the selection of the appropriate autonomy level; and the control policy to control the Robogami Third Arm. ( B) Three exemplary task scenarios demonstrating the reconfiguration and adaptable control strategy for selecting the SRL configuration and autonomy level. 

Stabilizing a cup is a non-collaborative task and can be performed without inter-fering with natural-arm actions. We attach the Robogami Third Arm with n = 2 modules to the chest. This configuration allows the SRL to hold the cup steady (e.g., to prevent spilling) and to position it within reach of the user’s mouth if desired. For 10 this placement, the robot workspace is dominated by the collaborative workspace, with 

wmax = wC = 1 .0. Because the configuration lies within the collaborative workspace, it also permits transferring the cup to a natural hand. Although both manual and autonomous control are feasible, we use autonomous control in this scenario to reduce cognitive load while enabling multitasking. Picking objects from the floor and transferring them to the natural hands is a collaborative task that requires coordination with the user’s arms. Because the task space lies below the body, we place the SRL on the front of the leg, which provides favorable coverage of the lower workspace with a small number of modules, thereby maintaining a higher payload capability. We attach the Robogami Third Arm with 

n = 3 modules to the leg, resulting in wC = 0 .21 and wmax = wEV = 0 .79. Since the task requires collaboration, we use manual control through a custom joystick interface, implemented as a miniaturized and sensorized version of the Robogami modules (Fig. S4, ’Robogami Third Arm: Design and Capacity’ in Methods). Stirring while simultaneously preparing ingredients is non-collaborative and is pri-marily intended to enable multitasking. We mount the SRL on the back to spatially separate the SRL task space from the natural-hand task space, reducing the risk of interference. Using n = 2 modules on the back yields a robot workspace dominated by the non-visible extended workspace, with wmax = wENV = 1 .0. We therefore use autonomous control for this scenario due to the limited visual feedback. In summary, the adaptable control strategy couples SRL reconfiguration with autonomy selection by mapping task requirements to the augmented workspace clas-sification. By ensuring task feasibility through TC ⊂ C and T ⊂ A, and selecting manual or autonomous control based on collaboration needs and sensory feedback availability, the strategy enables task-dependent SRL operation across placements and configurations. 

## 2.5 Control Policy Evaluation 

Kinematic modeling of the Robogami Third Arm becomes significantly more complex as the number of modules, n, increase, making it challenging to derive a closed-form inverse-kinematics solution required to generate robot motions. Additionally, due to kinematic redundancy, the system often presents infinitely many joint config-urations that achieve a desired end-effector pose. Consequently, purely model-based inverse-kinematics approaches are not scalable with increasing n and end-effector DoF requirements. To address these scalability issues while accounting for internal and external constraints, we employ a quadratic-programming (QP)-based control policy that explicitly incorporates the number of modules n and the kinematic con-straints of reconfigurable SRLs. QP-based control has proven effective for real-time control of multi-robot systems and reconfigurable robots with changing morphology [56, 57]. The proposed formulation jointly handles internal constraints, such as closed-chain kinematics and folding hinge limits, as well as external constraints, such as self-collision avoidance, while producing joint-level position and velocity commands. The QP-based controller accepts commands from either autonomous motion planners or manual control interfaces and computes the required joint motion, which is then tracked by a PID-based joint position and velocity controller (Fig. S5). Further details 11 ACBTimeframes of stabilization experiment SRL end effector angle trajectory over time Human torso angle trajectory over time 

t1 t3 Stationary Pitch forward Pitch backward Roll right Roll left 0Time (s) 60 Roll 40 20 0-20 -40 -60 Human torso angle (deg) Pitch 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Roll Pitch 60 40 20 0-20 -40 -60 SRL end effector angle (deg) 0Time (s) 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 

t3 t4 t5t1 t5t4t3t2 t5t4t1 t3t2t2Fig. 5 Control policy evaluation through object stabilization. The closed-loop performance of the control policy is evaluated using an object stabilization experiment (cup holding). ( A) Rep-resentative time steps from the human-in-the-loop stabilization experiment. The participant applies disturbances to the end effector in pitch (t2 and t3) and roll (t4 and t5). ( B) Torso angle of the par-ticipant over time, indicating the applied disturbances during the experiment. ( C) End-effector angle of the SRL, the Robogami Third Arm, over time in response to the human-applied disturbances. 

on the QP-based formulation are provided in ‘Quadratic Programming-based Control Policy: Formulation’ in Methods. We validate the closed-loop control performance of the proposed policy through an object stabilization experiment (Fig. 5, Movie S4). The goal is to maintain the end-effector orientation parallel to the ground under external disturbances. This exper-iment resembles scenarios in which an SRL holds a cup containing liquid and must prevent spilling while the human wearer moves. For this experiment, we formulate the QP-based control policy with a multi-objective function that aims to minimize the error between the end effector orientation and a world-frame orientation set on the ground. We utilize a motion capture system (Vicon Vero, USA) for tracking the human torso orientation, the Robogami Third Arm’s end effector orientation, and the world frame orientation set on the ground. 12 The Robogami Third Arm is worn by a human subject to create external disturbances through rotations around the human torso (Fig. 5A). The human subject rotated their torso with a pitch angle of approximate 40 ◦ in positive (t2) and negative rotation direction (t3), as well as a roll angle of approximate 40 ◦ in positive (t4) and negative rotation direction (t5) (Fig. 5B). During the human disturbances, the absolute error of the end effector roll angle is (4 .2±4.5) ◦ and reaches a maximum absolute angle of 27 ◦ (Fig. 5C). The absolute error of the pitch angle is (3 .0 ± 3.4) ◦ and reaches a maximum absolute angle of 18 ◦.In summary, the end effector stabilization results show that the QP-based control policy is able to effectively control the Robogami Third Arm with external distur-bances, such as movements of the human wearer, while taking into account the number of modules n and the kinematic constraints of the Robogami Third Arm. The experi-ments highlight the potential of QP-based control for achieving safe and complex task execution with reconfigurable SRLs. 

# 3 Discussion 

This study advances SRLs toward operation in dynamic, unstructured settings by cou-pling a quantitative augmentation model with reconfiguration and adaptable control. We introduce a human augmentation analysis that quantifies how SRL morphol-ogy, placement, and the wearer’s available sensory feedback shape the augmented workspace, with vision as a primary channel. By classifying the SRL workspace into collaborative, visible extended, and non-visible extended regions, the framework links where the SRL can act to how it should be controlled. This workspace classifica-tion enables systematic comparisons across configurations using augmentation and workspace ratios, providing a quantitative basis for selecting SRL placement, length, and autonomy in a task-dependent manner. To demonstrate our approach, we present a compact, lightweight Robogami Third Arm built from origami-inspired modular units with intrinsic compliance. This design supports comfortable wearability across multiple on-body locations. Structural recon-figuration from a flat to an extended state enables unobtrusive on-body storage and rapid deployment, while serial modular stacking provides variable reach without redesigning the device. For control, we employ a quadratic-programming-based policy that remains scalable as the number of modules increases and that explicitly incor-porates internal and external constraints. Using the integrated reconfiguration and autonomy-selection strategy, we demonstrate task-dependent operation across three representative scenarios: coffee cup stabilization with the SRL mounted on the chest, pick-and-transfer of objects from the ground with the SRL mounted on the leg, and Swiss fondue stirring with the SRL mounted on the back. Several limitations motivate future work. First, our sensory-feedback modeling emphasizes vision; while this captures a dominant feedback pathway, additional modal-ities such as haptic cues, auditory feedback, or camera-based displays could expand the effective feedback workspace and shift the boundary between regions best suited for manual versus autonomous control. Second, our validation focuses primarily on 13 reachability-driven tasks; the analysis could be extended to incorporate payload lim-its, contact conditions, and task DoF requirements. Third, our workspace analysis and autonomy-selection rules are evaluated under assumptions about user pose/position and quasi-static postures during planning. Future work will extend the framework to real-time, dynamic scenarios in which both the wearer and the task evolve over time. Overall, this work provides a quantitative approach to SRLs that can be configured and controlled for unstructured, everyday tasks. By explicitly linking SRL placement and morphology to workspace utility, feedback availability, and autonomy require-ments, the proposed framework moves SRLs beyond task-specific deployments toward adaptable augmentation that can be deployed where and when assistance is needed. 

# 4 Methods 

## SRL Workspace Calculation 

We calculate the workspaces for varying SRL configuration to perform the human augmentation analysis by utilizing the kinematic model of a human model and the SRL, as well as the human visual field model (Fig. S6). Based on the models, we compute point clouds for the human and robot workspace ( H and R) and the point cloud constraints for the human visual field space ( V ). We utilize the boolean equations (Equation 2) for the collaborative workspace, C, the visible extended workspace, EV,and the non-visible extended workspace, ENV to compute the point cloud for each workspace. The point clouds are then transformed into a convex polytope to calculate the volume of each workspace. For the evaluations, we use a human kinematic model with 4 DoF for each arm. These DoF include shoulder movements with 3 DoF and elbow movements with 1 DoF. Based on the functional range of motion for the elbow [58] and the shoulder [59], we define the joint limits for the kinematic model: 

θelbow ∈ [0 ◦, 130 ◦],θshoulder, adduction ∈ [−90 ◦, 25 ◦],θshoulder, abduction ∈ [0 ◦, 130 ◦],θshoulder, flexion-extension ∈ [0 ◦, 120 ◦].

(5) We based the bone length of the human kinematic model on average human body data taken from the NASA anthropometric source book [60]. However, the calculations can be adapted to the user’s specific body size. The human visual field space, V, is defined as the space in front of the human. We utilize the analytical model presented in prior work [36] to obtain the forward kinematic model fi(θ) of the Robogami module i as a transformation matrix Ti(θ). Based on matrix multiplication, we obtain the forward kinematic model of a complete Robogami Third Arm Tarm with n modules and the motor joint limits: 

Tarm =

> n

Y

> i=1

Ti(θ) : θ ∈ [5 ◦, 85 ◦]. (6) 14 Based on the Robogami Third Arm kinematic model, the Robogami Third Arm workspace can be calculated as a function of the number of modules n used. We uni-formly sample the joint space with 10000 samples for the human and 10000 samples for the Robogami Third Arm. For the human visual field space, we use the full space in front of the human, which are realized as positional constraints for the point clouds. We use k-dimensional trees to compute the intersections and differences between the point clouds. Subsequently, we convert the computed point clouds into convex poly-tope meshes to compute the volume of the different workspaces. The thresholds for the k-dimensional trees are selected, so that the reconstructed robot volume has a maximum difference of 10 % to the actual robot volume. 

## Robogami Third Arm: Design and Capacity 

The Robogami Third Arm, a reconfigurable SRL, comprises multiple modules with identical kinematics (Fig. S1). Each module utilizes 3 origami waterbomb legs that are connected together to build the parallel kinematic structure, similar to the structures used in prior work [35, 36, 52, 53]. The origami legs are a sandwich structure based on two rigid FR4 layers and a flexible polyimide layer in between, which are connected to each other using two adhesive layers activated through heat pressing. The legs enable the reconfiguration of the structure through actuation of motors (Dynamixel, Robotis) connected to each leg. We utilize motors with a stall torque of 1 .4 N m for modules with higher payload and motors with a stall torque of 0 .52 N m for lightweight modules with lower payload. To quantify the payload capacity of the Robogami Third Arm, we conduct pay-load experiments using the arm (with 1 to 3 modules) in a static, fully extended, straight-beam configuration (Fig. S7). This configuration represents the most challeng-ing orientation for the base motors, as it corresponds to the arm’s maximum extension and therefore generates the highest torque from the combined weight of the arm and the payload. We record the maximum payload of the Robogami Third Arm by increas-ing the attached weights until the maximum torque is reached. The end condition for the tests are one of the motors reach to maximum torque output cannot keep the arm straight or the arm mechanically fails. The experiments with straight-beam load case show a payload capacity of 3000 g for 1 module, 1000 g for 2 modules, and 300 g for 3 modules, while each module weighs 150-250 g. The Robogami Third Arm’s central controller unit (Arduino Due) performs the low-level joint control of the motors, coordinates the communication from and to the high-level control, and manages the current flow from the power supply (Fig. S8). The high-level QP-based controller runs on an external computer and sends the desired values to the central controller, where the low-level joint control moves the motors. Wireless communication with peripheral sensors, such as manual control interfaces, is achieved via Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) using a wireless ESP32 module connected to the central controller unit. For manual control of the Robogami Third Arm, we design a 3-DoF joystick based on a sensorized miniaturized version of the arm (Fig. S4). The joystick uses potentiometers to measure joint angles, enabling intuitive manual operation. 15 Finally, we designed a compact box for housing the power (6S lithium-polymer battery), control (Arduino Due), and communication peripherals (ESP32) to operate the Robogami Third Arm untethered on the human body (Fig. S9). 

## Quadratic Programming-based Control Policy: Formulation 

To generate the motion for reconfigurable SRL with varying configurations, the QP-based control policy for autonomous control comprises three main components: SRL module description, the control objective function, and control constraints. The SRL module description describes the SRL module’s structure and consists of a kinematic tree that details the dimensions of all module links and their interconnec-tions via joints. For the Robogami Third Arm, the origami-inspired waterbomb joints are modeled as three revolute joints with the same origin. Based on The control objective function describes the control task goal and consists of sev-eral weighted objectives or tasks. The primary task, always present in the objective function, is called the posture task, which specifies the preferred position for each joint of the module and ensures that the optimization problem is well-posed. The posture task typically has a low-weight in the objective function compared to other tasks. To represent the folding joints of the Robogami Third Arm, different weights are assigned to passive and active joints in the posture task. The weights assigned to passive joints are significantly lower than those assigned to the three main active joints of the Robogami module, ensuring that the QP solution is not significantly influenced by the posture task values of the passive joints. The second task is the end effector position and orientation task associated with an end effector point of the outermost module. Additional tasks may be included depending on the task and scenario, such as position or image-based visual servoing tasks for vision-based closed-loop end-effector control or trajectory tracking tasks. The control constraints describe the constraints to ensure safe control of the recon-figurable SRL. For the Robogami Third Arm, four constraints for each module ensure the proper representation of the module and its kinematic capabilities in the con-trol problem. First, two internal closed-loop fixed contact constraints to represent the closed-chain kinematics of the Robogami module [35, 36, 52, 53], as well as one virtual joint or fixed contact constraint with one free axis to allow the motion of a passive joint around the axes. The second constraint considers the active joint limits in terms of position, velocity, and acceleration for the three main active (controlled) joints of a module. The third constraint considers the motion limits of the origami-inspired fold-ing hinges to prevent overstretching and braking of the hinges. The fourth constraint considers self-collision avoidance to prevent the Robogami module from colliding with itself. In addition to the constraints for a single SRL module, fixed contact constraints between multiple SRL modules are defined. These constraints can be added or removed from the control problem formulation during runtime in case of reconfiguration of the Robogami Third Arm. 

Supplementary information. The supplementary information is available in a separate file. 16 Acknowledgements. We thank Kevin Holdcroft for his contributions to the design and fabrication of the wearable power supply unit for untethered operation of the Robogami Third Arm. We also thank Prof. Jingjing Li (University of Tsukuba) for her illustration work on Fig. 1. The image in Fig. 4 is courtesy of Jamani Caillet (EPFL Mediacom). This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation under the grant “Approaching Tangible Reality” (grant no. 204819). The study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee at EPFL (No. 096-2023). 

Author contributions. Conceptualization M.M., A.B., A.S., and J.P.; Funding acquisition J.P.; Investigation M.M., A.B., and A.S.; Methodology M.M., A.B., and A.S.; Software M.M., A.B. and A.S.; Supervision J.P.; Visualization M.M., A.B. and A.S.; Writing - original draft M.M., A.B. and A.S.; Writing - review & editing M.M., A.B., A.S., and J.P. 

Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests. 

Correspondence. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Jamie Paik. 

# References 

[1] Bergamasco, M., Herr, H.: Human–robot augmentation. Springer handbook of robotics, 1875–1906 (2016) [2] Gao, S., Chen, J., Xia, Y., Li, X., Ma, W., Yang, H., Li, J., Zhou, X., Jia, T., Xu, Y., Uchitel, J., Ta, D., Qi, P., Ge, J., Guo, Y., Qin, Y., Kang, I., Xu, W., Li, H., Chang, J., Zuo, S., Wang, S., Luo, S., Gionfrida, L., Hu, C., Dong, S., Guo, Y., Yuan, Y., Zhang, H., Chen, H., Pan, Y., Dai, C., Ren, Q., Loureiro, R., Carlson, T., Chen, W., Zhang, Y., Kyriacou, P., Heidari, H., Nazarpour, K., Prodromakis, T., Casson, A., Makin, T.R., Cauwenberghs, G., Farina, D., Zhao, H.: Wearable technologies for assisted mobility in the real world. Nature Communications 16 (1), 10988 (2025) [3] Ferroni, R., D’Avola, G., Sciarrone, G., Righi, G., De Santis, C., Carpaneto, J., Gandolla, M., Del Popolo, G., Micera, S., Proietti, T.: A multi-joint soft exosuit improves shoulder and elbow motor functions in individuals with spinal cord injury. Nature Machine Intelligence 7(9), 1390–1402 (2025) [4] Tricomi, E., Missiroli, F., Xiloyannis, M., Lotti, N., Zhang, X., Stefanakis, M., Theisen, M., Bauer, J., Becker, C., Masia, L.: Soft robotic shorts improve outdoor walking efficiency in older adults. Nature Machine Intelligence 6(10), 1145–1155 (2024) [5] Goldberg, K., Guthart, G.: Augmented dexterity: How robots can enhance human surgical skills. Science Robotics 9(95), 5247 (2024) [6] Abdi, E., Bouri, M., Himidan, S., Burdet, E., Bleuler, H.: Third Arm Manipula-tion for Surgical Applications: An Experimental Study, pp. 153–163 (2016) 17 [7] Parietti, F., Asada, H.: Supernumerary Robotic Limbs for Human Body Support. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 32 (2), 301–311 (2016) [8] Parietti, F., Asada, H.H.: Supernumerary robotic limbs for aircraft fuselage assembly: Body stabilization and guidance by bracing. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2014) [9] Parietti, F., Chan, K., Asada, H.H.: Bracing the human body with supernumer-ary robotic limbs for physical assistance and load reduction. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2014) [10] Ballesteros, E., Man, B., Asada, H.H.: Supernumerary robotic limbs for next generation space suit technology. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2023) (2023) [11] Ballesteros, E., Lee, S.-Y., Carpenter, K.C., Harry Asada, H.: Supernumer-ary Robotic Limbs to Support Post-Fall Recoveries for Astronauts. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 2324–2331 (2024) [12] Prattichizzo, D., Pozzi, M., Lisini Baldi, T., Malvezzi, M., Hussain, I., Rossi, S., Salvietti, G.: Human augmentation by wearable supernumerary robotic limbs: Review and perspectives. Progress in Biomedical Engineering 3(4), 042005 (2021) [13] Yang, B., Huang, J., Chen, X., Xiong, C., Hasegawa, Y.: Supernumerary Robotic Limbs: A Review and Future Outlook. IEEE Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics 3(3), 623–639 (2021) [14] Eden, J., Br¨ acklein, M., Ib´ a˜ nez, J., Barsakcioglu, D.Y., Di Pino, G., Farina, D., Burdet, E., Mehring, C.: Principles of human movement augmentation and the challenges in making it a reality. Nature Communications 13 (1), 1345 (2022) [15] Kieliba, P., Clode, D., Maimon-Mor, R.O., Makin, T.R.: Robotic hand augmen-tation drives changes in neural body representation. Science Robotics 6(54), 7935 (2021) [16] Clode, D., Dowdall, L., da Silva, E., Sel´ en, K., Cowie, D., Dominijanni, G., Makin, T.R.: Evaluating initial usability of a hand augmentation device across a large and diverse sample. Science Robotics 9(90), 5183 (2024) [17] Franco, L., Prattichizzo, D., Salvietti, G.: A manually actuated robotic supernu-merary finger to recover grasping capabilities. In: IEEE International Humani-tarian Technology Conference (IHTC), pp. 1–4 (2021). IEEE [18] Cunningham, J., Hapsari, A., Guilleminot, P., Shafti, A., Faisal, A.A.: The Super-numerary Robotic 3rd Thumb for Skilled Music Tasks. In: IEEE International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (Biorob), pp. 665–670 18 (2018) [19] Hussain, I., Salvietti, G., Spagnoletti, G., Prattichizzo, D.: The Soft-SixthFinger: A Wearable EMG Controlled Robotic Extra-Finger for Grasp Compensation in Chronic Stroke Patients. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 1(2), 1000–1006 (2016) [20] Hussain, I., Spagnoletti, G., Salvietti, G., Prattichizzo, D.: Toward wearable supernumerary robotic fingers to compensate missing grasping abilities in hemi-paretic upper limb. The International Journal of Robotics Research 36 (13-14), 1414–1436 (2017) [21] Dominijanni, G., Pinheiro, D.L., Pollina, L., Orset, B., Gini, M., Anselmino, E., Pierella, C., Olivier, J., Shokur, S., Micera, S.: Human motor augmentation with an extra robotic arm without functional interference. Science Robotics 8(85), 1438 (2023) [22] V´ eronneau, C., Denis, J., Lebel, L.-P., Denninger, M., Blanchard, V., Girard, A., Plante, J.-S.: Multifunctional remotely actuated 3-dof supernumerary robotic arm based on magnetorheological clutches and hydrostatic transmission lines. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), 2546–2553 (2020) [23] Saraiji, M.Y., Sasaki, T., Kunze, K., Minamizawa, K., Inami, M.: MetaArms: Body Remapping Using Feet-Controlled Artificial Arms. In: Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 65–74 (2018) [24] Sasaki, T., Saraiji, M.Y., Fernando, C.L., Minamizawa, K., Inami, M.: Met-aLimbs: Multiple arms interaction metamorphism. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2017 Emerging Technologies, pp. 1–2 (2017) [25] Llorens - Bonilla, B., Parietti, F., Asada, H.H.: Demonstration-based control of supernumerary robotic limbs. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3936–3942 (2012) [26] Zhang, Q., Li, C., Jing, H., Li, H., Li, X., Ju, H., Tang, Y., Zhao, J., Zhu, Y.: Rtsras: A series-parallel-reconfigurable tendon-driven supernumerary robotic arms. IEEE Robotics AND Automation Letters 7 (2022) [27] Yamamura, N., Uriu, D., Muramatsu, M., Kamiyama, Y., Kashino, Z., Sakamoto, S., Tanaka, N., Tanigawa, T., Onishi, A., Yoshida, S., Yamanaka, S., Inami, M.: Social Digital Cyborgs: The Collaborative Design Process of JIZAI ARMS. In: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–19 (2023) [28] Nabeshima, J., Saraiji, M.Y., Minamizawa, K.: Prosthetic Tail: Artificial Anthro-pomorphic Tail for Extending Innate Body Functions. In: Augmented Human International Conference 2019, pp. 1–4 (2019) 19 [29] Treers, L., Lo, R., Cheung, M., Guy, A., Guggenheim, J., Parietti, F., Asada, H.: Design and control of lightweight supernumerary robotic limbs for sitting/s-tanding assistance. In: International Symposium on Experimental Robotics, pp. 299–308 (2017) [30] Hao, M., Zhang, J., Chen, K., Asada, H., Fu, C.: Supernumerary Robotic Limbs to Assist Human Walking With Load Carriage. Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics 

12 (061014) (2020) [31] Nguyen, P.H., Sparks, C., Nuthi, S.G., Vale, N.M., Polygerinos, P.: Soft poly-limbs: Toward a new paradigm of mobile manipulation for daily living tasks. Soft Robotics 6, 38–53 (2019) [32] Nguyen, P.H., Mohd, I.I.B., Sparks, C., Arellano, F.L., Zhang, W., Polygerinos, P.: Fabric soft poly-limbs for physical assistance of daily living tasks. International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2019) [33] Ciullo, A.S., Veerbeek, J.M., Temperli, E., Luft, A.R., Tonis, F.J., Haarman, C.J.W., Ajoudani, A., Catalano, M.G., Held, J.P.O., Bicchi, A.: A Novel Soft Robotic Supernumerary Hand for Severely Affected Stroke Patients. IEEE Trans-actions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 28 (5), 1168–1177 (2020) [34] Zhang, T., Xu, J., Lu, Y., Zhao, M., Huang, K., Chen, B., Hou, X., Li, Y.: Design and Control of a Soft Supernumerary Robotic Limb Based on Fiber-Reinforced Actuator. In: 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 9167–9174 (2024) [35] Robertson, M.A., Can Kara, Paik, J.: Soft pneumatic actuator-driven origami-inspired modular robotic “pneumagami”. International Journal of Robotics Research 40 , 72–85 (2021) [36] Mete, M., Paik, J.: Closed-Loop Position Control of a Self-Sensing 3-DoF Origami Module With Pneumatic Actuators. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6(4), 8213–8220 (2021) [37] Kusunoki, M., Nguyen, L.V., Tsai, H.-R., Ho, V.A., Xie, H.: Scalable and foldable origami-inspired supernumerary robotic limbs for daily tasks. IEEE Access (2023) [38] Zhang, C., Zhang, Z., Peng, Y., Zhang, Y., An, S., Wang, Y., Zhai, Z., Xu, Y., Jiang, H.: Plug & play origami modules with all-purpose deformation modes. Nature Communications 14 (2023) [39] Liu, S., Zhu, Y., Zhang, Z., Fang, Z., Tan, J., Peng, J., Song, C., Asada, H.H., Wang, Z.: Otariidae-inspired soft-robotic supernumerary flippers by fabric kirigami and origami. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 26 , 2747–2757 (2021) 20 [40] Kim, J., Cha, Y.: Supernumerary Wearable Soft Manipulator With Modularized Origami Structures. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 1–11 (2025) [41] Dominijanni, G., Shokur, S., Salvietti, G., Buehler, S., Palmerini, E., Rossi, S., De Vignemont, F., d’Avella, A., Makin, T.R., Prattichizzo, D., Micera, S.: The neural resource allocation problem when enhancing human bodies with extra robotic limbs. Nature Machine Intelligence 3(10), 850–860 (2021) [42] Penaloza, C.I., Nishio, S.: BMI control of a third arm for multitasking. Science Robotics 3(20), 1228 (2018) [43] Tang, Z., Zhang, L., Chen, X., Ying, J., Wang, X., Wang, H.: Wearable Super-numerary Robotic Limb System Using a Hybrid Control Approach Based on Motor Imagery and Object Detection. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30 , 1298–1309 (2022) [44] Leal Pinheiro, D., Faber, J., Micera, S., Shokur, S.: Neuromuscular learning and control of auricular muscles for human–machine interfaces. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 02783649251390578 (2025) [45] Lisini Baldi, T., D’Aurizio, N., Gaudeni, C., Gurgone, S., Borzelli, D., d’Avella, A., Prattichizzo, D.: Exploiting body redundancy to control supernumerary robotic limbs in human augmentation. The International Journal of Robotics Research 44 (2), 291–316 (2025) [46] Guggenheim, J., Hoffman, R., Song, H., Asada, H.H.: Leveraging the Human Operator in the Design and Control of Supernumerary Robotic Limbs. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), 2177–2184 (2020) [47] Amanhoud, W., Hernandez Sanchez, J., Bouri, M., Billard, A.: Contact-initiated shared control strategies for four-arm supernumerary manipulation with foot interfaces. The International Journal of Robotics Research 40 (8-9), 986–1014 (2021) [48] Maimeri, M., Della Santina, C., Piazza, C., Rossi, M., Catalano, M.G., Grioli, G.: Design and Assessment of Control Maps for Multi-Channel sEMG-Driven Prostheses and Supernumerary Limbs. Frontiers in Neurorobotics 13 (2019) [49] Luo, J., Liu, S., Si, W., Zeng, C.: Enhancing Human–Robot Collaboration: Super-numerary Robotic Limbs for Object Balance. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 55 (2), 1334–1347 (2025) [50] Nakabayashi, K., Iwasaki, Y., Iwata, H.: Development of Evaluation Indexes for Human-Centered Design of a Wearable Robot Arm. In: International Conference on Human Agent Interaction, pp. 305–310. ACM, ??? (2017) [51] Liao, Z., Chen, B., Qian, Z., Chang, T., Bai, D., Liu, K., Xu, J.: Collaborative 21 workspace design of supernumerary robotic limbs base on multi-objective opti-mization. Journal of the Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering 

45 (7), 354 (2023) [52] Mintchev, S., Salerno, M., Cherpillod, A., Scaduto, S., Paik, J.: A portable three-degrees-of-freedom force feedback origami robot for human–robot interactions. Nature Machine Intelligence 1(12), 584–593 (2019) [53] Wang, Z., Demirtas, S., Zuliani, F., Paik, J.: Surface-based manipulation with modular foldable robots. npj Robotics 4(1), 3 (2026) [54] Salerno, M., Paik, J., Mintchev, S.: Ori-Pixel, a Multi-DoFs Origami Pixel for Modular Reconfigurable Surfaces. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(4), 6988–6995 (2020) [55] Jiang, Y., Asmar, S.E., Wang, Z., Demirtas, S., Paik, J.: CPG-Based Manipula-tion With Multi-Module Origami Robot Surface. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 10 (5), 4786–4793 (2025) [56] Bouyarmane, K., Chappellet, K., Vaillant, J., Kheddar, A.: Quadratic program-ming for multirobot and task-space force control. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 

35 (1), 64–77 (2018) [57] Bolotnikova, A., Holdcroft, K., Cerbone, H., Belke, C., Ijspeert, A., Paik, J.: Opti-mized user-guided motion control of modular robots. Nature Communications 

16 (1), 8675 (2025) [58] Sardelli, M., Tashjian, R.Z., MacWilliams, B.A.: Functional Elbow Range of Motion for Contemporary Tasks. JBJS 93 (5), 471 (2011) [59] Namdari, S., Yagnik, G., Ebaugh, D.D., Nagda, S., Ramsey, M.L., Williams, G.R., Mehta, S.: Defining functional shoulder range of motion for activities of daily living. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery 21 (9), 1177–1183 (2012) [60] Churchill, E., Laubach, L.L., Mcconville, J.T., Tebbetts, I.: Anthropometric Source Book. Volume 1: Anthropometry for Designers (1978) 22 Supplementary Materials for ”Reconfiguration of supernumerary robotic limbs for human augmentation” 

Mustafa Mete 1,†, Anastasia Bolotnikova 1,2,†, Alexander Sch¨ ußler 1,† Jamie Paik 1,∗

> 1

Reconfigurable Robotics Lab, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland 

> 2

Laboratory for Analysis and Architecture of Systems (LAAS), CNRS, Toulouse, France 

> ∗

Corresponding author. Email: jamie.paik@epfl.ch. 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

This PDF file includes: 

Figures S1 to S9 Tables S1 Captions for Movies S1 to S4 

Other Supplementary Materials for this manuscript: 

Movies S1 to S4 23 Supplementary Figures and Tables A B

Origami-inspired folding legs Dynamixel XL430-W250 (1.4 Nm, 57 g) Dynamixel XL330-M288 (0.52 Nm, 18 g) 5 cm Strong Robogami module Lightweight Robogami module 

Total weight: 0.25 kg Total weight: 0.15 kg 

Fig. 1 Robogami module. The Robogami module realizes a parallel kinematic structure based on the Canfield joint principle through the use of three origami-inspired folding legs. Each of the legs is connected to a DC motor to realize the actuation of the module. Two versions of the Robogami module are used: ( A) A strong but heavier version using a motor with 1 .4 N m torque and a weight of 57 g. ( B) A weaker but lighter version using a motor with 0 .52 N m torque and a weight of 18 g. 

24 A B4 cm 14 cm Retracted configuration Extended configuration Fig. 2 Structural reconfiguration of Robogami module. The parallel kinematic structure of the Robogami module enables reconfiguration from a shape with a 4 cm height ( A) to a shape with a 14 cm height ( B). This results in an extension ratio of 3 .5 for a single Robogami module. 

25 A B C10 cm 3 modules 2 modules 1 module Fig. 3 Modularity of Robogami Third Arm. The Robogami modules can be stacked in series to create arms with different configurations ( A-C ). The modularity is a key feature of the Robogami Third Arm to adapt its workspace and payload capacity to different scenarios and tasks. An underactuated hand is attached to the Robogami Third Arm and can be exchanged for alterna-tive end-effectors depending on the task. 

26 A5 cm Sensorized minature robgami module ESP32 LiPo battery Belt hook Miniaturized Robogami joystick B Joystick in use Fig. 4 Miniaturized Robogami Third Arm joystick. (A) A 3-DoF joystick based on a sen-sorized miniaturization of the Robogami Third Arm: The joystick unit includes a lithium-polymer (LiPo) battery for power supply and a microcontroller (ESP32) for Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) communication with the central controller unit. ( B) A belt hook is used to attach the joystick to the belt of the human operator for comfortable use. 

27 DC motors Desired joint angle θ d

Velocity controller Position controller Joint angle θ  

> Joint velocity θ
> Desired joint velocity θd

QP control policy Control input 

> (e.g., desired end effector position) Control constraints (e.g., SRL kinematics)

Fig. 5 Control policy flowchart. The quadratic programming-based (QP-based) control pol-icy receives control inputs from either an autonomous motion planner or manual control interfaces, together with the control constraints, to compute desired joint-level position and velocity commands. A cascaded PID controller simultaneously regulates joint angles and velocities. Joint angle and veloc-ity limits are applied to the controller outputs to ensure safe execution and prevent damage to the origami-inspired folding legs. 

28 Sample human kinematic model Compute point cloud Kinematic parameters θh

> Human arms workspace

Sample robot kinematic model Kinematic parameters θr

Compute workspace polytopes Compute point cloud Robot arm workspace  

> Workspace extension (no vision)
> Workspace extension (vision)
> Collaborative workspace Number of modules m

Human visual field model Compute point cloud constraints Visual field constraints Fig. 6 Workspace calculation. The workspaces for supernumerary robotic limb (SRL) configu-rations are calculated in three steps. In the first step, the human and robot kinematic models are sampled, based on the kinematic parameters and the number of modules of the robot. Based on the samples, point clouds for each human arm and the robot are computed. Moreover, point cloud constraints for the human visual field are computed. Subsequently, convex polytopes for the collabo-rative, visible extended, and non-visible extended workspaces are computed based on the intersection of the point clouds and constraints. 

29 3 kg 1 kg 0.3 kg A 1 module B C 3 modules 2 modules Fig. 7 Payload capacity. The payload capacity of reconfigurable SRLs with multiple modules depends on the number of modules n, module kinematics M , and the module type (strong vs. lightweight module). The payload experiments in a straight-beam configuration evaluate the payload capacity of the Robogami Third Arm with 1, 2, and 3 modules (A, B, and C). The first two mod-ules are strong Robogami modules, while the third module is a lightweight module due to payload limitations. The experiments show a payload capacity of 3 kg for 1 module, 1 kg for 2 modules, and 0.3 kg for 3 modules. 

30 DC motor (Dynamixel) Bluetooth Low Energy Central controller unit (Arduino Due) ESP32 Serial TTL Serial External PC   

> AB
> Bluetooth Low Energy ESP32 Analog PINs Sensors
> Communication on controller side Communication on sensor side

Fig. 8 Robogami Third Arm communication. (A) The central controller unit (Arduino Due) acts as the central device that connects all peripherals (DC motors and user interfaces). The joint information from the DC motors (Dynamixel, Robotis) and the joint commands from the low-level joint control on the central controller unit are sent via TTL communication. Using serial commu-nication an external PC for running the high-level quadratic programming-based control policy is connected to the central controller unit. An ESP32 is connected via serial communication to the cen-tral controller unit to enable Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) communication with user interfaces, such as the miniature Robogami joystick. ( B) The user interfaces utilize a ESP32 to read the sensor data and send it to the central controller unit via BLE. 

31 Battery DC/DC Converter USB for serial communication with PC Central controller unit (Arduino Due) Power switch Fuse Communication unit (ESP32) Fan Reset button Cable for TTL communication with motors 

> 5 cm

A Wearable supply unit B Supply unit in use Fig. 9 Wearable supply unit for untethered operation. (A) The supply unit includes all necessities for power, communication, and control of the Robogami Third Arm to run it completely untethered on the human body. A lithium-polymer battery with a 1300 mA h capacity supplies the necessary power for running the arm for approximately 3 hours in unloaded scenarios and 1.5 hours in loaded scenarios. A DC/DC converter converts the voltage from the battery to the necessary 12 V for running the central controller unit (Arduino Due) and the servo motors. A communication unit (ESP32) is connected to the central controller unit for realizing the Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) connection to the peripheral user interfaces. The supply unit has two cables to connect to external devices: a USB cable for serial communication with an external PC and a cable for TTL communication with the servo motors. ( B) The wearable supply unit is attached to the human body for untethered control of the Robogami Third Arm. 

32 Table 1 Overview of existing supernumerary robotic limbs (SRLs) and the presented Robogami Third Arm with different number of modules. Robot arm Weight (g) Payload capacity (g) Load-to-weight ratio (-) Max. arm extension (mm) Extension ratio (-) Robogami Third Arm 250 3000 12 140 3.5 (1 strong module) Robogami Third Arm 500 1000 2 280 3.5 (2 strong modules) Robogami Third Arm 650 300 0.46 420 3.5 (2 strong + 1 lightweight module) Soft Poly-Limb [31, 32] 1100 1500 1.36 695 2Origami-inspired SRL [37] 78 200 3.56 280 5.44 Universal Robots UR5e [10] 20600 5000 0.24 850 1RSRAs [26] 3450 5000 1.45 940 1

33 Caption for Movie S1. 

Reconfiguration for human augmentation summary. Reconfiguration of super-numerary robotic limbs improves adaptability to dynamic and unstructured envi-ronments. The reconfiguration is highlighted by the Robogami Third Arm based on origami-inspired modules. Using the reconfiguration strategy, the Robogami Third Arm is able to reconfigure its structure (number of modules), as well as its placement on the human body. The control strategy adapts the level of autonomy depending on the task and scenario from manual control to autonomous control. Based on the recon-figuration and the control strategy, the Robogami Third Arm solves diverse tasks of everyday life. 

Caption for Movie S2. 

Robogami Third Arm overview. The Robogami Third Arm consists of origami-inspired robotic modules. This design enables lightweight construction and reconfig-urability, supporting compact storage and everyday wearability. The modular design is leveraged for spatial reconfiguration of the arm. The control strategy adapts to varying SRL configurations, scenarios, and tasks. 

Caption for Movie S3. 

Robogami Third Arm applications. The reconfiguration of supernumerary robotic limbs, such as the Robogami Third Arm, solves diverse tasks of everyday life. The Robogami Third Arm stabilizes a cup to free the human hands for other manip-ulation tasks. It picks up objects from the ground and passes them to the human, so that the human does not need to bend down. Moreover, the Robogami Third Arm assists humans during cooking tasks. While the human prepares the bread, the Robogami Third Arm makes sure that the fondue does not burn by stirring the fondue autonomously on the human’s back. 

Caption for Movie S4. 

Object stabilization experiment. The object stabilization highlights the closed-loop control performance of the QP-based control policy (Fig. 5). The control policy keeps the end-effector stable, while the human wearer applies motion disturbances to the Robogami Third Arm. 34