Title: IG-RFT: An Interaction-Guided RL Framework for VLA Models in Long-Horizon Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.20715v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Feb 2026 01:47:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> ARXIV PREPRINT 1

# IG-RFT: An Interaction-Guided RL Framework for VLA Models in Long-Horizon Robotic Manipulation 

Zhian Su, Weijie Kong, Haonan Dong, and Huixu Dong, Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have demon-strated significant potential for generalist robotic policies; how-ever, they struggle to generalize to long-horizon complex tasks in novel real-world domains due to distribution shifts and the scarcity of high-quality demonstrations. Although reinforcement learning (RL) offers a promising avenue for policy improvement, applying it to real-world VLA fine-tuning faces challenges regard-ing exploration efficiency, training stability, and sample cost. To address these issues, we propose IG-RFT, a novel Interaction-Guided Reinforced Fine-Tuning system designed for flow-based VLA models. Firstly, to facilitate effective policy optimization, we introduce Interaction-Guided Advantage Weighted Regres-sion (IG-AWR), an RL algorithm that dynamically modulates exploration intensity based on the robot’s interaction status. Furthermore, to address the limitations of sparse or task-specific rewards, we design a novel hybrid dense reward function that in-tegrates the trajectory-level reward and the subtask-level reward. Finally, we construct a three-stage RL system comprising SFT, Offline RL, and Human-in-the-Loop RL for fine-tuning VLA models. Extensive real-world experiments on four challenging long-horizon tasks demonstrate that IG-RFT achieves an average success rate of 85.0%, significantly outperforming SFT (18.8%) and standard Offline RL baselines (40.0%). Ablation studies confirm the critical contributions of IG-AWR and hybrid reward shaping. In summary, our work establishes and validates a novel reinforced fine-tuning system for VLA models in real-world robotic manipulation. 

Index Terms —Vision-Language-Action Models, Human-in-the-Loop Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Robotic Manipulation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# ROBOTIC manipulation for specific real-world applica-tions has become increasingly mature [1]–[3]. In com-parison, generalist robotic policies are still not well-developed [4]. Recently, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, as a prominent paradigm for generalist policies [5]–[9], have shown impressive capabilities and potential, owing to large-scale pre-training via behavior cloning. Existing VLA models have limited generalization, failing to achieve zero-shot transfer to novel real-world domains [10]. Consequently, fine-tuning VLA models using domain-specific demonstrations is an in-dispensable procedure [11], [12]. The predominant domain adaptation approach for VLA models is supervised fine-tuning (SFT), which is incapable of effectively evaluating and utiliz-ing demonstrations, thereby imposing stringent requirements 

Zhian Su, Weijie Kong, Haonan Dong, and Huixu Dong are with the Grasp Laboratory, Mechanical Engineering Department, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. (Corresponding author: Huixu Dong; e-mail: huix-udong@zju.edu.cn). All authors are also with Torch Kernel Co., Ltd., Hangzhou 310000, China. This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

on both the quality and quantity of training data. However, during data collection, sub-optimal data is frequently generated due to variations in operator proficiency, system errors, and discontinuous actions. In contrast, reinforcement learning (RL) can explore, eval-uate and utilize data more effectively to improve policies, exhibiting substantial potential for VLA domain adaptation [13]–[17]. Unlike multi-environment parallel RL deployed in simulation [18], [19], VLA models require direct physical interaction in real-world robotic tasks. This requires high sample efficiency and risk-aware exploration, rendering the direct implementation of on-policy RL infeasible. In real-world scenarios, deploying off-policy RL via Human-in-the-Loop can mitigate compounding errors caused by distribution shift, thereby guiding policy learning by timely corrections, yielding remarkable performance [20]–[22]. However, these existing real-world RL systems use sparse rewards, which mainly causes unstable training in the online stage and leads to credit assignment problems. Furthermore, in long-horizon complex tasks, the variance of state distributions differs significantly across sub-stages; applying uniform exploration noise throughout the entire cycle results in inefficient resource utilization. In this work, we propose a novel reinforced fine-tuning system for flow-based VLA models, designed to master long-horizon complex robotic manipulation tasks in the real world. As illustrated in Figure 1, the system consists of three stages: SFT, Offline RL, and Human-in-the-Loop RL, enabling a gradual transition from initial policy learning to policy evolution. Our core insight is that effective policy optimization necessitates structured interaction guidance and general dense procedural rewards. To this end, we firstly pro-pose Interaction-Guided Advantage Weighted Regression (IG-AWR), an algorithm that dynamically modulates exploration intensity based on the robot’s interaction status. Specifically, this enables the robot to prioritize exploration during non-interaction phases (e.g., approach, retraction) for adapting to the diversity of broadly distributed scenarios, while em-phasizing robustness during fine-grained interaction phases (e.g., handover, grasping) to acquire complex manipulation capabilities. To annotate the interaction status for episodes, we leverage open-source robotic segmentation models and optical flow estimation methods for automated processing. Furthermore, we design a novel dense reward function that integrates the trajectory-level reward and the subtask-level reward, providing comprehensive procedural guidance for the RL system, which depends solely on episode lengths and is thus broadly applicable across diverse tasks. While some prior works design dense rewards for specific tasks using  

> arXiv:2602.20715v1 [cs.RO] 24 Feb 2026 2ARXIV PREPRINT

Fig. 1: Overview of the Interaction-Guided Reinforced Fine-tuning System (IG-RFT). The system integrates a multi-head Q-Former-based critic model to provide dense value and interaction guidance. The supervision target of the dense value is our designed general hybrid value function. We use the interaction signal to modulate the flow matching initial noise to balance RL exploration and exploitation. The training process progresses through three stages: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), data-efficient Offline RL using the proposed IG-AWR algorithm, and final Human-in-the-Loop refinement to master long-horizon real-world manipulation tasks. visual similarity or distance to target points [23]–[27], others resort to sparse rewards in real-world reinforcement learning settings [20]–[22], [28], [29]. Finally, we design a multi-stage training system that achieves stable and efficient policy learning during the SFT and Offline RL stages, and leverages Human-in-the-Loop RL for iterative policy refinement. The innovation and effectiveness of the proposed components are rigorously validated through extensive experiments, including ablation studies on individual modules and comprehensive evaluation of the entire fine-tuning system on real-world long-horizon complex manipulation tasks. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose Interaction-Guided AWR (IG-AWR), a novel RL fine-tuning algorithm designed for flow-based VLA models that effectively balances exploration and exploitation by utilizing interaction signals.  

> •

We formulate a hybrid dense reward function incorporating trajectory-level procedural rewards and weighted subtask-level rewards, delivering smooth and dense feedback for long-horizon tasks.  

> •

We design a multi-stage reinforced fine-tuning system in-tegrated with human intervention. The system initializes policies via SFT, accomplishes foundational policy learning through Offline RL, and further elevates policy performance during Human-in-the-Loop rollouts. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Vision-Language-Action Models 

Robotic policies serve as agents that map perceived states to control actions [30], [31]. Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models are generalizable robotic policies equipped with se-mantic understanding, trained by adapting vision-language models (VLMs) on robotic manipulation demonstrations and open-world datasets [5]–[8], [11], [12], [32]–[35]. RT-1 [34] and RT-2 [35] are early representative methods that employ transformer-based architectures to predict discretized actions. In contrast, π0 [5] utilizes an action expert, independent of the pre-trained VLM parameters, to generate actions through flow matching. π0.5 [7] is trained with knowledge isolation [36] and enables subtask decomposition [37],achieving broad generalization in real-world manipulation tasks. Despite the rapid recent advancements and demonstrated potential of VLA models, they still exhibit limited generalization and robustness when deployed in novel real-world domains, leading to de-graded performance in out-of-distribution scenarios. Advanc-ing fine-tuning methodologies can significantly enhance their capabilities in tackling long-horizon complex real-world tasks. 

B. RL Fine-tuning for VLA Models 

Fine-tuning VLA models via Reinforcement Learning (RL) has recently emerged as a prominent research focus. One SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 3

way is to conduct online RL within simulation using large-scale parallel environments for model training [14], [38]– [42]. Some studies target RL training for flow-based VLA models [13], [43]–[46]; notably, flow-based VLA models present greater challenges for RL optimization compared to auto-regressive VLA models. The world model, serving as a more efficient interaction environment than the physical world, has been explored to provide feedback for RL fine-tuning [24], [47], [48]. Reward function design has also been increasingly investigated [23], [25], [26], [49]–[52], as sparse rewards often lead to unstable training, while dense rewards remain difficult to generalize. Another category of methods concentrates on exploring safe and efficient RL fine-tuning in real-world scenarios, mainly through specially devised offline-to-online RL approaches or human-in-the-loop guidance to mitigate the distribution shift problem [20]–[22], [29], [53], [54]; however, these methods lack stage-aware dense reward feedback. In contrast, our work designs a more efficient interaction-guided AWR algorithm, alongside a general and dense reward mechanism. It improves the performance of the system spanning from Offline RL to Human-in-the-Loop RL. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Vision-Language-Action Models 

Consider a robotic manipulation task specified by a nat-ural language instruction ℓ. At each time step t, the agent receives an observation ot (proprioception and visual data). VLA models leverage large-scale pre-trained VLMs and an action module as an end-to-end policy, sampling actions at ∼

π(·| ℓ, o t) conditioned on the multimodal context. Standard post-training relies on SFT via objectives like next-token pre-diction or conditional flow matching, which is highly sensitive to demonstration quality and suffers from data inefficiency. Crucially, SFT indiscriminately treats sub-optimal and optimal demonstrations as equivalent supervision targets. 

B. Reinforcement Learning 

The robotic manipulation task is formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the tuple M =(S, A, r, P, γ ). The state st ∈ S encompasses the robot observation ot and task prompt ℓ. The VLA serves as the policy πθ (·| st) to sample actions at with the transition dynam-ics P(st+1 |st, a t) determining the next state. We define the cumulative return as Gt = PTk=t γk−trk, where γ ∈ [0 , 1] is the discount factor. Let τ denote a trajectory sampled from the policy; the goal of RL is to optimize parameters θ to maximize the expected return J (θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

hPTt=0 γtrt

i

. Accordingly, the state value function is defined as V π (st) = Eτ ∼πθ [Gt|st].IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Interaction-guided AWR for Flow Matching 

In complex long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks, achiev-ing an optimal balance between exploration and exploitation remains a critical yet unresolved challenge. Conventional RL methods often suffer from detrimental exploration during delicate operations. To address this, we decompose episodes 

Fig. 2: Illustration of Dynamic Uncertainty Modulation in IG-AWR. This mechanism modulates the initial sampling noise ϵ of the flow ODE based on the extracted interaction sig-nal It. During non-interaction phases (top), a higher variance 

σhigh is applied to encourage diverse trajectory exploration. Conversely, during interaction phases (bottom), the variance is reduced to σlow to ensure precision and stability for contact-rich manipulation. into non-interactive phases (e.g., approach, retraction), where we encourage exploration for trajectory diversity, and contact-rich interaction phases (e.g., handover, grasping), where we prioritize precision and stability. Specifically, we first intro-duce the extraction of interaction signals, followed by their application to the RL fine-tuning of flow-based VLA models. 

1) Interaction Signal Extraction: Efficient and autonomous interaction labeling is crucial for processing VLA demonstra-tions. Leveraging global visual observations, at each time step 

t, we first employ the robot segmentation model, RoboEngine [55], to generate a binary robot mask Mt. Subsequently, we apply RAFT [56] to estimate the dense optical flow field Ft.The interaction status It is determined by 

It = I X

> u,v

(1 − M (u,v ) 

> t

) · I



|| F (u,v ) 

> t

|| 2 > δ flow 



> Θpixel 

!

(1) where (u, v ) denotes pixel coordinates and I(·) represents the indicator function. The term (1 −M (u,v ) 

> t

) excludes robot pixels to focus on environmental motion. We count the pixels where the squared flow magnitude || F (u,v ) 

> t

|| 2 exceeds the threshold 

δflow . If this count exceeds Θpixel , the time step is labeled as an interaction phase ( It = 1 ). 

2) Dynamic Uncertainty Modulation: During the rollout phase, as illustrated in Figure 2, we dynamically regulate the variance of the initial sampling noise conditioned on the predicted interaction signal probability. Building directly on the binary interaction labels derived from visual observations (Section IV-A1), the critic network predicts pint (s) ∈ [0 , 1] —a soft estimate of interaction likelihood for the state, trained to approximate the ground truth. We define the effective sampling temperature T (s) as: 

T (s) = σbase · (1 − α · pint (s)) + σmin (2) The policy generates actions by solving the flow ODE starting from a scaled noise distribution. Specifically, the initial state 

ˆa0, equal to ϵ, is sampled from N (0, T 2(s)I).4 ARXIV PREPRINT 

Fig. 3: Visualization of the Reward Signal and Value Function. We illustrate the proposed reward shaping mechanism on the ”Parcel Packing” task. (A) The reward signal rt combines a constant trajectory-level reward with weighted subtask-level rewards (peaks), providing dense feedback at key milestones. (B) The Value (Return-to-Go) function Vt monotonically decreases from 1.0 to 0 as the agent progresses through subtasks, serving as a precise progress indicator for the Critic. This formulation adaptively modulates exploration: high variance during non-interaction phases encourages diverse trajectory exploration, while low variance during interaction phases enforces precise, stable execution—seamlessly bridging the discrete visual-derived interaction signal It with continu-ous policy uncertainty modulation. 

3) Advantage-Weighted Flow Update: For policy optimiza-tion, we employ Advantage Weighted Regression (AWR) [57] to maximize the expected return of the flow-based policy. Given a demonstration D collected via the interaction-guided policy, we estimate the advantage ˆA(st, a t) = rt:t+N +

Vϕ(st+N )−Vϕ(st). The Interaction-Guided Advantage Weight Regression (IG-AWR) loss function is formulated as: 

LIG-AWR (θ) = E(s,a )∼D 



exp 

 1

β ˆA(s, a )



· Eτ,ϵ || vθ (τ, ˆaτ , s ) − uτ (a|ϵ)|| 2



(3) where β is the temperature hyperparameter for AWR, and ˆaτ

denotes the flow trajectory at time τ . This objective upweights data with higher estimated advantages while preserving the flow ODE structure for stable policy refinement. 

B. General Hybrid Reward Function 

Reward modeling is critical for RL fine-tuning of VLA models. Designing a general reward function is beneficial for enabling adaptation to a wide range of tasks. To effectively guide the agent through multi-stage long-horizon tasks, we de-sign a hybrid reward function that incorporates both trajectory-level success incentives and stage-wise subtask feedback, as illustrated in Figure 3 

1) Trajectory-level Reward: To generalize across various robotic manipulation tasks, we define the trajectory-level re-ward as: 

rtraj  

> t

=

(

1/T if task succeeds 

0 otherwise (4) where T denotes the total number of time steps in the episode. This formulation distributes the total return of 1.0 uniformly across the trajectory upon successful task completion. 

2) Subtask-level Reward: Since the trajectory-level reward lacks fine-grained feedback for complex long-horizon tasks, we employ potential-based reward shaping at the subtask level. This continuous monotonically increasing potential function prevents reward hacking and provides sufficient local guid-ance. To simulate subtask completion while ensuring smooth-ness, we adopt a weighted mixture model to prioritize complex subtasks, formulated as: 

Φ( ρ) = C

> K

X

> i=1

wi · σ

 ρ − ki

ϵ



s.t. X wi = 1 (5) 

rsub  

> t

= Φ( ρt) − Φ( ρt−1) (6) where ρt = t/T denotes the normalized temporal progress, and σ(·) is the standard sigmoid function. The parameters ki

and wi represent the completion time steps and the importance SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 5

weight of the i-th subtask. Here, ϵ controls the sharpness and 

C is a normalization constant. 

3) Reward Aggregation: We obtain the final reward by computing a weighted sum of the trajectory-level reward and the subtask-level reward: 

rt = ωtraj · rtraj  

> t

+ ωsub · rsub  

> t

s.t. ωtraj + ωsub = 1 (7) Accordingly, we derive the return-to-go as Gt = PTk=t rk

(assuming a discount factor γ = 1). This value naturally decays from 1.0 to 0 as the episode progresses. 

C. RL Fine-tuning System 

Due to low data efficiency in purely online RL, we deploy a multi-stage fine-tuning method in which offline training with pre-collected data provides a stronger prior. In the online stage, human feedback provides high-quality and efficient guidance for RL fine-tuning, mitigating exploration challenges in high-dimensional spaces. Building on this paradigm, we design a system incorporating the IG-AWR algorithm and dense reward function for long-horizon complex tasks. 

1) Model Architecture: We adopt the π0.5 model [7], a representative flow-based VLA validated for superior real-world performance, as our actor module πθ . Leveraging the KV cache from the VLM backbone conditioned on the current observation ot, we train a critic network to regress the state value V πt and predict the interaction signal It. Specifically, utilizing the KV cache from all transformer layers incurs com-putational inefficiency and information redundancy. Therefore, we selectively aggregate features from the deeper layers, which contain the richest semantic information. The network architecture is based on the Q-Former (Query Transformer) [58], which utilizes learnable queries to adaptively extract relevant multimodal features from the KV cache through cross-attention. The Q-Former output is then passed through three separate parameterized heads to produce the trajectory-level value, subtask-level value, and interaction signal, respectively. The loss of the Critic Module should not affect action genera-tion; thus, we stop gradient propagation to the VLM. Further details on the critic network architecture are provided in Appendix A. 

2) Training Recipe: With the proposed architecture es-tablished, we now outline the optimization procedure. After obtaining the state value function, we estimate the advantage 

ˆA(st, a t) using N-step advantage estimation [22] to update the policy via the IG-AWR algorithm. Specifically, we devise a three-stage RL training curriculum for the VLA models, as summarized in Algorithm 1:  

> •

Stage I: Warm-up and SFT. We collect demonstration data and employ a large-scale VLM to annotate subtask information. Interaction signals, rewards, and values are obtained. We use Knowledge Isolation [59] to train π0.5

(including subtask prediction loss). After a few warm-up steps, we train the critic module simultaneously using MSE loss for value regression and BCE loss for interaction prediction.  

> •

Stage II: Offline RL. We implement the IG-AWR algorithm to conduct RL training for the VLA and simultaneously 

Algorithm 1 Interaction-Guided AWR for VLA Fine-tuning 

Require: Pre-trained VLA π0.5, Demonstration Buffer Ddemo 

Ensure: Fine-tuned Policy πθ , Critic Vϕ 

> 1:

Data Annotation: Annotate Ddemo with subtasks, interac-tion signals It, rewards, and values.  

> 2:

// Stage I: Warm-up and SFT  

> 3:

Initialize Actor πθ from π0.5 via SFT.  

> 4:

Initialize Critic Vϕ by minimizing LMSE (State Value) and 

LBCE (Interaction Signal) on Ddemo . 

> 5:

// Stage II: Offline RL  

> 6:

for iteration k = 1 , . . . , K offline do  

> 7:

Estimate Advantage ˆA on Ddemo . 

> 8:

Update πθ via IG-AWR and update Vϕ. 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

// Stage III: Human-in-the-Loop RL  

> 11:

Initialize Replay Buffer Dreal ← ∅  

> 12:

while not converged do  

> 13:

s0 ← env.reset()  

> 14:

for t = 0 , . . . , T do  

> 15:

Observe state st, Critic outputs V (st), I (st). 

> 16:

if V (st) stagnates or Human identifies failure then  

> 17:

at ← HumanTeleop (st) ▷ Human Override  

> 18:

else  

> 19:

at ∼ πθ (·| st) ▷ Autonomous Execution  

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

Execute at, observe st+1 . 

> 22:

end for  

> 23:

Store episode to Dreal . 

> 24:

if Update Interval then  

> 25:

Sample batch Breal ∼ D real . 

> 26:

Sample equal-sized batch Bdemo ∼ D demo . 

> 27:

Construct Hybrid Dataset Bhybrid = Breal ∪ B demo . 

> 28:

Update Policy πθ via IG-AWR on Bhybrid . 

> 29:

Update Critic Vϕ (at a lower frequency).  

> 30:

end if  

> 31:

end while 

update the critic module. In this phase, the agent learns to evaluate and utilize data, achieving efficient policy learning.  

> •

Stage III: Human-in-the-Loop RL. We deploy the base policy in the real world to collect rollouts with Human-in-the-Loop intervention. By collecting high-quality human corrections, we enable the policy to approach its capability upper bound, realizing performance improvements espe-cially for long-horizon complex tasks. 

3) Human-in-the-Loop Mechanism: During real-world ex-ecution, the robot operates autonomously according to the policy πθ while a human operator monitors the process. When the value output by the critic module exhibits stagnation or the human identifies a potential failure, the operator intervenes via a teleoperation interface to override the action. These intervention data are stored in the replay buffer, capturing both the low-value states preceding the takeover and the subsequent high-quality corrective trajectories. Periodically, we sample an equal number of episodes from the pre-collected demonstra-tion buffer to construct a hybrid dataset. We then fine-tune the 6 ARXIV PREPRINT 

policy module using this dataset via the IG-AWR algorithm, while the critic module is updated at a lower frequency. This Human-in-the-Loop RL approach effectively overcomes distribution shifts and enables the mastery of complex long-horizon tasks that are difficult to solve via offline learning. V. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we conduct comprehensive real-world exper-iments to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed reinforced fine-tuning system. Our experiments are designed to answer three key research questions:  

> •

Q1 (Overall Performance): Does our reinforced fine-tuning system perform robustly in long-horizon complex real-world tasks and outperform SFT/RL baselines?  

> •

Q2 (Ablation Study): What are the contributions of in-dividual components, specifically the IG-AWR algorithm and the hybrid dense reward function?  

> •

Q3 (System Evolution): How does the policy perfor-mance evolve across the three training stages (SFT, Offline RL, and Human-in-the-Loop RL)? 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Hardware and Environment: We perform all experi-ments on a real-world robotic platform consisting of a Galaxea A1 dual-arm robot equipped with parallel-jaw grippers. Visual observations are captured via a head-mounted Orbbec Gemini 2L camera and two wrist-mounted RealSense L515 cameras. The control frequency is set to 30 Hz, matching the data collection frequency. We set the action chunk size to 30 and employ the RTC method [60] for real-time control. Policy inference and training are executed on a cloud server equipped with an NVIDIA A100 GPU. The low-level control pipeline runs on a local PC with an Intel Core i7-12700KF 3.6GHz CPU, 32GB RAM, and an RTX 4070 GPU. Socket-based net-work communication is established between the local deploy-ment endpoint and the cloud server inference endpoint. For detailed training hyperparameters and configurations, please refer to Appendix B. 

2) Tasks: We select four challenging long-horizon manip-ulation tasks that involve multi-stage reasoning, contact-rich interactions, bimanual coordination, as well as articulated and deformable object manipulation. Task summaries are provided below and visualized in Figure 4; comprehensive descrip-tions—including subtask decomposition, success criteria and average steps—are available in Appendix C.  

> •

Parcel Packing: The robot must pick up an item on the plate, place it into the parcel, move the plate aside, and perform dual-arm collaboration to synchronously fold the flaps and close the box. This task requires precise bimanual coordination and contact-rich manipulation ca-pabilities.  

> •

Fruit Bagging: The agent is required to open the lid of the canvas bag, sequentially pick up ginger, bitter melon, and banana, and place them into the bag. Finally, it needs to close the lid. This task involves articulated and deformable object manipulation, semantic understanding TABLE I: Main Results on Real-world Long-horizon Tasks. 

We compare the success rate (%) of our system against baselines across four tasks. Results are averaged over 20 trials per task. Best results are highlighted in BOLD .                     

> Method Parcel Packing Fruit Bagging Block Stacking Drink Shelving Avg.
> SFT 15.0 30.0 25.0 5.0 18.8 IQL 40.0 50.0 45.0 20.0 38.8 AWR 35.0 55.0 45.0 25.0 40.0
> Ours 85.0 95.0 90.0 70.0 85.0

of object categories, and sequential picking from random positions.  

> •

Block Stacking: The robot needs to pick up colored blocks from the table in the order of red, yellow, green, and blue, and sequentially stack them onto a plate. This task tests the capability for color-semantic understanding and precise stacking.  

> •

Drink Shelving: The robot is required to retrieve bev-erages from a cluttered container, where the closer arm picks items from the top and performs a handover to the other arm, which then places them into narrow shelves from the side. This task tests dual-arm collaborative han-dover, bin-picking in cluttered environments, and precise placement in confined shelf spaces. 

3) Baselines: We compare our full system against the following baselines:  

> •

SFT ( π0.5-Base): The base flow-based VLA model fine-tuned solely via behavior cloning on the demonstration dataset. Action generation is trained using Knowledge Isolation [59] while subtask prediction is performed con-currently.  

> •

Offline RL (IQL/AWR): Standard Offline RL meth-ods [57], [61] applied to the π0.5 model, lacking our specific interaction guidance, dense reward shaping, and human intervention. 

4) Data Collection and Metrics: For each task, we collect 60 expert demonstrations via teleoperation to form the initial dataset Ddemo . During the Human-in-the-Loop stage, we per-form 10 rollouts per training update and add them to Dreal 

for IG-AWR updates, iterating 4 times (totaling 40 rollouts). For fair comparison, baseline methods without Human-in-the-Loop utilize 100 expert demonstrations. The metric is Success Rate (SR) , defined as the ratio of successful trials to the total number of attempts. 

B. Main Results 

We present the comparative results in Table I. Our proposed system achieves the highest success rates across all four tasks, demonstrating superior generalization and robustness. 

1) Superiority over SFT: Although VLA models learn di-verse manipulation skills and semantic understanding through SFT during the pre-training stage, becoming a generalist policy, current SOTA methods still struggle to transfer knowl-edge to new real-world domains—including new embodiments and new tasks—using only a few (e.g., 100) task-specific SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 7

Fig. 4: Execution Sequences of Long-Horizon Tasks. From top to bottom, we visualize the successful execution flows for four challenging tasks: Parcel Packing, Fruit Bagging, Block Stacking, and Drink Shelving. Arrows indicate the progression of subgoals. Note: The text labels above each stage are abbreviated for visualization clarity and differ from the actual natural language instructions used by the model. For the detailed sequence of subtask instructions for each task, please refer to Appendix C. demonstrations to accomplish long-horizon complex tasks. Moreover, SFT is typically constrained by the quality of manually pre-collected data and is more prone to converge to suboptimal distributions. In contrast, RL fine-tuning VLA models for new domains demonstrates superior adaptation. As shown in Table I, the SFT policy achieves the lowest success rates in our real-world complex tasks, underperforming all other methods that employ RL fine-tuning. Our method, in particular, significantly improves the success rate over the SFT policy. The results demonstrate that fine-tuning VLA models using RL indeed enables the policy to learn a better action distribution, thereby avoiding compounding errors caused by minor deviations, enhancing the capability to handle long-horizon tasks in new real-world domains. 

2) Advantage over Offline RL: Deploying standard Offline RL baselines (IQL/AWR) to fine-tune VLA models can learn a better task-specific action distribution compared to SFT; however, these methods still suffer from distribution shift problems. Meanwhile, purely online RL on real-world em-bodiments faces challenges of low exploration efficiency and safety concerns. In contrast, the Human-in-the-Loop approach provides human prior guidance to efficiently drive policy evo-lution. Compared to Offline RL (Table I), our multi-stage RL fine-tuning system achieves substantially higher performance gains and demonstrates greater robustness in the real world. In our experimental setting, our method improves performance by approximately 40% across all four long-horizon complex tasks. This validates the effectiveness and practicality of our reinforced fine-tuning system, thereby answering Q1 .

C. Ablation Studies 

To validate our design choices, we conduct ablation studies on the Parcel Packing and Drink Shelving tasks, which demand the most complex manipulation capabilities. This section answers Q2 .

1) Effect of Interaction-Guided AWR: We compare our IG-AWR with a standard AWR implementation that also follows the three-stage training recipe but uses uniform exploration noise. As illustrated in Table II, removing the interaction-guided dynamic uncertainty modulation results in a perfor-mance drop of approximately 15%. Qualitative analysis reveals 8 ARXIV PREPRINT 

TABLE II: Ablation Study Results. We evaluate the contri-bution of Interaction Guidance (IG) and Reward Function on the two most challenging tasks.                 

> Configuration Parcel Packing Drink Shelving Avg. Drop Ours (Full System) 85.0 70.0 -
> w/o Interaction Guidance 70.0 55.0 ↓15.0
> w/o Trajectory-level Reward 75.0 60.0 ↓10.0
> w/o Subtask-level Reward 55.0 45.0 ↓27.5

TABLE III: Subtask Completion Progress. Instead of binary success rates, we report the normalized progress score (0.0-1.0), representing the average proportion of subtasks com-pleted per episode. This metric reveals when the policy fails.           

> Reward Configuration Parcel Packing Drink Shelving Avg. Progress Ours (Hybrid) 0.96 0.88 0.92
> w/o Trajectory Reward 0.84 0.78 0.81
> w/o Subtask Reward 0.68 0.54 0.61

that without interaction guidance, the robot tends to jitter during the delicate ”flap folding and box closing” phase. Furthermore, we observe that without interaction guidance, the agent lacks sufficient exploration during non-interactive phases, leading to poor generalization regarding object po-sitions. It often drifts towards the object locations seen in the pre-collected data, consequently causing task failure when facing out-of-distribution (OOD) cases during testing. Beyond final performance, we further investigate the impact of IG on data efficiency in Figure 5. IG-RFT is represented by the red curve, while the baseline AWR w/ dense reward is represented by the blue curve and AWR w/o dense reward by the gray curve. Our method exhibits a significantly steeper learning trajectory. IG-RFT achieves an average success rate of 77.5% with only 40 human interventions, and ultimately converges to an 82.5% success rate. The AWR w/ dense reward method learns more slowly, reaching only 62.5% under the same 40 human interventions. This demonstrates that our method achieves superior performance with significantly lower human cost. Even when the data scale is extended to 70 episodes, the baseline without IG fails to match the peak performance of IG-RFT. This confirms that modulating exploration based on visual interaction signals not only im-proves policy performance but also drastically reduces the human effort required for fine-tuning. The other baseline, AWR w/o dense reward, further validates this conclusion and highlights that our dense reward is equally significant for policy improvement in Human-in-the-Loop learning. 

2) Effect of Hybrid Dense Reward: We evaluate the system using only the trajectory-level reward or the subtask-level reward compared to our hybrid dense reward (Trajectory + Subtask) in Table II, and further analyze failure modes using the subtask completion progress metric in Table III. The results indicate that relying on a single reward signal leads to degraded task success rates, which is particularly evident in our long-horizon complex task settings. Specifically, the lack 

Fig. 5: Data Efficiency Analysis in Human-in-the-Loop Fine-tuning. We report the mean success rates averaged over the Parcel Packing and Drink Shelving tasks. The curves show that IG-RFT (Ours) achieves superior sample efficiency, converging to 77.5% success with only 40 interventions, significantly outperforming baselines. Shaded regions indicate the min-max range across tasks. of the subtask-level reward results in a substantial 27% drop in success rate and a significant 0.31 drop in progress score. This demonstrates that dense incentive signals are critical for facilitating the completion of sequential sub-goals. In contrast, the absence of the trajectory-level reward causes a 10% drop in success rate, yet the progress score decreases only marginally by 0.11. This indicates that the subtask reward facilitates the completion of intermediate sub-goals, even if the task ultimately fails. We observe that the trajectory-level reward provides long-term guidance towards the final goal, offering macroscopic assurance for the agent to learn the ultimate objective. Conversely, the subtask-level reward offers imme-diate guidance for short-term objectives, enabling the agent to master sequential sub-goals progressively. Collectively, these results demonstrate that the hybrid reward structure is highly beneficial for the reinforced fine-tuning system. 

D. Analysis of Training Stages 

We analyze the policy evolution throughout the three-stage RL training system in Table IV, investigating the contribution of each phase to the final performance. This section answers 

Q3 . Detailed analysis for each stage is as follows.  

> •

Stage I (SFT): The supervised fine-tuning stage estab-lishes adaptation to the new domain, acquires basic ma-nipulation skills and semantic understanding capabilities, but exhibits limited robustness in long-horizon execution, achieving an average success rate of only 18.8%. This indicates that the generalization and versatility of VLA models still have substantial room for improvement in real-world settings.  

> •

Stage II (Offline RL): By optimizing the policy using the interaction-guided objective on pre-collected datasets, the agent learns to distinguish high-value actions from SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 9

TABLE IV: Policy Evolution and Stage Analysis. We compare the performance at different training stages. Results are averaged over 20 trials per task. HIL denotes Human-in-the-Loop. Best results are highlighted in BOLD .                                      

> Training Stage / Configuration Parcel Packing Fruit Bagging Block Stacking Drink Shelving Avg. Avg. Drop Stage I: SFT 15.0 30.0 25.0 5.0 18.8 ↓66.2
> Stage II: Offline RL 40.0 55.0 45.0 20.0 40.0 ↓45.0
> SFT →HIL (w/o Stage II) 65.0 75.0 70.0 45.0 63.8 ↓21.2
> Stage III: Full System 85.0 95.0 90.0 70.0 85.0 -

sub-optimal ones, improving the success rate significantly to 40.0%. Although distribution shift problems remain during real-world rollouts, limiting the success rate, this stage provides a crucial warm-up for the subsequent online phase.  

> •

Stage III (Full System vs. Direct HIL): Introducing human intervention provides critical corrections for OOD states. As shown in Table IV, our full system (Stage I 

→ II → III) achieves a superior success rate of 85.0% .Notably, skipping Stage II and performing Human-in-the-Loop directly on the SFT model ( Stage I → III ) yields a suboptimal success rate of 63.8%. This performance gap (21.2%) highlights that the basic distribution of the actor and critic modules learned in Stage II is essential for maximizing the sample efficiency of human corrections. The results show that our three-stage RL fine-tuning system is indispensable for policy evolution. 

E. Qualitative Analysis 

To provide intuitive insights into the internal mechanisms of IG-RFT, we visualize the extraction of interaction signals and the dynamics of value estimation during real-world execution. First, we validate the effectiveness of our visual interaction extraction module in Figure 6. By combining global RGB observations with dense optical flow and robot masking, our system accurately quantifies the intensity of environmental changes. Following Eq. 1, we determine the interaction status (It) by calculating the moving pixel count and applying a threshold Θpixel = 400 . The visualization highlights four rep-resentative frames selected from the interaction phase for both the Parcel Packing and Drink Shelving tasks. This method al-lows for the convenient and automatic extraction of interaction information. By reducing exploration noise during interaction phases to enhance stability and robustness, while employing higher variance exploration in non-interaction zones to foster diverse trajectories and generalization, this pipeline effectively balances exploration and exploitation in RL. Furthermore, we analyze the critic’s ability to evaluate policy performance by visualizing the predicted state value (Vt) trajectories in Figure 7. The red curve represents the critic’s real-time prediction, while the dashed grey line indi-cates the reference value. In successful rollouts, the predicted value closely follows the reference, monotonically decreas-ing as subtasks are completed. Crucially, the critic exhibits high sensitivity to suboptimal actions. As highlighted by the blue shaded regions, the predicted value fluctuates or rises abnormally when the agent executes actions suboptimally, indicating potential risks rather than explicit failures. For 

Fig. 6: Visualization of Interaction Signal Extraction. We illustrate the process of quantifying interaction intensity. For each sample frame, the left panel shows the raw RGB obser-vation from global camera view, while the right panel displays the dense optical flow with the robot body masked out (black region). The “Moving Pix” count represents the magnitude of environmental motion P(1 − Mt) · I(|| Ft|| 2 > δflow ),which serves as the threshold metric for determining the binary interaction signal It.instance, in the Parcel Packing task, a ”slight grasp offset” or ”premature motion” causes immediate value deviations. Similarly, in the Drink Shelving task, events like ”unstable drink grasp” or ”shelf collision” trigger distinct value peaks. These results demonstrate that our dense value function not only guides the policy towards the goal but also serves as an effective indicator of execution quality, providing critical dense feedback that significantly facilitates policy optimization during Reinforcement Learning. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we presented IG-RFT, a comprehensive reinforced fine-tuning system tailored for flow-based VLA models to master long-horizon complex manipulation tasks in the real world. To balance exploration and exploitation in RL training, we innovatively posit that interaction status contains strong prior guidance information for long-horizon 10 ARXIV PREPRINT 

Fig. 7: Visualization of Value during one rollout in Long-Horizon Tasks. We plot the critic-model-predicted state value (Return-to-Go) trajectories for (A) Parcel Packing and (B) Drink Shelving tasks. The dashed grey line represents the reference value function designed in Section IV-A, while the solid red line shows the predicted value during real-world execution. The images from left to right sequentially represent a successful task; the blue-highlighted images correspond to value peaks, indicating the policy took suboptimal actions. For each suboptimal case, we describe the potential reasons with text above the images. The corresponding subtask stages are annotated in grey italic text along the timeline. contact-rich manipulation. Integrating this insight, we pro-posed the Interaction-Guided Advantage Weighted Regres-sion (IG-AWR) algorithm, which dynamically modulates flow models at the noise level. Addressing the training difficulties caused by sparse rewards in RL and the fact that task-specific dense rewards require careful manual design and are hard to scale, we proposed a hybrid dense reward function. This function includes trajectory-level and subtask-level rewards, simultaneously achieving density and generalization. Furthermore, our multi-stage training paradigm demon-strates a clear evolution of policy performance: establishing basic domain adaptation and value function estimation via SFT, optimizing to realize efficient policy learning via Offline RL, and achieving policy evolution while maintaining robust generalization through Human-in-the-Loop corrections. Real-world experiments across four challenging tasks validate that our method surpasses SFT and standard RL baselines by a significant margin, with approximately 40% improvement. We also implemented comprehensive ablation experiments to validate our design choices. As a powerful and effective policy improvement technique, RL possesses the potential to enable SFT models to break through the upper limit of their representation capability. However, existing research, including this work, tends to utilize RL as a fine-tuning method to bridge the domain gap and improve task success rates, rather than applying RL to large-scale training as seen in Large Language Models (LLMs) [62], [63]. We attribute this to two main reasons: 1) Sampling and exploration using policy gradient-based online RL (like GRPO, PPO) [64], [65] in the high-dimensional action space of the real world are expensive, while simulation faces a significant sim-to-real gap, and Human-in-the-Loop guidance relies heavily on manual labor, making it difficult to scale up. 2) A general Reward Model that can be directly applied to fully on-policy, online, and new real-world domains does not yet exist; the lack of real-time feedback from such a model poses significant challenges for real-robot on-policy learning. Future work will focus on two directions: applying RL to large-scale VLA post-training across multi-task and wide-ranging embodiments. Since human feedback currently re-mains an indispensable means, investigating how to effi-ciently provide feedback to enable robots to autonomously approach on-policy exploration holds great research promise. Additionally, training large reward models with world mod-els—particularly through paradigms such as physics-aware video generation—represents a crucial pathway toward scal-able RL for real-world robotics [66]. APPENDIX ACRITIC NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 

The critic module is designed based on an attention-based aggregation architecture inspired by Q-Former [58]. To ef-SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 11 

ficiently capture multimodal context, we initialize Nq = 8 

learnable query tokens, each with an embedding dimension of D = 256 . These queries interact with the frozen VLA features—extracted selectively from specific middle and late layers of the backbone (indices 11, 14, and 17 in our 18-layer model)—through a multi-head cross-attention mecha-nism with 8 heads. Note that we explicitly detach gradients from the VLA backbone to prevent interference with the policy representation. The aggregated features are then fed into three independent Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) heads. Specifically, each MLP head projects the 256 -dimensional feature to a hidden dimension of 128 before producing a final scalar output. The heads are optimized over sampled batches 

B as follows: 1) Trajectory Value Vtraj (s): Predicted by the task head to estimate long-term task success probability. It is opti-mized by minimizing the expected Mean Squared Error (MSE) against the ground truth return ytraj :

Ltraj = E(s,y traj )∼D 

h

(Vtraj (s) − ytraj )2i

(8) 2) Subtask Value Vsub (s): Predicted by the subtask head to track the progress of the current sub-goal. Similarly, it minimizes the expected MSE loss with respect to the subtask value label ysub :

Lsub = E(s,y sub )∼D 

h

(Vsub (s) − ysub )2i

(9) 3) Interaction Probability pint (s): Predicted by the interac-tion head to identify contact-rich phases. It uses a Sig-moid activation and is supervised via the expected Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss against the binary interaction label yint :

Lint = −E(s,y int )∼D 

h

yint log pint (s)+ (1 − yint ) log(1 − pint (s)) 

i (10) The total critic loss is the summation of these three compo-nents: Lcritic = Ltraj + Lsub + Lint .APPENDIX BHYPERPARAMETERS 

We list the key hyperparameters used in our experiments in Table V. For the SFT stage, we use the standard flow matching objective. In the RL stages (Offline and Human-in-the-Loop), we utilize the proposed IG-AWR algorithm. The critic network is trained using a separate optimizer. APPENDIX CTASK DESCRIPTIONS 

We provide detailed descriptions and strict success criteria for the four evaluation tasks to ensure experimental rigor.  

> •

Parcel Packing: – Goal: Place an item into a box and close the box. 

– Success Criteria: The object must be fully inside the box, and flaps must be folded flat (sealed). 

– Subtasks Sequence: 

TABLE V: Hyperparameters for IG-RFT Training 

Parameter Value 

General Optimization 

Optimizer AdamW LR Schedule CosineDecay Learning Rate (Actor) 5 × 10 −5

Learning Rate (Critic) 5 × 10 −6

Batch Size 64 Gradient Clipping 1.0 EMA Decay 0.999 LR Warm-up Steps 1,000 Critic Warm-up Steps 2,000 Total Training Steps 30,000 

IG-AWR Algorithm 

AWR Temperature β 0.05 Advantage Clipping [0 , 10] 

IG Flow Threshold δflow 2.0 IG Pixel Threshold Θpixel 400 Exploration σbase 1.5 Exploration σmin 0.2 Exploration Modulation α 0.9 Discount Factor γ 1.0 Trajectory Reward Weight ωtraj 0.4 Subtask Reward Weight ωsub 0.6 

Training Schedule 

SFT Warm-up Steps 5,000 Offline RL Training Steps 25,000 HitL RL Iterations 4HitL RL Update Interval 10 Actor Update Frequency 1.0 Critic Update Frequency 0.5 

1. Pick up the ⟨item ⟩ from the plate. 2. Place the item into the paper box. 3. Move the plate aside. 4. Move the paper box to the center. 5. Fold the lid of the paper box. 

– Average Steps: 1731.  

> •

Fruit Bagging: – Goal: Put three specific fruits (ginger, bitter melon, banana) into a canvas bag and close it. 

– Success Criteria: All three items must be inside, and the lid must cover the opening. 

– Subtasks Sequence: 

1. Open the lid of the canvas bag. 2. For each ⟨item ⟩ in {ginger, bitter melon, banana }:

▷ Pick up the ⟨item ⟩ from the tabletop. 

▷ Place the ⟨item ⟩ into the canvas bag. 3. Move the canvas bag to the center. 4. Close the lid of the canvas bag. 

– Average Steps: 2517.  

> •

Block Stacking: – Goal: Stack 4 colored blocks in a specific order (Red 12 ARXIV PREPRINT 

→ Yellow → Green → Blue). 

– Success Criteria: The stack must stand vertically for at least 3 seconds after release. 

– Subtasks Sequence: 

1. Pick up the red block from the tabletop. 2. Place the red block on the plate. 3. For each pairs ⟨source , target ⟩ in sequence 

{(yellow , red ), (green , yellow ), (blue , green )}:

▷ Pick up the ⟨source ⟩ block from the tabletop. 

▷ Stack the ⟨source ⟩ block on the ⟨target ⟩ block. 

– Average Steps: 1899.  

> •

Drink Shelving: – Goal: Place the container lid on the top shelf, then retrieve 4 drinks from a bin and place them onto the middle shelf via dual-arm handover. 

– Success Criteria: The lid must be on the top shelf. All 4 drinks must be placed upright on the middle shelf layer without falling. 

– Subtasks Sequence: 

1. Pick up the container lid from the bin. 2. Place the lid onto the top shelf. 3. For each ⟨loc ⟩ in sequence 

{leftmost , second-left , second-right , rightmost }:

▷ Pick up the ⟨loc ⟩ drink from the bin using a top-down grasp. 

▷ Hand over the drink to the other arm. 

▷ Place the drink onto the middle shelf via side-insertion. 

– Average Steps: 2931. REFERENCES [1] H. Dong, J. Li, K. Zhu, H. Guo, and G. Lu, “Enabling to learn for force sensing: A coupling-decoupling under-actuated gripper with multiple-dofs,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , p. 02783649251378155, 2025. [2] Z. Su, Y. Ma, H. Guo, and H. Dong, “Construction of bin-picking system for logistic application: A hybrid robotic gripper and vision-based grasp planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [3] Z. Lin, H. Dong, W. Kong, H. Huang, I.-M. Chen, and H. Dong, “A coarse-to-fine multimodal detection framework based on deep learning for robotic coating tasks,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics ,2025. [4] S. Fei, S. Wang, J. Shi, Z. Dai, J. Cai, P. Qian, L. Ji, X. He, S. Zhang, Z. Fei et al. , “Libero-plus: In-depth robustness analysis of vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13626 , 2025. [5] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter et al. , “ π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control.” arXiv preprint ARXIV.2410.24164 .[6] NVIDIA, J. Bjorck, N. C. Fernando Casta˜ neda, X. Da, R. Ding, L. J. Fan, Y. Fang, D. Fox, F. Hu, S. Huang, J. Jang, Z. Jiang, J. Kautz, K. Kundalia, L. Lao, Z. Li, Z. Lin, K. Lin, G. Liu, E. Llontop, L. Magne, A. Mandlekar, A. Narayan, S. Nasiriany, S. Reed, Y. L. Tan, G. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Xiang, Y. Xie, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, S. Ye, Z. Yu, A. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Zheng, and Y. Zhu, “GR00T N1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots,” in ArXiv Preprint , March 2025. [7] K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. R. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, M. Y. Galliker et al. , “ π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,” in 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. [8] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma, A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi, C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti et al. ,“Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844 , 2025. [9] A. Zhai, B. Liu, B. Fang, C. Cai, E. Ma, E. Yin, H. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Shi et al. , “Igniting vlms toward the embodied space,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11766 , 2025. [10] A. Yakefu, B. Xie, C. Xu, E. Zhang, E. Zhou, F. Jia, H. Yang, H. Fan, H. Zhang, H. Peng et al. , “Robochallenge: Large-scale real-robot evaluation of embodied policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17950 ,2025. [11] M. J. Kim, C. Finn, and P. Liang, “Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed and success,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645 , 2025. [12] J. Zheng, J. Li, Z. Wang, D. Liu, X. Kang, Y. Feng, Y. Zheng, J. Zou, Y. Chen, J. Zeng et al. , “X-vla: Soft-prompted transformer as scal-able cross-embodiment vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10274 , 2025. [13] K. Chen, Z. Liu, T. Zhang, Z. Guo, S. Xu, H. Lin, H. Zang, X. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Yu et al. , “ πRL : Online rl fine-tuning for flow-based vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25889 , 2025. [14] C. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Guo, H. Lin, S. Xu, H. Zang, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Zhu, J. Hu et al. , “Rlinf: Flexible and efficient large-scale reinforce-ment learning via macro-to-micro flow transformation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.15965 , 2025. [15] A. Ye, Z. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, and Z. Zhu, “Vla-r1: Enhancing reasoning in vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01623 , 2025. [16] W. Xiao, H. Lin, A. Peng, H. Xue, T. He, Y. Xie, F. Hu, J. Wu, Z. Luo, L. Fan et al. , “Self-improving vision-language-action models with data generation via residual rl,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00091 , 2025. [17] H. Deng, Z. Wu, H. Liu, W. Guo, Y. Xue, Z. Shan, C. Zhang, B. Jia, Y. Ling, G. Lu et al. , “A survey on reinforcement learning of vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation,” Authorea Preprints ,2025. [18] B. Wang, Z. Lin, W. Kong, and H. Dong, “Bin packing optimization via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2542–2549, 2025. [19] Y. Wang, W. Yu, H. Wu, H. Guo, and H. Dong, “Sa-dem: Dexterous ex-trinsic robotic manipulation of non-graspable objects via stiffness-aware dual-stage reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 23, pp. 347–362, 2025. [20] J. Luo, C. Xu, J. Wu, and S. Levine, “Precise and dexterous robotic manipulation via human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics , vol. 10, no. 105, p. eads5033, 2025. [21] Y. Chen, S. Tian, S. Liu, Y. Zhou, H. Li, and D. Zhao, “Conrft: A reinforced fine-tuning method for vla models via consistency policy,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05450 , 2025. [22] Physical Intelligence, A. Amin et al. , “ π∗

> 0.6

: A VLA that learns from experience,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759 , 2025. [23] H. Zhang, Z. Zhuang, H. Zhao, P. Ding, H. Lu, and D. Wang, “Rein-bot: Amplifying robot visual-language manipulation with reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07395 , 2025. [24] C.-Y. Hung, N. Majumder, H. Deng, L. Renhang, Y. Ang, A. Zadeh, C. Li, D. Herremans, Z. Wang, and S. Poria, “Nora-1.5: A vision-language-action model trained using world model-and action-based preference rewards,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14659 , 2025. [25] Z. Zhang, K. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. Jang, Y. Li, S. Han, C. Wang, M. Ding, D. Fox, and H. Yao, “Grape: Generalizing robot policy via preference alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19309 , 2024. [26] S. Zhai, Q. Zhang, T. Zhang, F. Huang, H. Zhang, M. Zhou, S. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Lin, and J. Pang, “A vision-language-action-critic model for robotic real-world reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.15937 , 2025. [27] H. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Jin, Q. Zeng, Y. Qiao, H. Lu, and D. Wang, “Balancing signal and variance: Adaptive offline rl post-training for vla flow models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04063 , 2025. [28] J. Luo, Z. Hu, C. Xu, Y. L. Tan, J. Berg, A. Sharma, S. Schaal, C. Finn, A. Gupta, and S. Levine, “Serl: A software suite for sample-efficient robotic reinforcement learning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 16 961–16 969. [29] Y. Li, X. Ma, J. Xu, Y. Cui, Z. Cui, Z. Han, L. Huang, T. Kong, Y. Liu, H. Niu et al. , “Gr-rl: Going dexterous and precise for long-horizon robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01801 , 2025. [30] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. [31] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 44, no. 10-11, pp. 1684–1704, 2025. SU ET AL.: IG-RFT: AN INTERACTION-GUIDED RL FRAMEWORK FOR VLA MODELS IN LONG-HORIZON ROBOTIC MANIPULATION 13 

[32] S. K. S. Ghasemipour, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, P. Sanketi, and I. Mor-datch, “Self-improving embodied foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.15155 , 2025. [33] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi et al. , “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 ,2024. [34] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, J. Hsu et al. , “Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. [35] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia, J. Wu, P. Wohlhart, S. Welker, A. Wahid et al. , “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 2165–2183. [36] K. Pertsch, K. Stachowicz, B. Ichter, D. Driess, S. Nair, Q. Vuong, O. Mees, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747 , 2025. [37] L. X. Shi, B. Ichter, M. Equi, L. Ke, K. Pertsch, Q. Vuong, J. Tanner, A. Walling, H. Wang, N. Fusai et al. , “Hi robot: Open-ended instruc-tion following with hierarchical vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19417 , 2025. [38] G. Lu, W. Guo, C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Jiang, Z. Gao, Y. Tang, and Z. Wang, “Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18719 ,2025. [39] J. Liu, F. Gao, B. Wei, X. Chen, Q. Liao, Y. Wu, C. Yu, and Y. Wang, “What can rl bring to vla generalization? an empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19789 , 2025. [40] Y. Chebotar, Q. Vuong, K. Hausman, F. Xia, Y. Lu, A. Irpan, A. Kumar, T. Yu, A. Herzog, K. Pertsch et al. , “Q-transformer: Scalable offline reinforcement learning via autoregressive q-functions,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 3909–3928. [41] H. Li, Y. Zuo, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, K. Zhang, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, T. Chen, G. Cui et al. , “Simplevla-rl: Scaling vla training via reinforce-ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09674 , 2025. [42] C. Zhang, Z. Wan, F. Chen, X. Yu, I. Tsang, and B. An, “Gorl: An algorithm-agnostic framework for online reinforcement learning with generative policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02581 , 2025. [43] J. Liu, G. Liu, J. Liang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Wang, P. Wan, D. Zhang, and W. Ouyang, “Flow-grpo: Training flow matching models via online rl,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05470 , 2025. [44] M. Lyu, Y. Sun, E. Lin, H. Li, R. Chen, F. Zhao, and Y. Zeng, “Re-inforcement fine-tuning of flow-matching policies for vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09976 , 2025. [45] K. Frans, S. Park, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Diffusion guid-ance is a controllable policy improvement operator,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23458 , 2025. [46] A. Wagenmaker, M. Nakamoto, Y. Zhang, S. Park, W. Yagoub, A. Naga-bandi, A. Gupta, and S. Levine, “Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15799 ,2025. [47] J. Zhang, Z. Huang, C. Gu, Z. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Reinforcing action policies by prophesying,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20633 , 2025. [48] F. Zhu, Z. Yan, Z. Hong, Q. Shou, X. Ma, and S. Guo, “WMPO: World model-based policy optimization for vision-language-action models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09515 , 2025. [49] S. Fei, S. Wang, L. Ji, A. Li, S. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Hou, J. Gong, X. Zhao, and X. Qiu, “Srpo: Self-referential policy optimization for vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15605 , 2025. [50] F. Xu, G. Zhai, X. Kong, T. Fu, D. F. Gordon, X. An, and B. Busam, “Stare-vla: Progressive stage-aware reinforcement for fine-tuning vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05107 , 2025. [51] M. Dai, L. Liu, Y. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, R. Su, C. Chen, L. Lin, and X. Wu, “Rover: Robot reward model as test-time verifier for vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10975 , 2025. [52] Q. Chen, J. Yu, M. Schwager, P. Abbeel, Y. Shentu, and P. Wu, “Sarm: Stage-aware reward modeling for long horizon robot manipulation,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25358 , 2025. [53] C. Xu, Q. Li, J. Luo, and S. Levine, “Rldg: Robotic generalist policy dis-tillation via reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09858 ,2024. [54] G. Lu, R. Zhao, H. Lin, H. Zhang, and Y. Tang, “Human-in-the-loop online rejection sampling for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26406 , 2025. [55] C. Yuan, S. Joshi, S. Zhu, H. Su, H. Zhao, and Y. Gao, “Roboengine: Plug-and-play robot data augmentation with semantic robot segmen-tation and background generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18738 ,2025. [56] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow,” in European conference on computer vision . Springer, 2020, pp. 402–419. [57] X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine, “Advantage-weighted regression: Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177 , 2019. [58] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 19 730–19 742. [59] D. Driess, J. T. Springenberg, B. Ichter, L. Yu, A. Li-Bell, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren, H. Walke, Q. Vuong, L. X. Shi et al. , “Knowledge insulating vision-language-action models: Train fast, run fast, generalize better,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23705 , 2025. [60] K. Black, M. Y. Galliker, and S. Levine, “Real-time execution of action chunking flow policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07339 , 2025. [61] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021. [62] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 27 730–27 744, 2022. [63] D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, R. Zhang, R. Xu, Q. Zhu, S. Ma, P. Wang, X. Bi et al. , “Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 ,2025. [64] Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song, X. Bi, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Wu et al. , “Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 ,2024. [65] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 ,2017. [66] M. J. Kim, Y. Gao, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, Y. Ge, G. Lam, P. Liang, S. Song, M.-Y. Liu, C. Finn et al. , “Cosmos policy: Fine-tuning video models for visuomotor control and planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16163 , 2026.