Title: RC-NF: Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow for Real-Time Anomaly Detection in Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11106v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:06:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# RC-NF: Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow for Real-Time Anomaly Detection in Robotic Manipulation 

# Shijie Zhou 1,2 Bin Zhu 3 Jiarui Yang 1,2 Xiangyu Zhao 1,2 Jingjing Chen 1,2* Yu-Gang Jiang 1,21Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University 

> 2

# Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multimodal Embodied AI 3Singapore Management University 

§ https://heikaishuizz.github.io/RC-NF/ {zhousj24, jryang24, zhaoxy25 }@m.fudan.edu.cn, binzhu@smu.edu.sg, {chenjingjing, ygj }@fudan.edu.cn 

Figure 1. We propose Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow (RC-NF) model to monitor in real time whether the robot’s execution state and object motion trajectory remain consistent with the task. To evaluate anomaly (i.e., Out-of-Distribution, OOD) detection performance, we introduce LIBERO-Anomaly-10, which includes three common robotic anomalies. Real-world experiments further demonstrate RC-NF manages to enhance the adaptability of the VLA models (e.g.,  π0). 

# Abstract 

Recent advances in Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have enabled robots to execute increasingly complex tasks. However, VLA models trained through imitation learn-ing struggle to operate reliably in dynamic environments and often fail under Out-of-Distribution (OOD) condi-tions. To address this issue, we propose Robot-Conditioned 

Normalizing Flow ( RC-NF ), a real-time monitoring model for robotic anomaly detection and intervention that ensures the robot’s state and the object’s motion trajectory align with the task. RC-NF decouples the processing of task-aware robot and object states within the normalizing flow. It requires only positive samples for unsupervised training and calculates accurate robotic anomaly scores during in-ference through the probability density function. We fur-

> * Corresponding author.

ther present LIBERO-Anomaly-10, a benchmark compris-ing three categories of robotic anomalies for simulation evaluation. RC-NF achieves state-of-the-art performance across all anomaly types compared to previous methods in monitoring robotic tasks. Real-world experiments demon-strate that RC-NF operates as a plug-and-play module for VLA models (e.g.,  π0), providing a real-time OOD sig-nal that enables state-level rollback or task-level replan-ning when necessary, with a response latency under 100 ms. These results have demonstrated that our RC-NF no-ticeably enhances the robustness and adaptability of VLA-based robotic systems in dynamic environments. 

# 1. Introduction 

With the development of Vision-Language Models (VLM), Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [5, 19, 20, 23, 52] 

> arXiv:2603.11106v1 [cs.CV] 11 Mar 2026

are capable of performing an increasing variety of manip-ulation tasks from natural-language prompts. These VLA models are typically trained through imitation learning on expert demonstration data, and map high-level task prompts to low-level control actions. However, despite their im-pressive performance, VLA models often struggle when de-ployed in dynamic real-world environments, where Out-of-Distribution (OOD) scenarios occur frequently and can sig-nificantly degrade performance. As a result, VLA models require an accurate runtime monitoring system to determine whether the robot’s execution remains consistent with the intended task in OOD situations. Previous works on runtime monitoring typically formu-late failure detection as a robotic state classification prob-lem [3, 26, 38, 42, 43], requiring exhaustive enumera-tion of abnormal conditions or manually defined precondi-tions. However, this approach struggles to handle the com-binatorial variability of real-world manipulation. Recent approaches have introduced high-level Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as in dual-system architectures [6, 9, 12, 17, 28, 39, 51] and Sentinel [1], but these models require multi-step reasoning, resulting in multi-second latency, hin-dering timely intervention. To address these limitations, we propose Robot-

Conditioned Normalizing Flow (RC-NF ), a real-time anomaly detection model that monitors whether the joint distribution of robot states and task-relevant object trajec-tories is consistent with normal task execution. Specif-ically, RC-NF is trained solely on successful demonstra-tions and models robot–object motion through a conditional normalizing flow. At runtime, it computes an anomaly score based on the probability density. If the score ex-ceeds the threshold, behavioral drift is immediately de-tected. Key to RC-NF is a novel affine coupling layer, the Robot-Conditioned Point Query Net work ( RCPQNet ), which fuses robot states, task embeddings, and object-centric point-set representations from SAM2 [32] segmen-tations. In particular, RCPQNet is designed to decouple robot state and object features while preserving their inter-active features, providing a structured and expressive repre-sentation for manipulation tasks. To evaluate our method, we introduce LIBERO-Anomaly-10 , a benchmark for robotic anomaly detection built upon LIBERO-10 [25]. Unlike prior datasets fo-cused on generalized task failures [1, 34, 36, 47], LIBERO-Anomaly-10 contains three manipulation-specific anomaly types— Gripper Open , Gripper Slippage , and Spatial Mis-alignment —each designed to test a different axis of devia-tion from expert trajectories. Compared to current state-of-the-art robotic monitoring model [47] and VLMs [1, 4, 8, 29], our proposed RC-NF achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance across all anomaly types, surpassing the best base-line by approximately 8% AUC and 10% AP respectively. In real-world deployment, RC-NF can detect anomalies within 100 ms. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RC-NF can trigger corrections for both task-level and state-level OOD situations, thereby enhancing the adaptability and ro-bustness of VLA models (e.g., π0 [5]). Task-level OOD oc-curs when the current VLA input task prompt no longer sup-ports the task, requiring task replanning. State-level OOD refers to situations where the relative motion trajectory be-tween the robot and the object drifts outside the VLA train-ing distribution [35]. Although the instruction is still valid, recovery can still be achieved by adjusting the trajectory ac-cording to the original task. At the task level, RC-NF serves as a trigger for the high-level module, bridging the low-level and high-level modules. At the state level, RC-NF can trig-ger the homing procedure to correct the trajectory, enabling real-time adjustments for VLA. In summary, our main contributions are as follows. • We propose RC-NF, an unsupervised robot-conditioned normalizing flow for robotic anomaly detection, featuring a novel affine coupling layer (RCPQNet) that injects task-aware robot states as conditions into the normalizing flow. • We present LIBERO-Anomaly-10, a new benchmark spanning three diverse manipulation-specific anomaly types, and show that RC-NF achieves state-of-the-art AUC and AP, outperforming prior robotic failure detec-tors and VLM-based monitors. • We validate RC-NF in real-world robotic manipulation, showing that it detects anomalies within 100 ms and sup-ports both task-level replanning and state-level trajec-tory rollback, substantially enhancing the robustness and adaptability of VLA models in dynamic environments. 

# 2. Related Work 

Vision-Language-Action Model. With the advance-ment of foundational models, powerful VLA models have emerged [5, 19, 20, 23, 52]. These imitation learning strate-gies face challenges during inference, particularly under Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) conditions. For example, task-level OOD occurs when instructions no longer align with the operational environment, while state-level OOD arises when the robotic state drifts from the training distribu-tion [35, 48]. Existing methods [6, 9, 12, 17, 39, 51]that integrate high-level decision-making with low-level execu-tion help address task-level OOD to some extent but are limited by their execution speed and response accuracy. In contrast, our approach can provide feedback on anomalies within 100 ms, effectively correcting low-level execution in response to both task-level and state-level OOD. 

Point Representations for Manipulation. Points effec-tively describe the position and motion trajectory of ob-jects. As embodied intelligence progresses, points are vi-tal in both high-level semantic understanding and low-level action execution [14–16, 18, 24, 30, 40, 41]. Existing work Figure 2. Overview of our framework. Our Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow (RC-NF) operates as a real-time runtime monitor for robotic manipulation tasks. (Left) SAM2 extracts object masks from video streaming, which are then grid-sampled into point sets. Task prompts are encoded using spherical uniform encoding, and robot proprioception provides joint, gripper, and pose states. (Center) Our RC-NF leverages these signals as conditions within the affine coupling layers in the proposed RCPQNet (Sec . 3.3) to apply K invertible transformations and compute anomaly scores for the current task. (Right) When the anomaly score exceeds the threshold, the Anomaly Detection and Handling module triggers corrective behaviors by task replanning for task-level OOD and task rollback for state-level OOD. 

relies on sparse point trajectories as intermediate represen-tations to guide execution modules. With advancements in open-world object detection [7, 11, 33, 46] and visual segmentation [22, 32], this paper introduces a point set en-riched with object semantic shapes, providing a more de-tailed representation during execution. 

Runtime Robot Behavior Monitoring. Some studies frame anomaly detection as a state classification problem, such as using behavior trees to partition or roll back task steps [3, 26, 38, 42, 43]. However, these methods depend on explicit task design, which may limit their applicabil-ity to more complex tasks. Recent studies have employed VLMs for task monitoring [1, 27, 45, 45], but these re-quire chain of thought inferences to generate anomaly as-sessment, making it difficult to quickly adapt to environ-mental changes. FailDetect [47] proposed an unsupervised flow matching model [49] that concatenates image features with robot states as its input, but this method leaves po-tential for improvement in feature selection and processing. To address above, inspired by anomaly detection in pedes-trian scenarios [2, 10, 13, 44, 50], RC-NF uses unsupervised training, eliminating the need to enumerate all anomalies. It processes multimodal inputs through decoupled pathways, enabling intuitive anomaly score reflection. As a result, RC-NF can operate as a sub-100 ms fast system, preventing fail-ure accumulation in closed-loop control. 

# 3. Method 

3.1. Preliminary 

Normalizing Flow (NF) establishes a bidirectional map-ping between the complex distribution  X and a simple prob-ability distribution  Z via a sequence of invertible transfor-mations  f , enabling explicit probability density estimation: 

pX (x) = pZ (f (x)) det 

 ∂f ∂x 



. (1) Taking the Glow [21] model as an example, the entire network consists of  K flow steps  f . Each flow step com-prises three layers: an ActNorm layer, a permutation layer, and an affine coupling layer. The ActNorm layer applies learnable channel-wise scaling and bias initialized with the first data batch, achieving normalization while preserving invertibility. The permutation transformation employs an invertible  1×1 convolution to reorder feature channels. This formulation allows NF models to compute tractable likeli-hoods and to model complex distributions while maintain-ing differentiability and invertibility. The affine coupling layer splits the input into two parts,  x0 and  x1, using  x0 to compute the scale  γ and shift  β via a neural network. The affine transformation  x1 ⊙ γ + β is then applied to  x1, leav-ing  x0 unchanged. This design ensures invertibility with a tractable Jacobian determinant. 

3.2. Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow 

Building on the foundation of Normalizing Flow, as shown in Fig. 2, we propose the Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow (RC-NF), which augments Glow with robot- and task-aware conditioning. Specifically, we design a new affine coupling layer—the Robot-Conditioned Point Query Net-work (RCPQNet, detailed in Sec. 3.3)—that integrates the robot’s execution state s and target object trajectory xtarget 

to model the conditional probability of successful task ex-ecution. This formulation allows RC-NF to detect whether the joint distribution pT (xtarget , s ) deviates from the task T

by applying a threshold-based criterion. Specifically, RC-NF extends a standard NF by condition-ing on  c = ( s, τ ), where  s denotes the robot state and  τ is the task embedding. The task embedding  τ is derived by mapping the current task prompt to a surface vector of a  T -dimensional hypersphere with radius  R. T is the number of sliding-window steps. These surface vectors, optimized to approximate a uniform distribution on the hypersphere, ensure maximal separation between task embeddings in the latent space, providing an optimal geometric structure for subsequent density estimation. The robot state  s includes the  T -dimensional joint state, gripper state, and Cartesian pose. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the video stream captured by the camera is processed by SAM2 [32] to obtain object segmentation masks. Grid sampling is then applied to these masks to extract the shape representation of the manipulated objects. Given this point set  X , RC-NF maps it into a Gaus-sian latent distribution  Z ∼ N (μtask , I ), where the mean 

μtask  is obtained by broadcasting the task embedding  τ to match the dimensionality of  Z.The conditional invertible mapping of RC-NF defines: 

z = fc(x), (2) where  x ∈ X  , z ∈ Z , and  fc is a composition of  K con-ditional transformations, with intermediate representations 

yi, and final output  z = yK :

y0 = x, y i = fi,c (yi−1), z = yK , i = 1 , . . . , K.  (3) Based on the change-of-variables principle, where the Ja-cobian determinant accounts for the local volume change induced by the transformation, we can compute the condi-tional likelihood of x given c as follows: 

pX|C (x | c) = pZ|C (fc(x) | c) det ∂f c(x)

∂x . (4) Taking the logarithm of Eq. 3 and expanding over K steps: 

log pX|C (x | c) = log pZ|C (z | c)+

> K

X

> i=1

log det ∂f i,c (yi−1)

∂y i−1

. (5) During training, we maximize the log-likelihood in Eq. 5. For a Gaussian prior over the latent variable z, the log-probability term can be expressed as: 

log pZ|C (z | c) = Const − 12 ∥z − μtask ∥22. (6) The resulting log-probability reflects the likelihood that the current robot-object configuration belongs to the nom-inal task distribution, with the negative value representing the anomaly score. Each conditional transformation fi,c in RC-NF employs an affine coupling layer parameterized by the Robot-Conditioned Point Query Network (RCPQNet), which fuses task embeddings and robot states to generate context-dependent transformation parameters.  

> Figure 3. Robot-Conditioned Point Query Network (RCPQNet) is introduced as the affine coupling layer in RC-NF that generates shift and scale parameters.

3.3. Robot-Conditioned Point Query Network 

As shown in Fig. 2, we denote the point set generated by SAM2 as  x ∈ RB×T ×N ×2, where  B represents the batch size,  T is the number of sliding-window steps,  N denotes the number of sampled points per object mask, and the last dimension corresponds to the 2D coordinates of each point. The point set after the ActNorm and Permute layers of the first flow step is also denoted as  x, which is used as an exam-ple to illustrate the processing flow of the RCPQNet. The point set  x is split into two halves along the temporal di-mension:  xb = x[: T / 2]  and  xt = x[T / 2 :] .The scaling factor  γ and shift  β are obtained by applying 

RCPQNet (xb, c ), where  c = ( s, τ ), as detailed in Sec. 3.2: 

γ, β = RCPQNet (xb, c ).

Based on the above definition, the output of the flow step y, can be expressed as: 

y =

yt

yb



=

γ ⊙ xt + βxb



.

As illustrated in Fig. 3, RCPQNet utilizes Task-aware Robot-Conditioned Queries to generate the query token and Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding to create the memory token. They are then used in cross-attention within the transformer. Hence, the model learns context-aware affine parameters that adjust the flow’s transformation based on the robot’s current state and the performing task. 

Task-aware Robot-Conditioned Query. The robot state is first projected into a latent space through a linear layer and then modulated by the task embedding  τ using FiLM[31] to produce task-specific query features. These query tokens encode both the robot’s state context and the high-level goal specified by the task prompt, serving as dynamic keys for retrieving relevant temporal and spatial cues from subse-quent feature memories. 

Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding. To capture com-plementary spatial-temporal representations, RCPQNet em-ploys Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding. The Dynamic Shape branch performs centering and normalization on each frame to eliminate translation and scale effects dur-ing the extraction of shape features. The Positional Resid-ual branch focuses on compensating for the information lost during shape normalization of the raw point set. Sub-sequently, the features are passed through an MLP to in-crease their dimensionality and then average-pooled to ob-tain frame-level representations. These representations are sequentially modeled by their respective GRUs to capture temporal dependencies. Finally, they are encoded by a Transformer encoder to produce the memory vectors. 

3.4. Anomaly Detection and Handling 

Anomaly Detection. During deployment, RC-NF func-tions as a plug-and-play and real-time monitoring module that can be seamlessly integrated into existing VLA control loops without architectural modification (see Fig. 2). Oper-ating in parallel with the policy network, RC-NF continu-ously observes both the visual stream and robot-state feed-back, estimating the likelihood of the current execution tra-jectory under the learned nominal task distribution. At each time step, the negative log-likelihood of the observed con-figuration is used as an anomaly score, where higher values indicate greater deviation from expected task execution. When the anomaly score exceeds an upper threshold, it indicates both an anomaly and an OOD condition. During RC-NF training, debiasing is applied to ensure the tempo-ral smoothness of anomaly scores in each demonstration. Therefore, we adopt a static threshold that does not vary over time. For each task  T , the upper threshold is estimated using calibration datasets  S1 and  S2 derived from success-ful expert demonstrations[37, 47]: 

Upper T = μT + Q1−α(DT ), (7) where  μT is the mean anomaly score from  S1, and 

DT = {D1, . . . , D n2 } denotes the score deviations from 

μT values in  S2. Q1−α(DT ) is the  (1 − α)-quantile. 

Anomaly Handling. Once an anomaly is detected, a high-level system determines whether it corresponds to a state-level or task-level OOD case. In practice, the system first performs a lightweight state-level recovery and escalates to task-level replanning if required. On one hand, task-level OOD represents that the environment or context no longer matches the given instruction. For instance, the drawer be-comes closed when the prompt specifies place the blue ball into the open drawer . In this case, RC-NF alerts the high-level controller (e.g, a human operator or LLM-based plan-ner) to perform task replanning, producing an updated se-quence of sub-tasks or object interactions consistent with the new environmental state. On the other hand, state-level OOD indicates that the task remains valid, but the robot’s physical configuration has drifted from the nominal distri-bution. For example, during the execution of the task place the blue ball into the open drawer , if the ball falls from the gripper onto the table (in this experiment, we manually reposition the ball from the gripper onto the table), RC-NF detects an increase in the anomaly score. Then a homing procedure, designed to return the robotic arm to its initial state, is activated for task rollback. It locally adjusts the tra-jectory or control parameters until the anomaly score falls below the threshold. Once the environment and robot state return to the familiar data distribution, execution control is seamlessly handed back to the VLA for normal operation. 

# 4. Experiment 

We primarily conduct quantitative analysis of RC-NF’s anomaly detection capability through simulation experi-ments, and demonstrate the significance of the monitoring mechanism through real-world robotic tasks. 

4.1. Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We train RC-NF on the original LIBERO-10 dataset, which efficiently encompasses all the scenar-ios present in the LIBERO dataset[25], with 50 demon-strations per task. We evaluate it on our proposed LIBERO-Anomaly-10 benchmark. It introduces three dis-tinct anomaly types, illustrated in Fig. 1: (1) Gripper Open :the gripper remains open at tanomaly , when it should grasp the object, leaving the object untouched and unperturbed. This case tests a situation where the object position remains nor-mal, but the robot state does not align with it. (2) Gripper Slippage : at tanomaly , when the gripper is holding the object, the gripper friction is set to zero, causing the object to slip and produce abnormal trajectory fluctuations. (3) Spatial Misalignment : the robot moves toward the wrong compart-ment (left, front or right) instead of the intended back at 

tanomaly , testing semantic–spatial misalignment between the task prompt and motion direction. During annotation, the period before tanomaly is labeled as normal and after tanomaly as abnormal. Gripper Open and 

Gripper Slippage are generated for all ten tasks in LIBERO-10, whereas Spatial Misalignment corresponds to tasks in-volving three different incorrect compartment placements (front, left, and right), rather than the demo task Pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy .

Baselines and Evaluation Metrics. We compare RC-NF against two categories of methods. The first category is VLM-based monitoring method, represented by Sen-Table 1. Quantitative comparison of anomaly detection performance on the LIBERO-Anomaly-10 benchmark. 

Method Gripper Open Gripper Slippage Spatial Misalignment Average AUC AP AUC AP AUC AP AUC AP 

GPT-5 [29] 0.9137 0.9642 0.8941 0.8720 0.4904 0.4015 0.8500 0.8507 Gemini 2.5 Pro [8] 0.8644 0.9333 0.8633 0.8505 0.5167 0.4271 0.8186 0.8313 Claude 4.5 [4] 0.8754 0.9401 0.8551 0.8285 0.5292 0.4290 0.8214 0.8249 FailDetect [47] 0.7883 0.9032 0.6665 0.6932 0.6557 0.5820 0.7181 0.7700 

RC-NF(Ours) 0.9312 0.9781 0.9195 0.9180 0.9676 0.9585 0.9309 0.9494 

tinel [1], where we employ the most advanced VLMs, GPT-5 [29], Gemini 2.5 Pro [8], and Claude 4.5 [4]. They are evaluated under conditions involving parallel invocation and a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. The second category is also flow-based, represented by FailDetect [47], a flow-matching model that jointly encodes image and robot-state features for unsupervised failure detection. We evaluate the model using Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) and Average Precision (AP). AUC assesses the model’s overall discriminatory ability, while AP focuses on precision-recall performance, particularly for imbalanced tasks like anomaly detection. These threshold-independent metrics offer a comprehensive evaluation of both discrimi-natory power and precision-recall trade-offs. 

Real-World Setup. Experiments are conducted on a Franka Research 3 robotic arm equipped with both a wrist-mounted and a third-person camera, both of which are Intel Re-alSense D435 depth cameras. VLA model π0 [5] is adopted as the imitation policy baseline. The training demonstra-tions for both VLA and RC-NF are consistent. VLA uses both camera views during training, while RC-NF uses only the third-person camera for monitoring. The threshold pa-rameters of real-world experiments in Eq. 7 are set with 

α = 0 .05 , following the design of FailDetect [47]. 

Implementation Details. As shown in Fig. 2, before SAM2 processes the video stream, a bounding box prompt is re-quired for the first frame. In the simulation environment, computer graphics techniques are used to ensure the re-producibility of the point set. In the real-world setup, the bounding box is obtained using the Gemini 2.5 Pro. The parameters of FailDetect [47] follow its open-source code exactly. The prompts for the VLMs are derived from Sentinel [1], originally designed for task progress assess-ment, and are used in this paper as anomaly scores with the following anchors: 0–3 (normal), 4–6 (slightly abnor-mal), and 7–10 (strongly abnormal). For RC-NF, the num-ber of flow steps is  K = 12  and the model is trained for 100 epochs with debiasing applied for data balancing. More de-tails can be found in the Supplementary Materials. 

4.2. Performance Comparison 

Table 1 presents a comparison of anomaly detection perfor-mance on the LIBERO-Anomaly-10 benchmark. Across all   

> Figure 4. Visualization of the anomaly scores for the task Pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy . The x-axis denotes the time steps, and the y-axis indicates the anomaly score. The red dashed line marks tanomaly .

anomaly types, RC-NF consistently outperforms baselines across all metrics, surpassing the best prior method by about 

8% in AUC and 10.0% in AP on average. VLMs achieve moderate success in Gripper Open and 

Gripper Slippage but degrade to near-random performance (AUC ≈ 0.5, AP ≈ 0.4) on Spatial Misalignment , highlight-ing their difficulty in aligning visual semantics with spatial reasoning. In contrast, RC-NF can precisely compute the degree of deviation from the normal trajectory for the task in real-time, replacing semantic understanding with the spa-tial trajectories of the object and robot arm. Compared to FailDetect, RC-NF offers significant ad-vantages in feature selection and feature processing for robotic anomaly monitoring. In terms of feature selection, RC-NF operates on a refined point-set representation de-rived from segmentation masks, which offers greater robust-ness to noise than raw image features used in FailDetect. Regarding feature processing, RC-NF treats the robot state features as query tokens and the object point features as memory tokens, enabling an efficient and decoupled design that encourages multimodal information interaction while avoiding feature interference. By contrast, FailDetect con-catenates robot and image features as flow-matching inputs, Table 2. Ablation study of the proposed Robot-Conditioned Point Query Network (RCPQNet). RC-NF (Ours) denotes the full model. 

Row Method Gripper Open Gripper Slippage Spatial Misalignment Average AUC AP AUC AP AUC AP AUC AP 

1 RC-NF(Ours) 0.9312 0.9781 0.9195 0.9180 0.9676 0.9585 0.9309 0.9494 

2 w/o Task Embedding 0.8769 0.9603 0.8668 0.8680 0.8139 0.8118 0.8643 0.9008 3 w/o Robot State 0.6327 0.8621 0.7443 0.8116 0.8929 0.8617 0.7152 0.8401 4 w/o Pos. Residual branch 0.9045 0.9712 0.8971 0.9085 0.8543 0.8072 0.8947 0.9225 5 w/o Dyn. Shape branch 0.7666 0.9234 0.7763 0.8108 0.1022 0.2755 0.6841 0.7899      

> Figure 5. A real-world comparison of π0and π0+ RC-NF (ours) during the task placing the ball into the open drawer , when the drawer closes midway.

leading to entangled representations and feature imbalance. Fig. 4 visualizes the anomaly detection curves for the task Pick up the book and place it in the back compart-ment of the caddy . RC-NF maintains a stable score of -2 before  tanomaly  for each task, indicating normal behavior. Once an anomaly occurs after  tanomaly , as indicated by the red dashed line, it quickly reacts by increasing the anomaly score. Compared to VLM-based monitoring methods, RC-NF can calculate the anomaly score in real-time without the need for prolonged inference or reasoning. In contrast to FailDetect, RC-NF produces scores that are superior in terms of smoothness, stability, and accuracy, which can be attributed to its structured feature decoupling and robot-conditioned flow formulation. 

4.3. Ablation Study 

To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed Robot-Conditioned Point Query Network (RCPQNet), as shown in Tab. 2, we perform ablations on the two principal com-ponents introduced in Sec. 3.3. 

Effect of Task-Aware Robot-Conditioned Query. To as-sess the role of task modulation and robot awareness, we remove either the task embedding or the robot-state fea-tures. When the task embedding is removed (Row 2), the point set  X is projected into the latent space  Z ∼ N (0 , I ).As a result, model can only detect dataset-level OOD sam-ples but fails to distinguish task-specific anomalies. Perfor-mance on Spatial Misalignment drops nearly threefold com-pared to the counterparts, confirming that task embeddings are crucial for encoding spatial intent and disambiguating similar object trajectories under different instructions. In addition, removing robot-state features (Row 3) eliminates contextual grounding of object motion. For the Gripper Open anomaly , since the gripper remaining open does not directly displace the object, the anomaly manifests in the relative motion between the robot and the object, leading to the greatest drop in AUC. In contrast, for the Spatial Mis-alignment anomaly, the anomaly can be detected through the object’s positional deviation, leading to the least decline. These results highlight that robot-conditioned query enables RC-NF to reason jointly about robot–object motion, result-ing in more precise anomaly localization. 

Effect of Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding. We fur-ther examine the contribution of the two encoding branches within RCPQNet: the Positional Residual branch and the 

Dynamic Shape branch . Removing the positional branch (Row 4) results in a moderate drop, with an average AUC of approximately 0.89, suggesting that absolute spatial in-formation complements dynamic-shape cues by preserving average shifts within robot-object motion features. The Dy-namic Shape branch treats the point sets of all objects as a unified whole, representing the relative movements between target objects as shape variations of the entire set. Remov-ing this branch (Row 5) leads to the greatest degradation (AUC ≈ 0.68 on average), underscoring its importance in Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding. The sharp decline observed under Spatial Misalignment further indicates that temporal shape evolution provides stronger evidence of ab-normality than inter-frame average positional shifts. 

4.4. Real-World Evaluation 

We further conduct real-world evaluations to demonstrate how RC-NF enhances the adaptability and robustness of Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policies. The study fo-cuses on the representative scenario placing the blue ball into the open drawer and associated derivative tasks using the  π0 model as the baseline. In real-world deployment, RC-NF can detect anomalies within 100 ms on a consumer-Figure 6. Comparison of  π0 + RC-NF (Ours) and  π0 model in handling two consecutive task-level OOD events during real-world deploy-ment. t1a represents the moment when the ball is repositioned on the table. t2a marks when the ball rolls behind the gripper. t3r indicates when control is returned to the VLA after homing. The timeline of  π0 + RC-NF (Ours) is shown in Fig. 7.     

> Figure 7. Anomaly score plot for a state-level OOD sequence where the ball is repositioned at t1aand rolls behind the gripper at
> t2a. The yellow curve indicates the detection of an anomaly, with the trajectory corrected by the homing procedure. The green curve represents the operation of the VLA model π0.

grade GPU such as Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090. Related videos can be found in the Supplementary Materials. 

Task-Level Anomaly Handling. As shown in Fig. 5, dur-ing the execution of the task, if the drawer closes unexpect-edly,  π0 policy continues execution and fails. With our RC-NF, the anomaly score computed from the visual stream and robot state increases sharply beyond the threshold defined in Eq. 7.  π0+RC-NF manages to pause the motion and signals the high-level controller (human or LLM planner) to initiate task replanning, i.e., reset the ball and open the drawer first, then execute the task normally, leading to task success. 

State-Level Anomaly Handling. As shown in Fig. 6 and 7, we next examine state-level disturbances that preserve task intent but perturb execution dynamics. At t1a, when the ball returns to the table, RC-NF quickly signals an anomaly and activates the homing procedure to re-align the trajectory. Nevertheless, π0 alone experiences a delay, which contin-ues moving to the drawer with empty gripper. In addition, when the ball rolls behind the gripper at t2a, RC-NF detects the anomaly immediately and adjusts the trajectory towards the new position of the ball. Once the anomaly score drops to normal at  t3r , control is seamlessly returned to VLA for regular operation. Without RC-NF, π0 continues to move incorrectly, causing the gripper to grasp air and lift. The real-world evaluation demonstrates that RC-NF transfers effectively from simulation to physical settings. It provides low-latency feedback for both task-level and state-level OOD anomalies, enabling safe and adaptive execu-tion without altering the underlying VLA architecture. The plug-and-play design allows direct integration with existing imitation-learning policies, enhancing robustness and situa-tional awareness in unstructured environments. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We introduced the Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow model, designed to enhance the adaptability of VLA mod-els in dynamic real-world environments. By utilizing 

Task-aware Robot-Conditioned Query and Dual-Branch Point Feature Encoding , RC-NF enables real-time robotic anomaly detection, improving the robot’s ability to handle Out-of-distribution scenarios. Our quantitative experiments on the LIBERO-Anomaly-10 benchmark show that RC-NF outperforms existing methods for monitoring, achiev-ing state-of-the-art AUC and AP scores. These results un-derscore RC-NF’s effectiveness in monitoring robotic tasks, detecting deviations in task execution and object motion. RC-NF acts as a real-time monitor that produces a general-purpose OOD signal meaningful across different granulari-ties. Real-world evaluations further confirm RC-NF’s effec-tiveness, highlighting its fast response (under 100 ms) and seamless integration with the VLA policy (e.g.  π0). Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No. 24511103100) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 62521004. It was also sup-ported by the Ministry of Education (MOE), Singapore, under its Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 2 (Pro-posal ID: T2EP20125-0048). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Ministry of Education, Singapore. 

# References 

[1] Christopher Agia, Rohan Sinha, Jingyun Yang, Ziang Cao, Rika Antonova, Marco Pavone, and Jeannette Bohg. Un-packing failure modes of generative policies: Runtime mon-itoring of consistency and progress. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 689–723. PMLR, 2025. 2, 3, 6 [2] Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre, Armin Danesh Pazho, Vinit Katariya, and Hamed Tabkhi. Understanding the challenges and opportunities of pose-based anomaly detection. In Pro-ceedings of the 8th international Workshop on Sensor-Based Activity Recognition and Artificial Intelligence , pages 1–9, 2023. 3 [3] Dogan Altan and Sanem Sariel. Clue-ai: A convolutional three-stream anomaly identification framework for robot ma-nipulation. IEEE Access , 11:48347–48357, 2023. 2, 3 [4] Anthropic. Introducing claude sonnet 4.5, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-28. 2, 6 [5] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. pi0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. 1, 2, 6 [6] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dha-balia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y Galliker, et al. pi05: a vision-language-action model with open-world generaliza-tion. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. 2[7] Tianheng Cheng, Lin Song, Yixiao Ge, Wenyu Liu, Xing-gang Wang, and Ying Shan. Yolo-world: Real-time open-vocabulary object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 16901–16911, 2024. 3 [8] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blis-tein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. 2, 6 [9] Can Cui, Pengxiang Ding, Wenxuan Song, Shuanghao Bai, Xinyang Tong, Zirui Ge, Runze Suo, Wanqi Zhou, Yang Liu, Bofang Jia, et al. Openhelix: A short survey, empirical anal-ysis, and open-source dual-system vla model for robotic ma-nipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03912 , 2025. 2 [10] Anja Deli´ c, Matej Grcic, and Siniˇ sa ˇ Segvi´ c. Sequential key-point density estimator: an overlooked baseline of skeleton-based video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 11579–11589, 2025. 3 [11] Shenghao Fu, Qize Yang, Qijie Mo, Junkai Yan, Xihan Wei, Jingke Meng, Xiaohua Xie, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Llmdet: Learning strong open-vocabulary object detectors under the supervision of large language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 14987–14997, 2025. 3 [12] ByungOk Han, Jaehong Kim, and Jinhyeok Jang. A dual process vla: Efficient robotic manipulation leveraging vlm. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15549 , 2024. 2 [13] Or Hirschorn and Shai Avidan. Normalizing flows for human pose anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 13545– 13554, 2023. 3 [14] Haoxu Huang, Fanqi Lin, Yingdong Hu, Shengjie Wang, and Yang Gao. Copa: General robotic manipulation through spa-tial constraints of parts with foundation models. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 9488–9495. IEEE, 2024. 2 [15] Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Yunzhu Li, Ruohan Zhang, and Li Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-temporal reasoning of rela-tional keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652 , 2024. [16] Yuheng Ji, Huajie Tan, Jiayu Shi, Xiaoshuai Hao, Yuan Zhang, Hengyuan Zhang, Pengwei Wang, Mengdi Zhao, Yao Mu, Pengju An, et al. Robobrain: A unified brain model for robotic manipulation from abstract to concrete. In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con-ference , pages 1724–1734, 2025. 2 [17] Tao Jiang, Tianyuan Yuan, Yicheng Liu, Chenhao Lu, Jian-ning Cui, Xiao Liu, Shuiqi Cheng, Jiyang Gao, Huazhe Xu, and Hang Zhao. Galaxea open-world dataset and g0 dual-system vla model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00576 , 2025. 2[18] Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian Rupprecht. Co-tracker: It is better to track together. In European conference on computer vision , pages 18–35. Springer, 2024. 2 [19] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 1, 2 [20] Moo Jin Kim, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed and suc-cess. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645 , 2025. 1, 2 [21] Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. 3 [22] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-head, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment any-thing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international confer-ence on computer vision , pages 4015–4026, 2023. 3 [23] Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang, Ya Jing, Weinan Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01378 ,2023. 1, 2 [24] Yi Li, Yuquan Deng, Jesse Zhang, Joel Jang, Marius Mem-mel, Raymond Yu, Caelan Reed Garrett, Fabio Ramos, Di-eter Fox, Anqi Li, et al. Hamster: Hierarchical action models for open-world robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05485 , 2025. 2 [25] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowl-edge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44776–44791, 2023. 2, 5[26] Huihan Liu, Shivin Dass, Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, and Yuke Zhu. Model-based runtime monitoring with interactive im-itation learning. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4154–4161. IEEE, 2024. 2, 3 [27] Gen Luo, Ganlin Yang, Ziyang Gong, Guanzhou Chen, Hao-nan Duan, Erfei Cui, Ronglei Tong, Zhi Hou, Tianyi Zhang, Zhe Chen, et al. Visual embodied brain: Let multimodal large language models see, think, and control in spaces. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00123 , 2025. 3 [28] J Bjorck Nvidia, Fernando Castaneda, N Cherniadev, X Da, R Ding, L Fan, Y Fang, D Fox, F Hu, S Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist hu-manoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. 2 [29] OpenAI. Gpt-5 system card, 2025. Accessed: 2025-10-28. 2, 6 [30] Mingjie Pan, Jiyao Zhang, Tianshu Wu, Yinghao Zhao, Wen-long Gao, and Hao Dong. Omnimanip: Towards general robotic manipulation via object-centric interaction primitives as spatial constraints. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 17359–17369, 2025. 2 [31] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI con-ference on artificial intelligence , 2018. 4 [32] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman R¨ adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. 2, 3, 4 [33] Tianhe Ren, Yihao Chen, Qing Jiang, Zhaoyang Zeng, Yuda Xiong, Wenlong Liu, Zhengyu Ma, Junyi Shen, Yuan Gao, Xiaoke Jiang, et al. Dino-x: A unified vision model for open-world object detection and understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14347 , 2024. 3 [34] Ralf Romer, Adrian Kobras, Luca Worbis, and Angela P Schoellig. Failure prediction at runtime for generative robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09459 , 2025. 2 [35] St´ ephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A re-duction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth inter-national conference on artificial intelligence and statistics ,pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceed-ings, 2011. 2 [36] Junwon Seo, Kensuke Nakamura, and Andrea Bajcsy. UNISafe: Uncertainty-aware latent safety filters for avoiding out-of-distribution failures. In Second Workshop on Out-of-Distribution Generalization in Robotics at RSS 2025 , 2025. 2[37] Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(3), 2008. 5 [38] Daniel Sliwowski and Dongheui Lee. Conditionnet: Learn-ing preconditions and effects for execution monitoring. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. 2, 3 [39] Wenxuan Song, Jiayi Chen, Wenxue Li, Xu He, Han Zhao, Can Cui, Pengxiang Ding Shiyan Su, Feilong Tang, Xuelian Cheng, Donglin Wang, et al. Rationalvla: A rational vision-language-action model with dual system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10826 , 2025. 2 [40] Qianqian Wang, Yen-Yu Chang, Ruojin Cai, Zhengqi Li, Bharath Hariharan, Aleksander Holynski, and Noah Snavely. Tracking everything everywhere all at once. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 19795–19806, 2023. 2 [41] Chuan Wen, Xingyu Lin, John So, Kai Chen, Qi Dou, Yang Gao, and Pieter Abbeel. Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025 , 2023. 2 [42] Christoph Willibald and Dongheui Lee. Hierarchical task decomposition for execution monitoring and error recov-ery: Understanding the rationale behind task demonstra-tions. The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649251352112, 2025. 2, 3 [43] Christoph Willibald, Daniel Sliwowski, and Dongheui Lee. Multimodal anomaly detection with a mixture-of-experts. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.19077 , 2025. 2, 3 [44] Ruituo Wu, Yang Chen, Jian Xiao, Bing Li, Jicong Fan, Fr´ ed´ eric Dufaux, Ce Zhu, and Yipeng Liu. Da-flow: Dual attention normalizing flow for skeleton-based video anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 2025. 3 [45] Yilin Wu, Ran Tian, Gokul Swamy, and Andrea Bajcsy. From foresight to forethought: Vlm-in-the-loop policy steer-ing via latent alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01828 ,2025. 3 [46] Xing Xi, Yangyang Huang, Ronghua Luo, and Yu Qiu. Ow-ovd: Unified open world and open vocabulary object detec-tion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 25454–25464, 2025. 3 [47] Chen Xu, Tony Khuong Nguyen, Emma Dixon, Christopher Rodriguez, Patrick Miller, Robert Lee, Paarth Shah, Rares Ambrus, Haruki Nishimura, and Masha Itkina. Can we de-tect failures without failure data? uncertainty-aware runtime failure detection for imitation learning policies. In Proceed-ings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. 2, 3, 5, 6[48] Jiarui Yang, Bin Zhu, Jingjing Chen, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Actor-critic for continuous action chunks: A reinforcement learning framework for long-horizon robotic manipulation with sparse reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.11143 , 2025. 2[49] Ling Yang, Zixiang Zhang, Zhilong Zhang, Xingchao Liu, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Chenlin Meng, Stefano Er-mon, and Bin Cui. Consistency flow matching: Defin-ing straight flows with velocity consistency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02398 , 2024. 3 [50] Yuchen Yang, Kwonjoon Lee, Behzad Dariush, Yinzhi Cao, and Shao-Yuan Lo. Follow the rules: Reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 304–322. Springer, 2024. 3 [51] Jianke Zhang, Yanjiang Guo, Xiaoyu Chen, Yen-Jen Wang, Yucheng Hu, Chengming Shi, and Jianyu Chen. Hirt: En-hancing robotic control with hierarchical robot transformers. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05273 , 2024. 2 [52] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. 1, 2 RC-NF: Robot-Conditioned Normalizing Flow for Real-Time Anomaly Detection in Robotic Manipulation 

# Supplementary Material 

# 1. Experimental Demonstration Videos 

Simulated Environment Results.mp4 presents three anomalies of LIBERO-Anomaly-10: Gripper Open, Grip-per Slippage, and Spatial Misalignment, along with the corresponding anomaly scores inferred by RC-NF. 

Real World Experiments Results.mp4 presents real-world experiments, exhibiting how the RC-NF monitoring mechanism enhances the robustness and adaptability of the model  π0, in task-level and state-level OOD situations. 

# 2. Further details on Task Embedding 

Implementation Details of Task Embedding. This section explains the implementation of task embedding τ from Sec. 3.2. Fig. 8 (left) shows the ten tasks in the LIBERO-10. In deployment, the first step is to obtain 10 vectors uniformly distributed on a hypersphere with radius  R = 5  and dimen-sion  T = 12  using an optimization algorithm. Then, these 10 task instructions are mapped one-to-one to the spherical vectors, resulting in  [τ1, τ 2, . . . , τ 12 ]. Fig. 8 (right) provides detailed examples to clarify the mapping process. When 

T = 3  and the number of tasks is 6, this results in 6 spheri-cal vectors on a 3-dimensional sphere, intersecting the  x, y,and  z-axes, as represented by  [τ1, τ 2, τ 3].

Role of Task Embedding. As discussed in Sec. 4.3, re-moving the task embedding limits the model to detecting only dataset-level OOD samples, preventing it from iden-tifying task-specific anomalies. To illustrate this, consider the Spatial Misalignment setup: during training, the book is placed in the back compartment, while in the test scenario, the robotic arm places the book in the left, front, or right compartments, referred to as the 3 tasks (see Fig. 9(right)). Tables 1 and 2 show that without these tasks in the train-ing set, the action trajectories are out-of-distribution, and Spatial Misalignment is classified as a dataset-level OOD anomaly. When these 3 tasks are included in the training set, the action trajectories become in-domain, and detect-ing Spatial Misalignment is recognized as a task-specific anomaly. Fig. 9 compares the metrics for this scenario. After adding the 3 tasks, the performance of the RC-NF model shows almost no decrease. However, without the task embedding, the RC-NF monitoring performance drops to around 0.6, emphasizing the importance of task embedding in distinguishing tasks within the training set. In contrast, FailDetect’s performance drops to 0.5, highlighting its in-ability to differentiate tasks within the same training set. 

Algorithm 1 Training Loop with BalancedHardSampler  

> 1:

for epoch ← startEpoch to numEpochs do  

> 2:

model.train()  

> 3:

for data in trainLoader do  

> 4:

... // process data, compute loss, update model  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

if epoch = NextStageEpoch then  

> 7:

model.eval()  

> 8:

for data in trainLoader do  

> 9:

update weights(model(data))  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

sampler ← BalancedHardSampler(weights)  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

if epoch ≥ NextStageEpoch then  

> 14:

update train loader(sampler)  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for 

# 3. Training Data Debiasing 

The Training Data Debiasing Procedure aims to address the issue of imbalanced sample distribution during robotic ma-nipulation. Specifically, in the initial stages of a robotic arm’s motion, the motion trajectories tend to be more con-sistent, whereas near the object grasping phase, the tra-jectories exhibit greater variation. This results in a higher frequency of similar trajectories from the initial movement phase, causing an uneven sample distribution. To mitigate this, we design the BalancedHardSampler class, designed to equalize the distribution of these samples, ensuring a more balanced and robust training process. Algorithm 1 illustrates the training procedure, which is divided into two stages. In the first stage, standard sampling is used to train RC-NF. Upon reaching the NextStageEpoch, inference results are collected for sample evaluation. The BalancedHardSampler is then initialized to reduce redun-dant samples while increasing the diversity of underrepre-sented samples, ensuring a more balanced sample distribu-tion throughout the demonstration. After the NextStageEp-och, the BalancedHardSampler is continuously employed for sample collection during the remaining stages. 

# 4. Implementation Details for Simulations 

As mentioned in the Implementation Details in Sec. 4.1, computer graphics techniques are used in the simulation environment to generate the first frame’s bounding box for SAM2. This method of obtaining the bounding box is sta-ble, low-cost, and ensures reproducibility. The following section provides a detailed explanation of the process. 

Generating Sample Points in Geometry. For each object, we generate a grid of sample points within the geometry. Assuming the geometry size is  geom size = [ W, H, D ],where  W , H, and  D represent the width, height, and depth of the geometry, respectively, the offset for each sample in a 5x5x5 grid is computed as: 

local offset =



dx · Wdy · Hdz · D

 .

Here,  dx, dy, dz  are the offsets in the grid along the width, height, and depth axes of the geometry. These local offsets are then transformed into world coor-dinates using the geometry’s position in the world  geom pos 

and its rotation matrix  R:

Pworld = geom pos + R · local offset .

In this equation,  geom pos  is the position of the geome-try in the world frame (a 3D vector representing the center of the geometry), and  R is the rotation matrix that trans-forms the local offset into the world frame. 

Projection of 3D Points to 2D. After obtaining the world coordinates of all sample points  Pworld , we project them onto the 2D image plane using the camera’s intrinsic ma-trix  K and the extrinsic matrix  Extrinsic :

Pimage = K · (Extrinsic · Pworld ).

In this equation,  Extrinsic  represents the transforma-tion from the world coordinates to the camera coordinates (a combination of rotation and translation), and  Pimage =[x, y ]T represents the 2D coordinates of the projected point on the image plane. 

Filtering Invalid Projections. We filter out invalid projec-tions, such as those behind the camera or outside the image boundaries. For each projected point  Pimage = [ x, y ]:

0 ≤ x < image width , 0 ≤ y < image height .

Bounding Box Calculation. For the valid projected points, we calculate the bounding box by finding the minimum and maximum  x and  y coordinates: 

xmin = min( x), xmax = max( x).

ymin = min( y), ymax = max( y).

The bounding box is then defined as: 

bbox = [ xmin , y min , x max , y max ].

# 5. Implementation Details in the Real World 

Bounding Box Generation. In this paper, we utilize the multimodal large model Gemini 2.5 Pro[8], which can understand the manipulated object from task instruc-tions and generate a zero-shot bounding box for SAM2. As illustrated in Fig. 10, the process begins by extract-ing the OBJECT LIST (e.g., blue ball , drawer ) from the TASK DESCRIPTION, such as Place the blue ball into the open drawer . The image and identified objects are subse-quently passed to Gemini, which generates a JSON list. 

Description of the Homing Procedure. The homing pro-cedure refers to the process by which a robot returns from an unknown or arbitrary position to a predefined home po-sition , which serves as the starting point for the robotic op-erations. We utilize the homing procedure to perform task rollback in state-level OOD situations. The intervention of RC-NF’s monitoring mechanism allows the robotic arm to adjust its trajectory without the need to completely return to the home position when an error is encountered. 

Explanation of the Real-Time Characteristic. RC-NF can detect anomalies within 100 ms on a consumer-grade GPU, such as the Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090. Below we re-port the latency breakdown for a single-frame inference. At 100 ms, this performance is faster than the average human reaction time, and thus, we refer to the operations involved in RC-NF as capable of real-time anomaly detection.     

> SAM2 Inference Grid Sampling RC-NF Inference Other Latency
> Overall (RTX 3090)
> 50 ms 1.7 ms 30 ms 5 ms 86.7 ms

# 6. VLMs as anomaly scorers 

In the simulation experiments presented in Sec. 4.2, we utilize VLMs such as GPT-5 [29], Gemini 2.5 Pro [8], and Claude 4.5 [4] for anomaly scoring. To reduce the effects of network latency and extended inference times on large model performance during streaming, we employ a parallel API invocation strategy and sample results at 1 Hz. Fig. 11 illustrates the prompt provided to the model, which is an improved version derived from Sentinel, adapted for anomaly detection scoring. We provide VLMs with the current time (TIME) and the total time allocated for the task (TIME LIMIT), enabling them to calculate the progress ratio of the task. DESCRIPTION refers to the task description, such as Pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy . FRAME RATE denotes the sampling frequency, set here to 1 Hz. CURRENT rep-resents a sequence of 256×256 images, with the number of images being TIME/FRAME RATE, which captures the vi-sual progression of the task from start to present. This en-ables the VLMs to capture the complete image sequence. Figure 8. Diagram illustrating Spherical Uniform Encoding. The left side displays the ten tasks from the training set along with their descriptions, while the right side provides an example demonstration. 

Figure 9. Comparison of performance metrics before and after incorporating three tasks with spatial misalignment (left, front and right) into the training set. 

Figure 10. Prompts for generating bounding boxes with Gemini 2.5 Pro Figure 11. VLMs prompts for robotic anomaly detection scoring