Title: OpenFrontier: General Navigation with Visual-Language Grounded Frontiers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.05377v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 02:27:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# OpenFrontier: General Navigation with Visual-Language Grounded Frontiers 

Esteban Padilla *,1 , Boyang Sun *,1 , Marc Pollefeys 1,2 , Hermann Blum 31ETH Zurich 2Microsoft Spatial AI Lab 3University of Bonn 

*Equal Contribution       

> Fig. 1: We present OpenFrontier .Top: OpenFrontier detects and semantically evaluates visual frontiers directly in the image space, enabling flexible language-conditioned goal reasoning without 3D reconstruction. Bottom: These frontiers are grounded into the 3D metric space to drive long-horizon, natural-language–conditioned navigation across diverse goals in a fully zero-shot manner, without training or fine-tuning.

Abstract —Open-world navigation requires robots to make decisions in complex everyday environments while adapting to flexible task requirements. Conventional navigation approaches often rely on dense 3D reconstruction and hand-crafted goal metrics, which limits their generalization across tasks and envi-ronments. Recent advances in vision–language navigation (VLN) and vision–language–action (VLA) models enable end-to-end policies conditioned on natural language, but typically require interactive training, large-scale data collection, or task-specific fine-tuning with a mobile agent. We formulate navigation as a sparse subgoal identification and reaching problem and observe that providing visual anchoring targets for high-level semantic priors enables highly efficient goal-conditioned navigation. Based on this insight, we select navigation frontiers as semantic anchors and propose OpenFrontier , a training-free navigation framework that seamlessly integrates diverse vision–language prior models. OpenFrontier enables efficient navigation with a lightweight sys-tem design, without dense 3D mapping, policy training, or model fine-tuning. We evaluate OpenFrontier across multiple navigation benchmarks and demonstrate strong zero-shot performance, as well as effective real-world deployment on a mobile robot. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Navigation in open-world environments requires robots to reason over both high-level semantics and low-level geometry while operating under partial observability. Classical object-goal navigation methods typically rely on dense 3D recon-struction followed by object detection and localization in a global map [52, 2, 18], which demands accurate mapping and struggles with cluttered scenes or small, ambiguous objects. Previous learning-based approaches attempt to jointly solve high-level decision making and low-level control through reinforcement learning [6, 7, 50, 35, 51], but are commonly limited to closed-set object categories and show poor gen-eralization beyond training distributions [13]. More recently, large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) have been explored as sources of semantic priors for navigation, either via end-to-end vision-language-action training [40, 53, 8] or by directly prompting models for action cues [24, 14]. However, such approaches often require large-scale interactive training, suffer from real-time constraints, or face fundamental difficulties in grounding high-level semantic reasoning into metric navigation decisions. While stronger semantic priors, larger datasets, and more versatile policies continue to advance language-conditioned navigation, an equally important challenge lies in identifying an effective interface that grounds semantic reasoning into physically meaningful navigation decisions. In this work, we revisit the general robot navigation task and propose Open-Frontier , a training-free navigation framework that uses visual navigation frontiers as sparse, interpretable, and physically grounded semantic anchors. Frontiers correspond to navigable regions in metric space and naturally encode exploration while remaining directly actionable, making them an ideal substrate for language-conditioned reasoning. OpenFrontier presents de-tected frontiers to a VLM using a set-of-marks formulation over the individual RGB observation, enabling the model to assign semantic relevance and priority to each candidate. It maintains a global updating mechanism to keep track of sparse  

> arXiv:2603.05377v1 [cs.RO] 5 Mar 2026 Fig. 3: System Overview . Given a posed RGB observation and a natural-language navigation goal, OpenFrontier detects visual frontiers in the image and directly queries a vision–language model to evaluate their relevance using in-image context. The resulting frontiers are then lifted into the 3D metric space with the updated information gain as goal-conditioned candidates and globally managed to update navigation targets, perform path planning, and determine termination.

frontiers. The robot then navigates by iteratively clearing fron-tiers according to these grounded priors, balancing exploration and exploitation while continuously assessing goal satisfaction. OpenFrontier requires no dense 3D mapping, no policy training, and no fine-tuning, is agnostic to the choice of VLM for reasoning, and transfers seamlessly to unseen environ-ments, open-set goals and real-world scenarios. We evaluate OpenFrontier across multiple indoor navigation benchmarks, including both closed-set and open-set object-goal naviga-tion tasks, and demonstrate strong zero-shot generalization compared to prior methods. Despite its simplicity, OpenFron-tier shows competitive performances against chosen baselines while requiring no dense mapping, model training, or in-context fine-tuning. Finally, we deploy our system on a mobile legged robot and demonstrate robust real-world navigation in a large indoor environment. As a summary, our main contributions are:  

> ∙

We propose OpenFrontier , a navigation framework that uses visual navigation frontiers as an interface for grounding vision–language priors into actionable navigation goals for language-conditioned object-goal navigation.  

> ∙

We introduce an image-space frontier reasoning formula-tion that evaluates candidate frontiers using vision–language models and integrates semantic relevance with exploration-driven information gain, without requiring dense 3D seman-tic maps or policy training.  

> ∙

We demonstrate strong zero-shot performance across mul-tiple navigation benchmarks and validate the approach in real-world robotic deployment. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Map-based Exploration and Navigation 

Building explicit maps for navigation is one of the most classical paradigms in mobile robotics [33, 1]. A wide range of map representations have been investigated. Among them, frontier-based exploration has long been a core approach, where frontiers represent the boundary between known and unknown space and serve as natural candidates for exploration-driven motion [43]. Classical methods extract frontiers from volumetric occupancy maps and select navigation goals based on hand-crafted heuristics such as distance or information gain [19, 34, 9, 16]. While effective, these approaches depend on reliable mapping and typically operate purely on geometric criteria. Recent works extend frontier-based navigation by incor-porating learning-based perception and semantic reasoning. FrontierNet [32] demonstrates that frontiers can be de-tected and evaluated directly from RGB images without constructing dense maps, enabling lightweight exploration driven by learned visual cues. Vision-Language Frontier Maps (VLFM) [48] integrate vision-language priors into frontier-based navigation by constructing dense semantic frontier maps, allowing semantic relevance to guide frontier selection. Semantic-enabled frontier representations are particularly natural for object-goal navigation. Object-goal navigation has been widely studied in the context of embodied AI, where agents are tasked with navigating to objects specified by category labels or semantic descriptions. Several benchmarks have been proposed, including HM3D ObjNav [41, 42] and OVON [49], with OVON explicitly targeting open-vocabulary settings, thereby increasing the complexity of required seman-tic representations. GOAT-Bench [20] further evaluates open-world object navigation with diverse object categories and environments. Early approaches rely on dense 3D reconstruction and semantic mapping pipelines, combining object detection with explicit spatial representations to guide navigation [52, 6]. BeliefMapNav [57] constructs voxel-based belief maps to represent object likelihoods in 3D space, enabling zero-shot navigation at the cost of maintaining dense semantic state. Similarly, GOAT [5] maintains a dense semantic map from which global and local policies derive actions. Another line of work uses map representations as inputs to reinforcement learning models to learn spatial information and navigation policies [38, 7, 6, 27]. Another line of work focuses on zero-shot navigation, par-ticularly enabled by recent advances in large-scale foundation models. CoWs [12] guides frontier-based exploration using CLIP-based semantic similarity. OpenFMNav [21] leverages vision-language foundation models to support open-set object-goal navigation, while History-Augmented VLM [15] incorpo-rates memory mechanisms to improve zero-shot exploration. ForesightNav [29] constructs CLIP-based semantic maps and trains a model to predict vision-language features for un-explored regions to guide navigation decisions. IPPON [26] builds volumetric occupancy maps augmented with language embeddings during exploration and uses them for open-vocabulary goal reasoning. UniGoal [47] proposes a universal framework for zero-shot goal-oriented navigation by combin-ing dense mapping, scene graph reasoning, and both LLMs and VLMs. Despite the different approaches and design choices, these methods often require persistent semantic maps, scene graphs, or learned belief representations, and some further rely on interactive learning to acquire navigation knowledge. 

B. Vision-Language Navigation and Action Models 

The emergence of large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs) has led to significant progress in vision-language navigation (VLN) and vision-language-action (VLA) systems [55]. Many approaches train end-to-end policies conditioned on language instructions using re-inforcement learning or imitation learning, often requiring large-scale interactive data collection and task-specific fine-tuning [54, 51, 36]. While effective in constrained settings, these methods typically struggle to generalize beyond training distributions and incur high computational cost at inference time. Several recent works explore general navigation by directly leveraging pretrained foundation models. InstructNav [23] relies on large-scale, closed-source vision-language and lan-guage models to infer navigation actions directly from visual observations and instructions. NAVILA [8] fine-tunes vision-language models using datasets extracted from real-world videos and maps them to robot action spaces through ahierarchical structure. StreamingVLN [36] designs a sliding-window key–value cache management architecture that enables navigation through multi-round dialogue. Uni-NaVid [53] fur-ther fine-tunes vision-language navigation models on specific navigation benchmarks to achieve strong performance. These approaches generally require large-scale datasets for fine-tuning and often rely on frequent model queries, such as direct action inference at every step. Such designs can be computationally expensive and difficult to ground in metric navigation space. Moreover, despite the significant training resources involved, many VLN systems primarily focus on target reaching or instruction following, which does not fully exploit the rich spatial and semantic information inherently captured by large-scale vision-language models. III. M ETHOD 

OpenFrontier adopts a minimal but effective principle: de-tect and evaluate navigation frontiers directly in the 2D image domain whenever possible . Following this principle, both goal identification and goal evaluation are carried out directly on RGB observations 𝐈 𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝐻 ×𝑊 ×3 , together with the associated 

> Fig. 4: The detected 2D frontier clusters are jointly queried with the corresponding RGB image using a set-of-marks prompting strategy. Each frontier is marked in the image, enabling the VLM to evaluate its relevance to the given navigation instruction within the local visual context. The resulting relevance probabilities are used to re-weight its exploration-driven information gain, effectively integrating task-specific semantic priors with exploration.

camera extrinsic parameters 𝐓 𝑡 ∈ 𝑆𝐸 (3) and the camera intrinsic matrix 𝐊 ∈ ℝ3×3 at time step 𝑡 . OpenFrontier outputs goal pose for the robot to reach which can be further translated into control actions for the robot to reach the goal. Given a natural-language navigation goal, OpenFrontier processes the current observation 𝐈 𝑡 to identify a set of visual frontiers . Each frontier is first represented as 𝐅 = { 𝐗 , 𝑔 }, where 𝐗 = { 𝐩 , 𝐪 }

denotes the 3D position and orientation of the frontier in the world frame, and 𝑔 denotes its information gain. Importantly, no dense 3D reconstruction or semantic mapping is required during this process. The selected frontier is grounded in 3D space and used to generate a goal pose, which is then passed to a low-level motion planner for execution. The system iteratively updates frontier information gain and replans as new observations arrive, until the navigation goal is reached. An overview of the full system of OpenFrontier is shown in Fig. 3, which consists primarily of the goal identification stage in image space, and a global goal management in the 3D space. 

A. Image-Space Goal Identification 

A large body of robot navigation follows the convention of using geometry frontiers [43, 25, 19, 48, 56] extracted from volumetric maps as goal candidates for robot motion. Frontiers provide an effective and natural representation for encourag-ing exploration toward uncertain regions of the environment. Inspired by FrontierNet [32], we observe that frontiers can be detected and evaluated directly from a single 2D image, without relying on dense 3D mapping or separating detection from evaluation. Following the implementation of FrontierNet, the similar logic is applied to a keyframe RGB observation 𝐈 𝑡 and, after post-processing, returns a set of frontier clusters 𝐅 𝑖 , 𝑖 ∈ ℕ.Each frontier cluster is represented in the image domain and then back-projected into 3D space to obtain its pose. Frontier identification pipeline generally also provides an information gain estimate ̂ 𝑔 𝑖 , which captures a pure exploration prior by predicting the volume of unknown space associated with the frontier[32, 3, 9]. To incorporate task-specific semantic priors, we directly ground a VLM onto the frontier clusters in the image 𝐈 𝑡 . Given a natural-language goal 𝐋 , the VLM assigns each frontier cluster a probability 𝑝 𝑖 ∈ [0 , 1] indicating the likelihood that navigating toward that frontier will lead to accomplishing the goal. The final utility of each frontier is computed as: 

𝑔 𝑖 = 𝑝 𝑖 ⋅̂𝑔 𝑖 , (1) 

𝑝 𝑖 = VLM (𝐈 𝑡 , 𝐅 𝑖 , 𝐋 ), (2) where ̂ 𝑔 𝑖 represents exploration-driven information gain and 

𝑝 𝑖 injects task-conditioned semantic guidance. This formula-tion naturally balances general exploration with goal-directed exploitation well. Visual frontiers are detected and clustered based on visual cues in the input image, resulting in a set of frontier clusters localized by their centroid pixel coordinates in the image plane. These 2D locations provide a natural and explicit mech-anism for guiding the attention of a vision-language model. To this end, we adopt a set-of-marks querying strategy that encourages the VLM to evaluate the correspondence between each frontier cluster and the language-conditioned goal using the surrounding image context. As illustrated in Fig. 4, we overlay a visual marker [46, 30] at the 2D centroid of each frontier cluster on the RGB observation. The marked image, together with the natural-language goal, is jointly fed into the VLM using an additional prompt that instructs the model to output a probability score for each marker. An example prompt template is provided in the Appendix. This querying strategy enables the VLM to jointly reason about all candidate frontiers within a single forward pass, while leveraging fine-grained 2D visual context directly tied to actionable navigation locations. Moreover, by anchoring reasoning in the image plane, this formulation avoids requiring the VLM to perform explicit 3D spatial reasoning, where current models are known to be less reliable [11]. 

B. Frontier Management 

Long-horizon navigation requires maintaining and updating goals at a global level. We maintain a set of active frontier goals and manage their selection and update throughout the navigation process. Similar to classical exploration strategies, the utility of each frontier is periodically updated based on the current robot state. Specifically, for each frontier 𝑖 , we compute a global utility 

𝑢 𝑖 = 𝑔 𝑖 

‖𝐩 𝑟 − 𝐩 𝑖 ‖ , (3) where 𝐩 𝑟 denotes the current position of the robot. This formu-lation favors frontiers that are both semantically relevant and spatially efficient to reach. The frontier with the highest utility is selected as the next navigation goal and passed to a low-level planner. The choice of low-level planner is flexible. When no global map is available, a map-free PointGoal navigation policy [37, 44, 39, 45, 22] can be used. Alternatively, if a 3D volumetric representation is maintained, a map-based collision-free planner can be applied without modifying the frontier management logic. While the robot navigates through the environment, the RGB observations are processed by an open-vocabulary seg-mentation method [4] to generate segmentation masks cor-responding to the target. When a valid mask is detected, depth and camera pose are used to estimate the 3D centroid 

Algorithm 1 Global Target Management 

Require: Global frontier set  , cleared set , proposals ̃ 𝑡 

Require: Robot position 𝐩 𝑟 , PointNav 𝜋 , goal 𝐋 

Require: Thresholds 𝜏 merge , 𝑟 clear , 𝑟 near , 𝑟 goal 

Require: Progress parameters (𝑇 stall , 𝜖 stall ) 

> 1:

hasTarget ← 0, 𝐱 ∗ ← 𝟎  

> 2:

stall ← 0, 𝑑 prev ← 10 9 

> 3:

while true do  

> 4:

 ← MERGE UPDATE ( ,̃ 𝑡 , 𝜏 merge ) 

> 5:

 ← PRUNE ( , , 𝑟 clear ) 

> 6:

 ← INSERT VIEWPOINT IFANY ( , 𝐋 , 𝑟 near ) 

> 7:

(ok , 𝐅 ⋆) ← SELECT BEST ( , 𝐩 𝑟 ) 

> 8:

if ok = 0 then  

> 9:

continue  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

(𝐩 𝑟 , 𝑑 ) ← STEP TO(𝜋, 𝐅 ⋆) 

> 12:

(drop , stall , 𝑑 prev ) ←

HANDLE PROGRESS (𝑑, 𝑑 prev , stall , 𝑇 stall , 𝜖 stall ) 

> 13:

if drop = 1 then  

> 14:

 ←  ∪ { POS (𝐅 ⋆)}  

> 15:

 ←  ⧵ {𝐅 ⋆} 

> 16:

continue  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

if 𝑑 < 𝑟 near then  

> 19:

 ←  ∪ { POS (𝐅 ⋆)}  

> 20:

 ←  ⧵ {𝐅 ⋆} 

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

(hasTarget , 𝐱 ∗) ←

VERIFY AND SET TARGET (𝐅 ⋆, 𝐋 , 𝑑, 𝑟 near ) 

> 23:

if hasTarget = 1 then  

> 24:

(𝐩 𝑟 , _) ← STEP TOPOS (𝜋, 𝐱 ∗) 

> 25:

if ‖𝐩 𝑟 − 𝐱 ∗‖ < 𝑟 goal then  

> 26:

break  

> 27:

end if  

> 28:

end if  

> 29:

end while 

of the object. A new frontier with high (effectively infinite) utility is then instantiated at a fixed offset from the object, oriented to face it directly. This viewpoint frontier is inserted into the frontier set and prioritized by the frontier manager, encouraging the robot to move to a configuration that provides direct visual access to the object. After the robot reaches the viewpoint frontier, the corre-sponding RGB observation is queried by the same vision– language model to verify the presence of the target. If the object is not confirmed, the viewpoint frontier is removed and the object hypothesis is discarded. If the object is confirmed, the estimated centroid is designated as the final target position, and the robot is instructed to approach it as closely as possi-ble. Algorithm 1 summarizes the global frontier management process from goal selection to termination. For simplicity, the algorithm presents a compact formulation; additional imple-mentation details for the helper functions are provided in the Appendix. HM3D ObjNav Val MP3D ObjNav Val OVON Val Unseen Method Zero-shot Dense Sem. Map SR (%) ↑ SPL (%) ↑ SR (%) ↑ SPL (%) ↑ SR (%) ↑ SPL (%) ↑

History-Augmented VLM [15] ✓ Require 46.0 24.8 – – – –OpenFMNav [21] ✓ Require 52.5 24.1 37.2 15.7 – –InstructNav [23] ✓ Require 58.0 20.9 – – – –BeliefMapNav [57] ✓ Require 61.4 30.6 37.3 17.6 – –VLFM [48] ✓ Require 52.5 30.4 36.4 17.5 35.2 19.6 DAgRL+OD [49] × No – – – – 37.1 19.9 UniGoal [47] ✓ Require 54.5 25.1 41.0 16.4 – –Uni-NaVid [53] × No 73.7 37.1 – – 39.5 19.8 

OpenFrontier (Ours) ✓ No 77.3 35.6 40.7 17.8 39.0 20.1   

> TABLE I: Performance Comparison on Habitat object-goal navigation benchmarks. All metrics are reported in percentage (%). Zero-shot indicates no task-specific training or fine-tuning.

C. Flexible Framework Design and Open-Context Query 

OpenFrontier is structured around a clear separation be-tween image-space perception and reasoning, and global goal management. This separation is enabled by the use of navi-gation frontiers as the interface between the two components We adapt frontier as a lightweight and interpretable abstrac-tion that bridges image-space inference with global decision making. As a result, each component of the pipeline can be modified or replaced independently, providing a high degree of flexibility in system design. Importantly, OpenFrontier does not assume any pre-training, fine-tuning, or in-context learning of the vision-language model. The VLM is queried in an open-context manner and can be replaced directly without modifying the rest of the system. Likewise, the framework does not require dense 3D reconstruction or semantic mapping. However, when available, simple geometric information can be incorporated to improve robustness. In our implementation, an optional lightweight volumetric map built from monocular depth priors is used only for basic filtering: occupied space is used to discard unreachable or unsafe frontiers, while free space is used to suppress frontiers whose geometry information gain has been exhausted during the process of the navigation. These geometric cues operate asynchronously and are not required for the core system to function, but consistently improve navigation performance in practice. IV. E XPERIMENT AND RESULTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

We evaluate OpenFrontier along three dimensions: (1) performance on object-goal navigation tasks, (2) flexibility and generalization across environments and goal vocabular-ies, and (3) robustness to the sim-to-real gap. To this end, we benchmark OpenFrontier on three object-goal navigation datasets: HM3D ObjNav, MP3D ObjNav [41, 42], and OVON [49]. All benchmarks follow the Habitat Navigation Challenge formulation. HM3D and MP3D consider closed-vocabulary object goals, while OVON extends the task to open-vocabulary settings with more diverse language descriptions.   

> Fig. 5: Navigation Results across two representative baseline methods and OpenFrontier on an HM3D validation scene with the goal of finding a bed. The red square and shaded region indicate the ground-truth target location and its success region. OpenFrontier makes more efficient decisions at multi-choice intersections, navigating directly toward the bedroom while avoiding redundant exploration of irrelevant areas.

We implement OpenFrontier within the Habitat framework and evaluate navigation performance using standard metrics: Success Rate (SR, %) and Success weighted by Path Length (SPL, %). We compare against a set of baseline methods span-ning dense 3D mapping approaches, belief-based planners, and recent vision-language navigation methods. For object-goal benchmark experiments, we use Gemini-2.5-flash as the VLM model. Low-level navigation is executed using a DD-PPO point-goal policy with pretrained weights from VLFM [48], which matches the Habitat action space. Visual fron-tier detection is performed using FrontierNet with pretrained weights from [32]. We set a same set of system parameters across all benchmarks. Empirically, we run frontier detection and reasoning every six steps. All experiments are conducted on a cluster server equipped with a single RTX 4090 GPU (24GB). More details about parameter setting can be found in the Appendix. 

B. Habitat Navigation Benchmarks 

Despite its training-free design, OpenFrontier achieves com-petitive performance across all three benchmarks compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Quantitative results are summa-rized in Table I. As the system only processes keyframes and operates on a sparse set of frontiers, it avoids high-frequency inference such as step-by-step mapping updates used by History-Augmented VLM, or direct action inference as in Uni-NaVid. Under a single, uniform configuration across all benchmarks, OpenFrontier outperforms most baselines on all three datasets. Compared to the strongest competing methods, OpenFrontier is 1.5% lower in SPL on HM3D validation Fig. 6: Additional Navigation Examples . Top: OVON scenes with goals (left to right)                      

> refrigerator ,picture , and dishwasher .Middle: MP3D scenes with goals stool ,table , and
> cushion .Bottom: HM3D scenes with goals sofa ,toilet , and bed . All experiments are conducted using the same system configuration and parameters across datasets.
> VLM SR (%) ↑SPL (%) ↑
> Gemini-2.5-flash 77.3 35.6
> Gemma-3-4b-it 76.9 33.7 InternVL3_5-8B 74.5 34.5
> TABLE II: Performance Comparison on the HM3D benchmark using different vision– language models.

and 0.5% lower in SR on OVON than Uni-NaVid, and 0.3% lower in SR than UniGoal. Notably, Uni-NaVid is a VLN model fine-tuned on these benchmarks and their action spaces, while UniGoal relies on dense mapping, scene graph construction, and the combined use of both a LLM and a VLM model. Despite these additional assumptions, UniGoal performs more than 20% lower in SR than OpenFrontier on HM3D. Overall, OpenFrontier adopts a minimal design while maintaining stable and competitive performance across benchmarks. Additionally, we provide failure case analyses for all three scenes in Fig. S6. To further validate qualitative behavior, we re-ran two representative baselines, InstructNav and VLFM, under the same evaluation setup on the entire HM3D validation set. InstructNav uses both advanced VLM and LLM models, while VLFM adopts a frontier-based strategy combined with dense mapping and feature integration. As shown in Fig. 5, OpenFrontier demonstrates higher navigation efficiency in complex scenes with multiple branching corridors, consis-tent with the quantitative results. Fig. 6 presents additional qualitative examples across all three evaluation datasets. In these scenarios, OpenFrontier demonstrates effective spatial and semantic reasoning, allowing the agent to bias exploration toward goal-relevant regions and reach the target efficiently. Additional qualitative results are provided in the Appendix. Vision-language models are used in OpenFrontier for two purposes: frontier utility reweighting and goal verification. Goal verification is triggered only when a candidate target is detected by SAM3 [4]. Neither component requires task-specific training or fine-tuning, allowing the VLM to be easily replaced with alternative models. To evaluate this flexibil-ity, we run the full HM3D evaluation using several other VLMs. As shown in Table II, replacing Gemini-2.5-Flash with other publicly available or open-source models results in only a marginal performance decrease, while maintaining strong compatibility with our framework. We further evaluate a broader set of VLMs on real-world images to compare their image-space reasoning ability with frontier selection capability. The qualitative comparison in Fig. 8 illustrates the differences in reasoning behavior across models. Despite differences in the exact probability values generated by differ-ent VLMs, all tested models provide reasonable probability estimates. All tested VLMs provide reasonable probability estimates. These results suggest that for OpenFrontier stronger VLMs naturally bring improved performance with just asimple switch, however it is also generally robust to the choice of different VLM,. Beyond category-level object-goal navigation, we also eval-uate OpenFrontier under more complex language conditions that include spatial or appearance context, which can not be easily revealed with the quantitative evaluation setup. Fig. 7 shows an example comparing the goals “Plant” and “Plant in Bathroom” . The resulting trajectories and frontier probability assignments differ accordingly, with OpenFrontier prioritiz-ing bathroom-related frontiers under the spatially conditioned query. Additional examples are provided in the Appendix. These results demonstrate that OpenFrontier indeed can exploit contextual reasoning from VLMs and successfully ground it onto frontiers to support goal specifications with more complex context. 

C. Real-World Deployments 

Finally, we evaluate OpenFrontier in real-world settings. The results in Fig. 8 already demonstrate the image-space goal identification module on real indoor images with human-specified targets, verifying its generalization beyond simu-lation. We further deploy OpenFrontier on a legged robot (Boston Dynamics Spot) and conduct navigation tasks in a large-scale indoor environment. The system is integrated within ROS, with RGB observa-tions provided by the camera mounted on the robot arm end-effector. The camera pose is obtained from the robot’s onboard vision–inertial odometry. Robot is started at different initial locations and is given different language input for the target, without any prior knowledge of the scene layout. Fig. 9 shows an example in which the robot autonomously navigates to a fire extinguisher in a large indoor environment without any human intervention. V. I NSIGHTS 

OpenFrontier occupies an intermediate design point between existing navigation approaches that either rely on rich 3D map representations or require fine-tuned VLN/VLA models. Despite its zero-shot setup, OpenFrontier demonstrates stable and competitive performance across benchmarks and transfers effectively from simulation to real-world deployment. In this Fig. 7: OpenFrontier Navigation with Different Goal Contexts. Top: target is “plant in the bathroom.” Bottom: target is “plant.” The robot is initialized at the same starting location in both runs. From left to right, we show selected frames along the navigation trajectory together with the corresponding image observations overlaid with detected frontiers. The final image shows the final image observation, which terminates the robot once it has the target in the field of view. Despite observing similar frontier locations, OpenFrontier assigns different relevance probabilities depending on the goal context. As a result, the top trajectory prioritizes regions likely associated with the bathroom, while the bottom trajectory moves toward the living room, which also commonly contains plants.   

> Fig. 8: Image-space Frontier Reasoning Examples. Four different vision–language models are evaluated for frontier probability estimation (without normalization) using the set-of-marks querying strategy (left to right: Qwen3-VL, Gemini-2.5, GPT-4o, InternVL-3.5). All models operate on the same real-world image with the same prompt after frontier detection.

section, we discuss several insights that help explain these observations. 

A. Why the Design Is Effective 

A key observation from our experiments is that a lightweight navigation pipeline can be highly effective when appropriate representations and system interfaces are used. Goal iden-tification is a critical first step in successful navigation, as it directly determines how semantic intent is translated into actionable motion. OpenFrontier achieves goal identification in a highly generic and minimally assumption-dependent manner. By performing detection and semantic reasoning primarily in the 2D image domain, it avoids the computational overhead and brittleness associated with dense 3D reconstruction and semantic mapping. This design better aligns with the strengths of modern VLM, which are significantly more reliable at interpreting 2D visual context than performing explicit 3D spatial reasoning, such as reasoning over multi-view inputs or abstract scene-level representations like scene graphs. As a result, OpenFrontier achieves competitive performance without learned navigation policies or heavy geometric repre-sentations. Within this framework, navigation frontiers play a central role by serving as a stable and interpretable bridge between image-space reasoning and scene-level navigation. Detected in the image plane and grounded in metric space, frontiers provide a sparse set of actionable subgoals that naturally balance exploration and exploitation. This abstraction also functions as a form of global memory, enabling long-horizon planning without maintaining dense semantic state. Compared to pixel-level or action-level grounding, frontiers reduce ambiguity and allow semantic priors from VLM to be directly associated with navigable regions in the environment. Furthermore, structuring navigation around high-level goal identification and low-level motion execution allows each component to operate at the level of abstraction where it is most effective. Navigation inherently follows a hierarchical structure, with high-level semantic decision making guiding low-level control. This formulation improves robustness and generalization. Future work may explore tighter but principled integration between these two levels, enabling mutual feedback while preserving the benefits of modularity. Fig. 9: Real-world Deployment . Example of a deployment of OpenFrontier queried to find a fire extinguisher. The blue arrows illustrate the path of the robot through the environment. The yellow boxes mark the VLM prompt images for different keyframes, connected to some key 3D frontiers marked during navigation on the map. The red box shows the detection of the target object that signals successful task completion.   

> Fig. 10: Failure Case Analysis. From left to right, we show representative failures from the HM3D, MP3D, and OVON evaluation benchmarks. Across all three benchmarks, the two most common failure modes are false-positive target detections and termination due to exhausting the step budget. A third failure mode, where the robot becomes stuck, primarily arises from planner failures to escape local minima or from target hypotheses being registered at unreachable locations in the scene.

B. When and Why It Fails 

Despite strong benchmark performance, OpenFrontier re-mains susceptible to several failure modes. Figure 10 has summarized representative examples on the benchmark. One major challenge lies in termination criteria, which is non-trivial in open-world navigation settings. Some failures are influenced by limitations of the Habitat benchmark itself. However, our analysis indicates that these cases also expose a broader limitation of OpenFrontier, namely its limited ability to recover from failure once progress stalls. Even after a target is detected and navigation reduces to point-goal execution, the robot may move in incorrect directions or become trapped in local minima. In such cases, the system currently lacks a mechanism to quickly recognize failure and trigger re-reasoning or replanning at the semantic level. Enabling reliable failure detection and recovery is expected to significantly improve robustness and overall performance, and remains an important direction for future work. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We presented OpenFrontier, a training-free navigation framework that enables language-conditioned object-goal navi-gation by grounding vision-language priors onto visual naviga-tion frontiers. By treating navigation as a discrete subgoal se-lection problem and performing perception and semantic rea-soning primarily in the 2D image domain, OpenFrontier avoids dense semantic mapping, policy training, and task-specific fine-tuning. Frontiers serve as sparse and physically grounded anchors that bridge high-level semantic reasoning with metric navigation, enabling efficient exploration and goal-directed behavior in both closed-set and open-set environments. We demonstrated that this design achieves competitive perfor-mance across multiple object-goal navigation benchmarks and transfers robustly to real-world deployment on a mobile legged robot. Our results suggest that effective grounding and system-level abstraction, rather than increasingly complex models or training pipelines, play a central role in scalable open-world navigation. We believe OpenFrontier provides a practical and flexible foundation for integrating future vision-language mod-els into robotic navigation systems without requiring costly retraining or dense environment representations. REFERENCES 

[1] Dhruv Batra, Aaron Gokaslan, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Oleksandr Maksymets, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, Alexander Toshev, and Erik Wijmans. Objectnav revisited: On evaluation of embodied agents navigating to objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13171 , 2020. [2] Kenneth Blomqvist, Michel Breyer, Andrei Cramariuc, Julian Förster, Margarita Grinvald, Florian Tschopp, Jen Jen Chung, Lionel Ott, Juan Nieto, and Roland Siegwart. Go fetch: Mobile manipulation in unstructured environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00899 , 2020. [3] Chao Cao, Hongbiao Zhu, Howie Choset, and Ji Zhang. Tare: A hierarchical framework for efficiently exploring complex 3d environments. In Robotics: Science and Systems , volume 5, 2021. [4] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoub-hik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, Andrew Huang, et al. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 , 2025. [5] Matthew Chang, Théophile Gervet, Mukul Khanna, Sri-ram Yenamandra, Dhruv Shah, So Yeon Min, Kavit Shah, Chris Paxton, Saurabh Gupta, Dhruv Batra, et al. Goat: Go to any thing. 2024. [6] Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Prakashchand Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Object goal navigation using goal-oriented semantic exploration. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 4247–4258, 2020. [7] Devendra Singh Chaplot, Murtaza Dalal, Saurabh Gupta, Jitendra Malik, and Russ R Salakhutdinov. Seal: Self-supervised embodied active learning using exploration and 3d consistency. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:13086–13098, 2021. [8] An-Chieh Cheng, Yandong Ji, Zhaojing Yang, Xueyan Zou, Jan Kautz, Erdem Biyik, Hongxu Yin, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Navila: Legged robot vision-language-action model for navigation. In RSS , 2025. [9] Anna Dai, Sotiris Papatheodorou, Nils Funk, Dimos Tzoumanikas, and Stefan Leutenegger. Fast frontier-based information-driven autonomous exploration with an mav. In ICRA , 2020. [10] Gemma Team et al. Gemma 3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786. [11] Zhiyuan Feng, Zhaolu Kang, Qijie Wang, Zhiying Du, Jiongrui Yan, Shubin Shi, Chengbo Yuan, Huizhi Liang, Yu Deng, Qixiu Li, et al. Seeing across views: Bench-marking spatial reasoning of vision-language models in robotic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19400 , 2025. [12] Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Il-harco, Ludwig Schmidt, and Shuran Song. Cows on pas-ture: Baselines and benchmarks for language-driven zero-shot object navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 23171–23181, 2023. [13] Theophile Gervet, Soumith Chintala, Dhruv Batra, Ji-tendra Malik, and Devendra Singh Chaplot. Navigating to objects in the real world. Science Robotics , 8(79): eadf6991, 2023. [14] Dylan Goetting, Himanshu Gaurav Singh, and Antonio Loquercio. End-to-end navigation with vision language models: Transforming spatial reasoning into question-answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05755 , 2024. [15] Mobin Habibpour and Fatemeh Afghah. History-augmented vision-language models for frontier-based zero-shot object navigation, 2025. [16] Cherie Ho, Seungchan Kim, Brady Moon, Aditya Paran-dekar, Narek Harutyunyan, Chen Wang, Katia Sycara, Graeme Best, and Sebastian Scherer. Mapex: Indoor structure exploration with probabilistic information gain from global map predictions. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 13074–13080. IEEE, 2025. [17] Mu Hu, Wei Yin, Chi Zhang, Zhipeng Cai, Xiaoxiao Long, Hao Chen, Kaixuan Wang, Gang Yu, Chunhua Shen, and Shaojie Shen. Metric3d v2: A versatile monoc-ular geometric foundation model for zero-shot metric depth and surface normal estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2024. [18] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, S. Hu, R. Talak, R. Abdulhai, J. Strader, and L. Carlone. Foundations of spatial perception for robotics: Hierarchical representations and real-time systems. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2024. doi: 10.1177/02783649241229725. URL https://doi.org/10.1177/02783649241229725. [19] Matan Keidar and Gal A Kaminka. Efficient frontier detection for robot exploration. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 33(2):215–236, 2014. [20] Mukul Khanna, Ram Ramrakhya, Gunjan Chhablani, Sriram Yenamandra, Theophile Gervet, Matthew Chang, Zsolt Kira, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhruv Batra, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Goat-bench: A benchmark for multi-modal lifelong navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16373–16383, 2024. [21] Yuxuan Kuang, Hai Lin, and Meng Jiang. Openfmnav: Towards open-set zero-shot object navigation via vision-language foundation models, 2024. [22] Richard Kuhlmann, Jakob Wolfram, Boyang Sun, Jiaxu Xing, Davide Scaramuzza, Marc Pollefeys, and Cesar Cadena. Sight over site: Perception-aware reinforcement learning for efficient robotic inspection. ArXiv , 2025. [23] Yuxing Long, Wenzhe Cai, Hongcheng Wang, Guanqi Zhan, and Hao Dong. Instructnav: Zero-shot system for generic instruction navigation in unexplored environ-ment, 2024. [24] Andrew Melnik, Gora Chand Nandi, et al. Cognitive planning for object goal navigation using generative ai models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00318 , 2024. [25] J A Placed, J Strader, H Carrillo, N Atanasov, V In-delman, L Carlone, and J A Castellanos. A Survey on Active Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: State of the Art and New Frontiers. 2023. [26] Kaixian Qu, Jie Tan, Tingnan Zhang, Fei Xia, Cesar Cadena, and Marco Hutter. Ippon: Common sense guided informative path planning for object goal navigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19697 , 2024. [27] Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Devendra Singh Chap-lot, Ziad Al-Halah, Jitendra Malik, and Kristen Grau-man. Poni: Potential functions for objectgoal navigation with interaction-free learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18890–18900, 2022. [28] Victor Reijgwart, Cesar Cadena, Roland Siegwart, and Lionel Ott. Efficient volumetric mapping of multi-scale environments using wavelet-based compression. 2023-07. [29] Hardik Shah, Jiaxu Xing, Nico Messikommer, Boyang Sun, Marc Pollefeys, and Davide Scaramuzza. Fore-sightnav: Learning scene imagination for efficient ex-ploration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , 2025. [30] Rutav Shah, Albert Yu, Yifeng Zhu, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Martín-Martín. Bumble: Unifying reasoning and acting with vision-language models for building-wide mobile manipulation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 13337–13345. IEEE, 2025. [31] Ioan A. Şucan, Mark Moll, and Lydia E. Kavraki. The Open Motion Planning Library. IEEE Robotics & Au-tomation Magazine , 19(4):72–82, December 2012. doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2205651. https://ompl.kavrakilab. org. [32] Boyang Sun, Hanzhi Chen, Stefan Leutenegger, Cesar Cadena, Marc Pollefeys, and Hermann Blum. Frontier-net: Learning visual cues to explore. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(7):6576–6583, 2025. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2025.3569122. [33] Jingwen Sun, Jing Wu, Ze Ji, and Yu-Kun Lai. Asurvey of object goal navigation. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , 22:2292–2308, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TASE.2024.3378010. [34] Yuezhan Tao, Yuwei Wu, Beiming Li, Fernando Cladera, Alex Zhou, Dinesh Thakur, and Vijay Kumar. Seer: Safe efficient exploration for aerial robots using learning to predict information gain. In ICRA , 2023. [35] Hongze Wang, Boyang Sun, Jiaxu Xing, Fan Yang, Marco Hutter, Dhruv Shah, Davide Scaramuzza, and Marc Pollefeys. What matters in rl-based methods for object-goal navigation? an empirical study and a unified framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01830 , 2025. [36] Meng Wei, Chenyang Wan, Xiqian Yu, Tai Wang, Yuqiang Yang, Xiaohan Mao, Chenming Zhu, Wenzhe Cai, Hanqing Wang, Yilun Chen, et al. Streamvln: Streaming vision-and-language navigation via slowfast context modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05240 ,2025. [37] Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal naviga-tors from 2.5 billion frames. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2020. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=H1gX8C4YPr. [38] Wei Xie, Haobo Jiang, Yun Zhu, Jianjun Qian, and Jin Xie. Naviformer: A spatio-temporal context-aware transformer for object navigation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 14708–14716, 2025. [39] Zhefan Xu, Xinming Han, Haoyu Shen, Hanyu Jin, and Kenji Shimada. Navrl: Learning safe flight in dynamic environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10 (4):3668–3675, 2025. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2025.3546069. [40] Xinda Xue, Junjun Hu, Minghua Luo, Xie Shichao, Jin-tao Chen, Zixun Xie, Quan Kuichen, Guo Wei, Mu Xu, and Zedong Chu. Omninav: A unified framework for prospective exploration and visual-language navigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25687 , 2025. [41] Karmesh Yadav, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, John Turner, Aaron Gokaslan, Oleksandr Maksymets, Rishabh Jain, Ram Ramrakhya, Angel X Chang, Alexander Clegg, Manolis Savva, Eric Undersander, Devendra Singh Chap-lot, and Dhruv Batra. abitat challenge 2022. https: //aihabitat.org/challenge/2022/, 2022. [42] Karmesh Yadav, Jacob Krantz, Ram Ramrakhya, San-thosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Jimmy Yang, Austin Wang, John Turner, Aaron Gokaslan, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Roozbeh Mootaghi, Oleksandr Maksymets, An-gel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Alexander Clegg, Deven-dra Singh Chaplot, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat challenge 2023. https://aihabitat.org/challenge/2023/, 2023. [43] Brian Yamauchi. A frontier-based approach for au-tonomous exploration. In Proceedings 1997 IEEE In-ternational Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation CIRA’97.’Towards New Computational Principles for Robotics and Automation’ ,pages 146–151. IEEE, 1997. [44] Fan Yang, Chen Wang, Cesar Cadena, and Marco Hutter. iPlanner: Imperative Path Planning. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 2023. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.064. [45] Fan Yang, Per Frivik, David Hoeller, Chen Wang, Cesar Cadena, and Marco Hutter. Spatially-enhanced recurrent memory for long-range mapless navigation via end-to-end reinforcement learning. The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649251401926, 2025. [46] Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chun-yuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 , 2023. [47] Hang Yin, Xiuwei Xu, Linqing Zhao, Ziwei Wang, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Unigoal: Towards universal zero-shot goal-oriented navigation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 19057–19066, 2025. [48] Naoki Yokoyama, Sehoon Ha, Dhruv Batra, Jiuguang Wang, and Bernadette Bucher. Vlfm: Vision-language frontier maps for zero-shot semantic navigation. In 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. [49] Naoki Yokoyama, Ram Ramrakhya, Abhishek Das, Dhruv Batra, and Sehoon Ha. Hm3d-ovon: A dataset and benchmark for open-vocabulary object goal navigation, 2024. [50] Bangguo Yu, Hamidreza Kasaei, and Ming Cao. Frontier semantic exploration for visual target navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05506 , 2023. [51] Kuo-Hao Zeng, Zichen Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Rose Hen-drix, Jordi Salvador, Alvaro Herrasti, Ross Girshick, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Luca Weihs. Poliformer: Scal-ing on-policy rl with transformers results in masterful navigators. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 408– 432. PMLR, 2025. [52] Jiazhao Zhang, Liu Dai, Fanpeng Meng, Qingnan Fan, Xuelin Chen, Kai Xu, and He Wang. 3d-aware object goal navigation via simultaneous exploration and identi-fication. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6672– 6682, 2023. [53] Jiazhao Zhang, Kunyu Wang, Shaoan Wang, Minghan Li, Haoran Liu, Songlin Wei, Zhongyuan Wang, Zhizheng Zhang, and He Wang. Uni-navid: A video-based vision-language-action model for unifying embodied navigation tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06224 , 2024. [54] Jiazhao Zhang, Kunyu Wang, Rongtao Xu, Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, Xiaomeng Fang, Qi Wu, Zhizheng Zhang, and He Wang. Navid: Video-based vlm plans the next step for vision-and-language navigation. Robotics: Sci-ence and Systems , 2024. [55] Yue Zhang, Ziqiao Ma, Jialu Li, Yanyuan Qiao, Zun Wang, Joyce Chai, Qi Wu, Mohit Bansal, and Parisa Kordjamshidi. Vision-and-language navigation today and tomorrow: A survey in the era of foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07035 , 2024. [56] Boyu Zhou, Yichen Zhang, Xinyi Chen, and Shaojie Shen. Fuel: Fast uav exploration using incremental fron-tier structure and hierarchical planning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 6(2):779–786, 2021. [57] Zibo Zhou, Yue Hu, Lingkai Zhang, Zonglin Li, and Siheng Chen. Beliefmapnav: 3d voxel-based belief map for zero-shot object navigation, 2025. [58] Jinguo Zhu, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Zhaoyang Liu, Shenglong Ye, Lixin Gu, Hao Tian, Yuchen Duan, Weijie Su, Jie Shao, et al. Internvl3: Exploring advanced training and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10479 , 2025. APPENDIX 

A. Configuration Settings and Key Parameters 

For simulation evaluation and benchmarking, we use Habi-tat 0.2.4 as the simulation environment. All experiments follow the standard ObjectNav task configuration, using the default action-space agent with a step size of 0.25 m and a turn angle of 30 ◦. The agent is equipped with a 640 ×480 RGB-D camera, and each episode is capped at a maximum of 500 steps, consis-tent with the Habitat ObjectNav Challenge settings [41, 42]. Camera intrinsic parameters and scene bounds are obtained directly from the simulator. All benchmarking experiments are conducted on a headless server equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of VRAM. FrontierNet [32], SAM3 [4], and InternVL [58] (when applicable) are executed locally on the GPU. Gemini and Gemma [10] models are accessed via API calls. The key parameters used in the simulation benchmarks are summarized in Table S1. Unless otherwise specified, the same configuration is used across all experiments. 

B. Emergency rotation mechanism 

Occasionally, a benchmarking episode begins with the agent facing a wall or a room corner where no valid frontiers are visible, or the agent may drive itself into configurations in which no frontier can be identified to continue exploration. To address this, an emergency rotation mechanism is introduced by inserting three artificial “rotation frontiers” with 𝑔 = 1 at the agent’s position, oriented to the left, right, and opposite the current viewing direction, thereby forcing an in-place rotation. If, after clearing all three rotation frontiers, no new exploration frontiers are detected, the filtering threshold is relaxed by updating 𝑔 min ← 0.5 ⋅ 𝑔 min . This procedure is repeated up to a maximum of 𝑛 emergency iterations, after which the failure condition no_frontiers is triggered. 

C. VLM Prompt 1) Frontier Probability Estimation (Set-of-Marks): 

Assume the labeled frontiers {labels} represent possible places to go. Each frontier is a detected boundary between explored and unexplored space. Estimate the probability that each frontier leads to (or is already around) a {target_object} when moving towards it and continuing exploration. Unseen labels should have a probability of 0.5. Consider long-term navigation potential, not only immediate visibility. Some frontiers may lead to larger unexplored regions. Use the local neighborhood context around each frontier. Return only a JSON list with one dictionary. Each key is a frontier                        

> Frontier
> 𝑟 𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 0.2m
> 𝑟 𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 1.0m
> 𝑟 𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟 0.5
> 𝜖 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑙 0.1m
> 𝑇 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑙 15
> 𝑝 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 0.7
> 𝑛 𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 3
> 𝜏 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒 1.8m
> 𝑔 𝑚𝑖𝑛 0.5
> 𝐾 11 Prediction Interval 6 steps
> 𝛼 10
> PointNav
> Backbone Resnet50 RNN Type LSTM Hidden Layers 2
> Models
> FrontierNet Weights rgbd_11cls PointNav Weights vlfm/pointnav_weights SAM3 Tokenizer bpe_simple_vocab_16e6 Gemini Model gemini-2.5-flash Gemma 3 Model gemma-3-4b-it InternVL Model InternVL3_5-8B
> TABLE S1: Configuration Settings for simulated benchmarking.

label; each value is a list: (1) a probability in [0 , 1] , and (2) ashort explanation. Format: {{"A": [0.3, "reason"], "B": [0.2, "reason"], ...}} 

2) Target Presence Verification: 

Based on this image, estimate the probability that a {target_object} 

is in the camera field of view, within five meters, and reachable. If the object is reflected in a mirror, behind glass, barely visible, heavily occluded, or unreachable, it should be considered absent. Probabilities should be close to 0 (absent) or 1 (present). Add one sentence of reasoning. Return a JSON list with one dictionary. Format: {{"probability": 0.9, "reason": "reason"}} 

D. Real-World Experiment 

We implement OpenFrontier as a ROS package and deploy it on a Boston Dynamics Spot robot with an arm. A calibrated RGB camera mounted on the arm’s end-effector provides 

640 × 480 images at approximately 3 Hz. Depth information is estimated from RGB images using Metric3Dv2 [17]. Frontier-Net, SAM3, and Metric3D are executed on a desktop worksta-tion equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of VRAM, while the Gemini-2.5-Flash model is queried via Algorithm 2 InsertViewpointIfAny 

Require: Frontier set  , object set 

Require: Target object 𝐋 , separation distance 𝑟 𝑠𝑒𝑝 

Require: RGB image 𝐈 , depth image 𝐷 𝑐𝑎𝑚 

Require: Robot position 𝑝 𝑟 , robot pose 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑑  

> 1:

 ← GET SEGMENTATION MASKS (𝐈 , 𝐋 ) 

> 2:

if || > 0 then  

> 3:

𝑐𝑎𝑚 ← MASK DEPTH (𝐷 𝑐𝑎𝑚 , ) 

> 4:

𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑑 ← PROJECT TOWORLD (𝑐𝑎𝑚 , 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑑 ) 

> 5:

 ← ADD CENTROID (𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑑 , ) 

> 6:

 ← DBSCAN () 

> 7:

for ∀𝐱 𝐢 ∈  do  

> 8:

𝐟 𝐳 ← 𝐱 𝐢 − 𝑝 𝑟 

‖𝐱 𝐢 − 𝑝 𝑟 ‖ 

> 9:

𝐟 𝐱 ←̂ 𝐲 × 𝐟 𝐳 

‖̂𝐲 × 𝐟 𝐳 ‖ 

> 10:

𝐟 𝐲 ← 𝐟 𝐳 × 𝐟 𝐱 

‖𝐟 𝐳 × 𝐟 𝐱 ‖ 

> 11:

𝑝 𝑓 ← 𝑝 𝑜 − 𝑟 𝑠𝑒𝑝 𝐟 𝐳  

> 12:

𝑓 ←

[𝐟 𝐱 𝐟 𝐲 𝐟 𝐳 𝑝 𝑓 

0 0 0 1

] 

> 13:

𝐅 ← CREATE FRONTIER WITH OBJECT (𝑓 , 𝑥 𝑖 ) 

> 14:

 ←  ∪ { F} 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end if Algorithm 3 HandleStall 

Require: Current distance 𝑑 , previous distance 𝑑 prev 

Require: Stall counter stall 

Require: Minimum progress 𝜖 stall , stall threshold 𝑇 stall  

> 1:

if 𝑑 prev − 𝑑 ≥ 𝜖 stall then  

> 2:

stall ← 0 

> 3:

else  

> 4:

stall ← stall + 1  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

if stall ≥ 𝑇 stall then  

> 7:

drop ← true  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

drop ← false  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

𝑑 prev ← 𝑑  

> 12:

return (drop , stall , 𝑑 prev )

API calls. For real-world deployment, we do not use the DD-PPO policy. Instead, we construct an occupancy grid using the metric depth estimates and perform conventional map-based path planning. Mapping is carried out using Wavemap [28]. Planning is implemented as a ROS service that is triggered either by changes in the selected goal or at fixed time intervals, using the RRT-star planner from OMPL [31], following the setup in [32]. Path execution is handled by a simple pure-pursuit controller which sends velocity command to the robot. Frontier prediction, object segmentation, and mapping are performed asynchronously at around 3 Hz with latest incoming camera images. Frontier management and goal selection run 

Algorithm 4 VerifyAndSetTarget 

Require: Distance 𝑑 , threshold 𝑟 𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 

Require: Image 𝐈 , target object 𝐋 

Require: Presence threshold 𝑝 presence 

Require: Frontier F⋆ 

> 1:

hasTarget ← 0 

> 2:

if 𝑑 < 𝑟 𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 then  

> 3:

𝑝 ← VLMD ETECT (𝐈 , 𝐋 ) 

> 4:

if 𝑝 > 𝑝 presence then  

> 5:

hasTarget ← 1 

> 6:

𝐱 ∗ ← GET LINKED OBJECT (F⋆) 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

return (hasTarget , 𝐱 ∗)                

> Frontier
> 𝑟 𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 0.5m
> 𝑔 𝑚𝑖𝑛 0.01 Prediction Interval 1 step (3HZ loop) Planning Interval 100 steps (16HZ loop) Planning Algorithm 𝑅𝑅𝑇 ⋆
> Max planning time 1.5 sec
> Models
> Metric3D metric_depth_vit_large_800k
> Mapper and Planner
> Vox size 0.1m Max depth range 3.5m Max planning time 1.5s Min dist to occupied 0.5m Max dist to free 1.5m
> TABLE S2: Configuration Settings for real-world experiment.

concurrently at approximately 16 Hz, triggered by odometry updates from the robot. Key parameters specific to the real-world deployment are summarized in Table S2. Compared to simulation, we increase the strength of frontier filtering to better handle more challeng-ing environments, such as cluttered background, glass surfaces, and suppress frontiers detected at high elevations. 

E. Metric Calculation 

Overall success rate (SR) was obtained as the total amount of successful episodes over the total amount of available and feasible episodes. Success is determined by Habitat as "if on outputting a STOP command, the agent is within 1.0m Euclidean distance from any instance of the target object category AND the object can be viewed by an oracle from that stopping position by turning the agent or looking up/down." Overall SPL was calculated as the average of each individual episode’s SPL reported by Habitat’s internal metrics. For HM3D (V2), MP3D and OVON benchmakrs, all available episodes specified in the Val split (Val Unseen for OVON) were used. Episodes whose shortest path length was reported as "infinite" by Habitat, i.e. those without any feasible path from starting location to a target object, were not included in the set of feasible episodes. Fig. S1: Context-aware Navigation to the Same Object. Top: chair vs. chair in the bedroom . Bottom: chair vs. chair near a monitor .

F. Additional Exploration Examples on HM3D, MP3D, and OVON 

We present additional navigation examples on the three benchmark datasets used in the main paper: HM3D, MP3D, and OVON. All experiments are conducted using the same system configuration and parameters as those reported in the main paper and described in the previous section. Figures S2, S3, and S4 show representative navigation tra-jectories from HM3D, MP3D, and OVON, respectively. Each example visualizes a top-down view of the robot’s exploration trajectory from the start location (blue square) to the target success region (red area), along with a snapshot of the frontier distribution at the final navigation step. We additionally include examples of navigation under more contextualized goal specifications in Fig. S1. In these cases, the robot is instructed to navigate to the same object within the same scene, but with different contextual descriptions of the goal, and successfully completes the corresponding tasks. These additional results complement the quantitative evalua-tions in the main paper and further demonstrate the robustness of OpenFrontier across both closed-set object-goal navigation and more open-set scenarios. Videos that show the full navi-gation process are provided in the supplementary material. 

G. Additional results of ablations with Different Vision– Language Models 

As discussed in Section IV-B of the main paper, we conduct additional experiments to analyze the sensitivity of OpenFron-tier to the choice of vision-language model used for frontier relevance probability estimation. Beyond the qualitative com-parisons shown in Fig. 8 of the main paper, we evaluate the full pipeline with different VLMs on the entire HM3D evaluation set. The quantitative results are summarized in Table II. The best performance is achieved using Gemini-2.5-flash, same as the configuration adopted in the main experiments. Replacing it with Gemma-3 or InternVL3 results in only marginal performance degradation, with less than 3% drop in success rate and approximately 2% drop in success weighted by path length. Notably, both Gemma-3 and InternVL3 are publicly available models with relatively small model sizes: we use Gemma-3 with 4B parameters, and InternVL3 that with 8B parameters. Fig. S5 presents additional qualitative comparisons of navigation trajectories produced by different VLMs. 

H. Real-World Navigation Results 

We evaluate OpenFrontier in a large-scale indoor envi-ronment with diverse layouts and room types. The robot is initialized at random locations, and navigation targets are specified as objects present in the environment, including fire extinguishers, microwaves, scissor lifts, and television. Videos illustrating the full navigation process are provided in the supplementary material. 

I. Failure Cases 

We present representative failure cases observed during benchmarking and group them into three categories: reaching the maximum step limit , false positives , and robot stuck/cannot reach goal .Both failure due to reaching the maximum step limit and robot stuck result in the same outcome-the episode terminates after exceeding the allowed number of steps without success. However they arise from different underlying causes. In the 

reaching the maximum step limit cases, the robot fails to identify the target object throughout the whole episode. In contrast, in robot stuck cases, the robot successfully detects the target object but becomes trapped in a local minimum while planning or executing a path toward it, eventually exhausting the step budget. The false positive cases occur when the robot navigates to an object that is semantically consistent with the language description but is not annotated as the correct target in the benchmark ground truth. These failures stem from multiple sources. Some are at-tributable to limitations of the Habitat benchmarks themselves. For example, Fig. S6 (a) - (c) shows a case in which the robot reaches an object that closely matches the target description but is not included in the ground-truth annotations. Other failures are caused by limitations of the our chosen low-level PointGoal navigator (DD-PPO), such as becoming trapped in local minima or failing to escape confined regions when approaching the target, as illustrated in Fig. S6 (d) - (f). Finally, certain failures are specific to our method. As shown in Fig. S6 (g) - (i), the robot may pass near the target object but fail to register informative frontiers that would guide it closer to the goal. In some other cases, the robot detect the incorrect object as target. We believe that analyzing these failure cases provides valuable insights into future improvements. In particular, more reliable frontier detection and stronger low-level navigation policies could further improve robustness. At the same time, some cases highlight inherent ambiguities and limitations in current benchmarks, which can affect evaluation independently of the navigation policy. (a) Scene: 5cdEh9F2hJL, Target: Bed (b) Scene: 5cdEh9F2hJL, Target: Toilet (c) Scene: 5cdEh9F2hJL, Target: TV monitor 

(d) Scene: LT9Jq6dN3Ea, Target: Bed (e) Scene: LT9Jq6dN3Ea, Target: Sofa (f) Scene: LT9Jq6dN3Ea, Target: Chair 

(g) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, Targe: Bed (h) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, Targe: Sofa (i) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, Targe: Toilet 

(j) Scene: CrMo8WxCyVb, Target: Bed (k) Scene: CrMo8WxCyVb, Target: Plant (l) Scene: CrMo8WxCyVb, Target: Toilet 

Fig. S2: Additional Navigation Examples in HM3D across four scenes and three target objects. (a) Scene: 2azQ1b91cZZ, Target: Cushion (b) Scene: 2azQ1b91cZZ, Target: Picture (c) Scene: 2azQ1b91cZZ, Target: Chair 

(d) Scene: EU6Fwq7SyZv, Target: Sink (e) Scene: EU6Fwq7SyZv, Target: Table (f) Scene: EU6Fwq7SyZv, Target: Cushion 

(g) Scene: oLBMNvg9in8, Targe: Sofa (h) Scene: oLBMNvg9in8, Targe: Table (i) Scene: oLBMNvg9in8, Targe: Chair 

(j) Scene: TbHJrupSAjP, Target: Bed (k) Scene: TbHJrupSAjP, Target: Chair (l) Scene: TbHJrupSAjP, Target: Cushion 

Fig. S3: Additional Navigation Examples in MP3D across four scenes and three target objects. (a) Scene: 4ok3usBNeis, Target: Dishwasher (b) Scene: 4ok3usBNeis, Target: Nightstand (c) Scene: 4ok3usBNeis, Target: Freeze 

(d) Scene: BAbdmeyTvMZ, Target: Handrail (e) Scene: BAbdmeyTvMZ, Target: Refrigerator (f) Scene: BAbdmeyTvMZ, Target: Rug 

(g) Scene: DYehNKdT76V, Targe: Island (h) Scene: DYehNKdT76V, Targe: Picture (i) Scene: DYehNKdT76V, Targe: Microwave 

(j) Scene: TEEsavR23oF, Target: Nightstand (k) Scene: TEEsavR23oF, Target: Microwave (l) Scene: TEEsavR23oF, Target: Dishwasher 

Fig. S4: Additional Navigation Examples in OVON across four scenes and three target objects. (a) Scene: XB4GS9ShBRE, VLM: Gemini Target: TV Monitor (b) Scene: XB4GS9ShBRE, VLM: Gemma3 Target: TV Monitor (c) Scene: XB4GS9ShBRE, VLM: InternVL3 Target: TV Monitor 

(d) Scene: Dd4bFSTQ8gi, VLM: Gemini Target: Bed (e) Scene: Dd4bFSTQ8gi, VLM: Gemma3 Target: Bed (f) Scene: Dd4bFSTQ8gi, VLM: InternVL3 Target: Bed 

(g) Scene: GLAQ4DNUx5U, VLM: Gemini, Targe: TV Monitor (h) Scene: GLAQ4DNUx5U, VLM: Gemma3, Targe: TV Monitor (i) Scene: GLAQ4DNUx5U, VLM: InternVL3, Targe: TV Monitor 

(j) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, VLM: Gemini, Targe: Toilet (k) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, VLM: Gemma3, Targe: Toilet (l) Scene: QaLdnwvtxbs, VLM: InternVL3, Targe: Toilet 

Fig. S5: Navigation Examples with different VLMs in HM3D across four scenes with same target objects. (a) Scene: a8BtkwhxdRV, Target: Toilet, Failure: False Positive (b) Scene: bxsVRursffK, Target: Chair, Failure: False Positive (c) Scene: VBzV5z6i1WS, Target: Plant, Failure: False Positive 

(d) Scene: 4ok3usBNeis, Target: Boiler, Failure: Reach Max Steps (e) Scene: 6s7QHgap2fW, Target: Sofa, Failure: Reach Max Steps (f) Scene: DYehNKdT76V, Target: Picture, Failure: Cannot Reach Goal 

(g) Scene: bxsVRursffK, Target: Chair, Failure: False Positive (h) Scene: CrMo8WxCyVb, Target: Toilet, Failure: Reach Max Steps (i) Scene: h1zeeAwLh9Z, Target: Toilet, Failure: Reach Max Steps 

Fig. S6: Failure Cases . Each example visualizes the robot’s navigation trajectory, the final RGB observation, and the corresponding outputs of the segmentation and frontier detectors at the time the episode terminates unsuccessfully.