Title: Certificate-Guided Evaluation of Reinforcement Learning Generalization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00840v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:59:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Certificate-Guided Evaluation of Reinforcement Learning Generalization 

Vignesh Subramanian 1, Ðor ¯ de Žikeli´ c2, Suguman Bansal 11School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 

> 2

School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 

> 1

{vignesh,suguman}@gatech.edu , 2dzikelic@smu.edu.sg 

# Abstract 

This work presents a logic-driven framework to evaluate the performance of rein-forcement learning (RL) algorithms in their ability to generalize to unseen tasks. Our framework defines a family of inductive reach-avoid tasks, characterized by structural similarities in task dynamics, enabling evaluation of generalization ca-pabilities. We introduce a neural certificate function that validates trajectories generated by RL algorithms by enforcing key conditions, thereby serving as a litmus test for RL generalization. We empirically demonstrate our method’s ca-pability in certifying generalization for several state-of-the-art generalizable RL algorithms on challenging continuous environments. Our results show that a lower percentage of certificate function violations correlates with a higher number of test tasks successfully solved, highlighting the effectiveness of our framework in evaluating and distinguishing generalization capabilities of RL algorithms. This work provides a principled approach for benchmarking RL generalization. 

# 1 Introduction 

The generalization problem in reinforcement learning (RL) asks how agents can learn policies that transfer effectively to new, unseen situations beyond their training experience, a capability widely recognized as essential for practical deployment [ 15 , 12 , 13 ]. A particularly demanding form of generalization is zero-shot generalization , where agents must transfer to unseen tasks without any re-training [ 3, 12 ]. Significant effort has gone into developing agents capable of zero-shot generalization, spanning meta-learning [ 3 ], inductive task structures [ 11 , 20 ], and goal-conditioned approaches [ 17 ]. Yet despite this progress in training zero-shot generalizable agents, the complementary problem of 

evaluating their generalization ability, i.e., determining in a principled way whether and to what degree an agent generalizes to unseen tasks, has received surprisingly little attention. To the best of our knowledge, no principled approach to evaluating and comparing generalization properties of different RL agents has been proposed. Current practice reduces to brute-force testing: run agents on a large number of unseen environments and count successes. This lack of a principled comparison leads to two significant challenges. First, reliable conclusions require testing on a large number of new environments , making evaluation sample-inefficient and costly. Second, and more fundamentally, when an agent fails to generalize, current methods offer no means of identifying which state-action pairs caused the failure , leaving practitioners with no actionable signal for improvement. Ideally, one would want to flag precisely the behaviors that lead to incorrect generalization, thereby enhancing explainability of where and why RL generalization breaks down. Our goal is to address both challenges by proposing a principled framework for evaluating and comparing generalization properties of RL agents. We propose to evaluate generalization with respect to inductive reach-avoid tasks [20 ] — structured families of tasks that share the same dynamics but differ inductively in low-level details such as initial  

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2606.00840v1 [cs.AI] 30 May 2026 (a)

Inductive task (b) Certificate function values (c) Loss graph for learning the certificate 

Figure 1. Car: Moving Initial Point and Goal Point with obstacle: The task is to navigate the car from its initial position to the corresponding goal .position or goal location. The structural similarity within such a family provides a natural evaluation substrate: a truly generalizable agent, trained on a few tasks from the family, should transfer its policy to unseen members. Fig. 1a illustrates one such family, where each task requires navigating a car from an initial to a goal location while avoiding an obstacle, with both locations shifting left by one unit across tasks. The key challenge is formalizing what it means for a trajectory to capture the 

essence of the task family — a notion precise enough to serve as an evaluation criterion. To this end, we introduce certificates of correct generalization . A certificate is a scalar-valued function C over MDP states and task indices, trained on demonstration trajectories from a few tasks in the inductive family. Intuitively, the certificate value measures an agent’s progress toward satisfying its current reach-avoid task: it is required to be (1) non-negative at safe states along demonstration trajectories, (2) strictly decreasing along each trajectory until the goal is reached, (3) decreasing across subsequent task instances, and (4) negative at all unsafe states. Together, these conditions capture the monotonic invariant behavior that a well-generalizing agent should exhibit. We show (Theorem 3.3) that the existence of such a certificate guarantees that all demonstration trajectories satisfy their respective reach-avoid tasks. This certificate then serves as an evaluation tool. Given a new RL agent, we run it on unseen tasks from the inductive family and count how many states along its trajectories violate the certificate conditions. Agents with fewer violations are concluded to generalize better, a conclusion our experiments consistently validate against ground-truth task-solving performance across a diverse set of continuous control environments. To compute certificates in practice, we design a training procedure for learning neural network certificates from oracle demonstration trajectories, with a loss function enforcing conditions (1)–(4) above. The certificate function learned for the inductive task in Fig. 1a is visualized in Fig. 1b. 

Contributions. We make the following contributions: • We introduce certificates of correct generalization for inductive reach-avoid tasks, with a formal guarantee that certificates witness task satisfaction (Theorem 3.3). • We design an LSTM-based training procedure for learning certificates from demonstration trajecto-ries, with a loss function directly enforcing the certificate conditions. • We empirically demonstrate across multiple continuous control environments that certificate violation rates reliably distinguish RL algorithms by their generalization ability, correlating strongly with ground-truth task-solving performance. 

Related Work. Generalizable RL has been approached primarily through meta-learning, where agents learn to adapt across task distributions. Gradient-based methods such as MAML [ 9 ] and its variants [ 18 ] enable rapid adaptation, while VariBAD [ 23 ] uses variational inference for zero-shot generalization via task embeddings. Most relevant to our setting, PSMP [ 11 ] and GenRL [ 20 ] exploit inductive task structure to improve transferability. However, all of these works focus on training 

generalizable agents; none proposes a principled method for evaluating or comparing generalization properties across agents. Certificate functions have recently gained prominence as tools for verifying that control policies satisfy given specifications [ 7]. Neural network certificates have been studied for reachability, safety, 2and stability in both deterministic [ 5 , 1 , 8, 21 ] and stochastic [ 14 , 22 , 16 , 6] settings. However, all existing methods certify a single policy on a single task . To our knowledge, we are the first to repurpose certificates for cross-agent, cross-task evaluation of RL generalizability. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Markov Decision Process. RL environments are formally modeled via Markov decision processes. A Markov decision process (MDP) M is a tuple (S, A, P ), where S is a set of states, A is a set of actions, and P : S × A × S → R≥0 is a probabilistic transition function. We use P (· | s, a ) to denote the probability distribution of the successor state after taking action a in state s. In this work, we restrict our attention to deterministic MDPs , meaning that each P (· | s, a ) is a Dirac distribution assigning probability mass 1 to a single state s′ and probability mass 0 to every other state. By a slight abuse of notation, we write s′ = P (s, a ).A trajectory ζ in an MDP is an infinite sequence (st, a t)∞ 

> t=0

of state-action pairs. A finite trajectory 

is a finite prefix of a trajectory. A (pure positional) policy in an MDP is a map π : S → A, which to each state assigns an action to be taken. For simplicity, we denote the trajectory obtained by a pure positional policy π by (st)∞ 

> t=0

where sj+1 = P (sj , π (sj )) .

Reach-Avoid Tasks. This work focuses on reach-avoid tasks. Given an MDP with states S, a reach-avoid task is defined by the tuple (G, η, X u) comprising goal states G ⊆ S, initial state distribution 

η over MDP states S, and unsafe states Xu ⊆ S \ supp( η) where supp( η) is the support of the initial state distribution. The objective of a reach-avoid task is to reach the goal states from the initial states while avoiding all unsafe states along the trajectory. Formally, a trajectory ζ = ( st, a t)∞ 

> t=0

satisfies a reach-avoid task (G, η, X u), denoted ζ |= ( G, η, X u), if there exists T ≥ 0 such that s0 ∼ η,

sT ∈ G, and sj ∈ S \ Xu for all 0 ≤ j ≤ T . For simplicity, we use the notation Xs = S \ Xu to denote the safe states .

Assumption. We assume that all states in the set of unsafe states Xu are sink states. This means that once a trajectory enters any state s ∈ Xu, it cannot leave, i.e., P (s, a ) = s for all s ∈ Xu and a ∈ A.This assumption reflects scenarios where entering an unsafe state represents an irreversible failure, such as collisions in robotic navigation. As a result, any trajectory that enters Xu is immediately terminated and considered invalid for the reach-avoid task. 

# 3 Evaluation of RL Generalizability 

We present our framework for evaluating and comparing generalization properties of RL agents. Our framework evaluates the generalization of RL algorithms based on their ability to extrapolate to similar but different tasks. To achieve this, we consider generalization with respect to inductive tasks 

[ 20 ], which form a family of tasks that are structurally similar but differ inductively in the low-level details. We consider inductive reach-avoid tasks . We are guided by the intuition that these tasks are so similar that their policies should also be similar, making them a good fit for evaluating RL generalizability. Inductive reach-avoid tasks are formally defined in Section 3.1. In order to evaluate generalization properties of RL algorithms, our framework uses a set of task-trajectory pairs that serve as demonstrations of what a trajectory that satisfies some reach-avoid task looks like. It then uses these demonstrations to extract a quantitative measure of progress 

along demonstration trajectories towards satisfying their reach-avoid tasks. This progress measure is formally captured via certificates of correct generalization , a notion that we introduce in Section 3.2. Finally, our framework is presented in Section 3.3. Our framework first trains a certificate of correct generalization from a given set of task-trajectory demonstration pairs. It then runs each RL agent on a set of new and unseen tasks, and uses the certificate to quantify and compare the generalization capabilities of each RL agent. 

3.1 Inductive Reach-Avoid Tasks 

An inductive reach-avoid task is a sequence of reach-avoid tasks over the same MDP, such that the subsequent reach-avoid task builds upon the previous one by progressively updating the goal region, 3the initial state distribution, or both. We assume that the set of unsafe states is the same for all tasks in the sequence, as these correspond to e.g., physical obstacles or collisions. For a set S, denote by 

P(S) the set of all subsets of S and by D(S) the set of all probability distributions over S.

Definition 3.1 (Inductive reach-avoid task) . Consider an MDP with a set of states S. An induc-tive reach-avoid task is given by a tuple T = ( T0, update _goal , update _init ), where (1) T0 =(G0, η 0, X u) is the base task with initial goal states G0 ⊆ S, initial state distribution η0 and unsafe states Xu, (2) update _goal : P(S) 7 → P (S) is the goal update function , and (3) update _init :

D(S) 7 → D (S) is the initial distribution update function . Then, the inductive task T denotes the sequence of reach-avoid tasks Ti = ( Gi, η i, X u) for each i ∈ N0, where T0 is defined as above and 

Ti+1 = ( update _goal (Gi), update _init (ηi), X u) for i ∈ N0.

For each task to be satisfiable, we assume that the goal region and the support of the initial distribution of each task are contained within the safe set Xs, i.e. that Gi ⊆ Xs and supp( ηi) ⊆ Xs hold for all 

i ∈ N0.

3.2 Certificates of Correct Generalization 

We now define our certificates for validating generalizability in inductive reach-avoid tasks. Consider an inductive reach-avoid task T giving rise to a sequence of reach-avoid tasks T0, T1, . . . . Our certificate is defined with respect to a set ξ = {(T0, ζ 0), (T1, ζ 1), . . . } of task-trajectory pairs, where each ζi is a finite (possibly empty) set of MDP trajectories. These trajectories serve as demonstrations 

of what a trajectory that satisfies the reach-avoid task Ti should look like. Before defining the certificate, we fix some additional notation. For each task index i ∈ N0, let 

ζi = {ζ1 

> i

, . . . , ζ Ki 

> i

} be the set of demonstration trajectories for task Ti with Ki ∈ N0 and each 

ζki = ( ski,j )∞ 

> j=0

being an MDP trajectory. We use TGi (ζki ) = inf {j ∈ N0 | ski,j ∈ Gi} to denote the index of the first state along trajectory ζki that is in the goal region of the task Ti, with Ti = ∞ if the goal region is not reached. Formally, a certificate of correct generalization is a function C : S × N0 → R assigning a real value to each MDP state and task index pair. The certificate value is required to be (1) non-negative at all safe states along the demonstration trajectories, (2) strictly decreasing along each demonstration trajectory until it reaches a goal state, (3) decreasing across subsequent tasks, and (4) negative at all unsafe states. 

Definition 3.2 (Certificates of correct generalization) . Consider an inductive reach-avoid task T and a set ξ = {(T0, ζ 0), (T1, ζ 1), . . . } of task-trajectory pairs defined as above. A certificate of correct generalization for the set of demonstration trajectories ξ is a function C : S × N0 → R, such that the following conditions hold: 

(1) (Non-Negativity at Safe States) For each task index i ∈ N0, trajectory ζki and safe state ski,j ∈ Xs

along the trajectory ζki , we have C(ski,j , i ) ≥ 0.

(2) (Strict Decrease Within a Task Until the Goal) For each task index i ∈ N0, there exists εi > 0

such that for each trajectory ζki and safe state ski,j ∈ Xs along the trajectory ζki with 

0 ≤ j < T (ζki ), we have C(ski,j +1 , i ) ≥ 0 and C(ski,j , i ) > C(ski,j +1 , i ) + εi.

(3) (Decrease Across Subsequent Tasks) For each task index i ∈ N0, the certificate value at the goal state of every trajectory for task Ti is greater than the value at the initial state of every trajectory for task Ti+1 , i.e. 

min   

> 1≤k≤Ki
> T(ζki)<∞

C(ski,T (ζki ), i ) > max  

> 1≤k≤Ki+1
> T(ζki+1 )<∞

C(ski+1 ,T (ζki+1 ), i + 1) 

(4) (Strict Negativity at Unsafe States) For all unsafe states s ∈ Xu and task indices i ∈ N0, we have C(s, i ) < 0.

The intuition behind our certificate is that it captures and quantifies progress along demonstration trajectories towards satisfying their reach-avoid tasks. This is because the certificate value is required to be non-negative at safe states and to strictly decrease along a demonstration trajectory while 4keeping the certificate value non-negative, until the goal region is reached (Conditions 1 and 2). Hence, the trajectory must eventually reach the goal region, and so the certificate value measures progress towards the goal. Moreover, as the certificate value is negative at unsafe states (condition 4), the trajectory must avoid unsafe states until the goal is reached, and so the reach-avoid task is satisfied. Finally, the certificate furthermore captures the inductive relation between subsequent task instances in the inductive reach-avoid task (condition 3). The following theorem formalizes this intuition, and shows that if a certificate of correct generalization exists, then all demonstration trajectories satisfy their reach-avoid tasks. Hence, our certificate indeed captures and quantifies progress along demonstration trajectories towards satisfying their reach-avoid tasks. This will allow us to utilize our certificates to evaluate generalization properties of RL algorithms, by checking whether they preserve this progress behaviour along the trajectories generated for new and unseen tasks. 

Theorem 3.3. Let T be an inductive reach-avoid task giving rise to a sequence of reach-avoid tasks 

T0, T1, · · · , and let ξ = {(T0, ζ 0), (T1, ζ 1), . . . } be a set of task-trajectory pairs. If a certificate of correct generalization for the set of demonstration trajectories ξ exists, then ζki |= Ti for all task indices i ∈ N0 and trajectory indices 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki.Proof. Suppose that C is a certificate of correct generalization for ξ. We need to show that, for each task index i ∈ N0 and trajectory index 1 ≤ k ≤ Ki, we have ζki |= Ti. That is, if ζki = ( ski,j )∞

> j=0

is an MDP trajectory, we need to show that there exists an index T ∈ N0 such that ski,T ∈ Gi and 

ski,j ̸ ∈ Xu for 0 ≤ j < T .The existence of an index T ∈ N0 such that ski,T ∈ Gi follows by conditions 1 and 2 in Definition 3.2. This is because the support of the initial state distribution ηi of task Ti is assumed to be contained within the safe set Xs (see Section 3.1). Hence, by condition 1, we have C(ski, 0, i ) ≥ 0. On the other hand, by condition 2, it follows that until a state in Gi is reached, we will have C(ski,j , i ) ≥C(ski,j +1 , i ) + εi and C(ski,j +1 , i ) ≥ 0. Hence, a state in Gi is reached in at most T ≤ ⌈C (ski, 0, i )/ε i⌉

steps. Moreover, since C(ski,j , i ) ≥ 0 holds for 0 ≤ j ≤ T , it follows by condition 4 that ski,j ̸ ∈ Xu

for 0 ≤ j < T . This concludes the proof that ζki |= Ti.

3.3 Evaluating RL Generalizability via Certificates 

We now show how our certificates of correct generalization can serve as a tool for evaluating and comparing the generalization capabilities of different RL algorithms π1, . . . , π n.First, our framework learns a certificate of correct generalization for a given set of demonstration trajectories ξ = {(T0, ζ 0), (T1, ζ 1), . . . }. The training procedure for learning certificates and the details on how demonstration trajectories are collected are presented in Section 4. Second, a finite number of test reach-avoid tasks Φtest ⊆ T are chosen to assess generalizability of given RL agents π1, . . . , π n. We require that demonstration trajectories for the test reach-avoid tasks are not used in the certificate training procedure. That is, a reach-avoid task Ti can be used as a test task only if the set of demonstration trajectories ζi is empty. Finally, for each RL agent πi and for each test reach-avoid task ϕ ∈ Φtest , we use πi to generate a trajectory ξϕπi for the test task ϕ. We then count the total number of violations of the certificate conditions along ξϕπi . That is, for each of Conditions 1-4 in Definition 3.2, we count at how many states along the trajectory ξϕπi the condition is violated. In reach-avoid tasks, all steps beyond the first unsafe state (denoted as "OC") are treated as violations. We denote by N ϕπi the total number of certificate violations for task ϕ, and define Nπi = P 

> ϕ∈Φtest

N ϕπi to be the total number of certificate violations of the RL agent πi across all test tasks in Φtest . The percentage of certificate violations 

is computed using the ratio of the number of certificate violations to the total number of states in the trajectory. We then compare the percentages of certificate violations for different RL agents 

π1, . . . , π n, and conclude that RL agents πi with lower percentages of certificate violations have better generalizability properties. This framework provides a principled method to evaluate generalization properties of RL agents on unseen tasks, by using certificates of correct generalization from given demonstrations as a validation 5tool. By comparing the percentages of certificate violations across different RL algorithms, we gain insights into their ability to generalize to new tasks and preserve the progress behavior captured by the certificate. 

# 4 Learning Certificates 

This section describes the training procedure for learning a certificate of correct generalization. Consider an inductive reach-avoid task T giving rise to a sequence of reach-avoid tasks T0, T1, . . . .Given a set of demonstration trajectories ξ = {(T0, ζ 0), (T1, ζ 1), . . . } defined as in the previous section, our objective is to train a neural network to approximate the certificate function C : S × N0 →

R defined in Definition 3.2. 

Training Data. We start by describing how our training data, i.e. the demonstration trajectories used to train a neural network certificate, are collected. We train the certificate on finite-length prefixes of trajectories for tasks T0, . . . , Tn−1, i.e., the first n tasks in the inductive reach-avoid task 

T , where n ∈ N is an algorithm parameter. We use finite-length prefixes because one cannot obtain infinite-length trajectories in practice. We refer to tasks T0, . . . , Tn−1 as the training tasks and tasks 

Tn, Tn+1 , . . . as the testing tasks . Hence, demonstration trajectories will be finite-length trajectories in the sets ζi for 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, whereas ζi = ∅ for i ≥ n.For each training task Ti with 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, the set of demonstration trajectories ζi comprises (1) positive examples, i.e. trajectories that satisfy the reach-avoid task Ti, and (2) negative examples, i.e. trajectories that violate Ti. Positive examples are needed in order to capture progress behaviour in trajectories that satisfy the reach-avoid task with respect to Conditions 1-3 in Definition 3.2. Among the negative examples, all trajectories are of the kind that reach an unsafe state and thus violate the avoidance objective, which are needed to capture condition 4 in Definition 3.2. We do not consider finite-length trajectories that do not violate safety but violate reachability, since one cannot ascertain whether such a trajectory could have satisfied the specification if it were longer. These training trajectories are collected using an oracle that generates trajectories of positive and negative examples in the environment for the given reach-avoid task. Positive and negative trajectories are obtained by sampling many trajectories in the environment using a planner, and labeling them as positive or negative examples depending on whether the trajectory satisfies the reach-avoid task. 

Training Procedure. Our training procedure is formulated as a learning task, where the goal is to minimize a loss function that is designed to enforce Conditions 1-4 in Definition 3.2 along demonstra-tion trajectories. In particular, our loss function is a sum of four loss terms, each corresponding to one condition in Definition 3.2, where the outer sum is taken over all training tasks and all demonstration trajectories: 

Loss =

> n−1

X

> i=0

X 

> (si,j )lj=0 ∈ζi



λsafe 

> l

X

> j=0

max {0, −C(si,j , i )} 1si,j ∈Xs

| {z }

> cond. (1)

+ λunsafe 

> l

X

> j=0

max {0, C (si,j , i )} 1si,j ∈Xu

| {z }

> cond. (4)

+

> l−1

X

> j=0

max {0, C (si,j +1 , i ) + εi − C(si,j , i )} 1(si,j ,s i,j +1 )∈Xs

| {z }

> cond. (2)

+ X 

> (si+1 ,j )lj=0 ∈ζi+1

max {0, C (si+1 ,0, i + 1) + εi − C(si,l , i )} 1si,l ∈Gi

| {z }

> cond. (3)



.

Here, for each task index i ∈ N0 and for each finite-length trajectory in ζi, we use l to denote the index of the first visit to either the goal region Gi of Ti (for positive example trajectories) or the unsafe set Xu (for negative example trajectories). The first summation enforces the non-negativity condition (1) at safe states Xs by penalizing violations. The fourth summation enforces the strict negativity condition (4) at unsafe states Xu. The scaling factors λsafe and λunsafe are hyperparameters that control 6(a) Car: Moving initial point and stationary goal point with obstacle  

> (b)

Car: Stationary initial point and moving goal point with obstacle  

> (c)

Fetch-Reach - Moving initial point and station-ary goal point without ob-stacle 

Figure 2. Illustrations of tasks in the Car environment and the Fetch-Reach environment.  

> (a)

Moving Initial Point (No Obstacle) (b) Moving Initial Point (With Obstacle)  

> (c)

Moving Goal Point (No Obstacle) (d) Moving Goal Point (With Obstacle)  

> (e)

Moving Initial and Goal Point (No Obstacle) (f) Moving Initial and Goal Point (With Obstacle) 

Figure 3. Violation plots for the Car environment. 

the importance of these penalties. The second summation penalizes violations of monotonic decrease within task trajectories, enforcing the certificate function to decrease as the trajectory progresses. The third summation penalizes violations of monotonic decrease across tasks, ensuring the certificate values at the goal states of task Ti are greater than those of the start states of Ti+1 .We use the Long Short-Term Memory [ 10 ] (LSTM) architecture to train the certificate function. The LSTM acts as a function C(s, i ) that takes a state s and a task index i as input and outputs a real number representing the certificate value. The LSTM is trained on the set of all sequences of concatenated trajectories of the form (ζk0 

> 0

, ζ k1 

> 1

, . . . , ζ kn−1 

> n−1

), where ζki 

> i

∈ ζi is a demonstration trajectory for task Ti (generated by the oracle). We generate and use multiple batches of ξ for effective training. We choose LSTMs since they are well-suited to capture sequential dependencies in data. Trajectories represent ordered sequences of states, where the progression along each trajectory encodes information about task dynamics, safety, and proximity to the target state. Furthermore, concatenated trajectories ensure that dynamics across subsequent tasks are encoded. Since LSTMs are designed to maintain memory and capture long-term dependencies, we expect the LSTMs to capture these intra- and inter-trajectory dependencies while respecting safety conditions. 7(a) (b) 

Figure 4. (a) Illustration of the task in the Reacher environment. (b) Violation plots for the Reacher environment.  

> (a)

No Obstacle (b) With Obstacle 

Figure 5. Violation plots for the Fetch-Reach environment. 

# 5 Experimental Evaluation 

The purpose of the empirical evaluation is to demonstrate that our certification procedure can serve as a litmus test to examine the generalizability of RL algorithms. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Objective and Procedure. Our objective is to demonstrate that a lower percentage of certificate violations indicates better generalizability of an RL algorithm. We do so by comparing the results of our certificate-based evaluation to ground truth. Given an RL algorithm A and an inductive task T , we learn a (generalizable) policy using the first n

tasks T0, T1, · · · T n−1 of the inductive task. Then, we evaluate the following two metrics to assess generalizability of the learned policy: • (Ground Truth) We compute the number of unseen tasks solved by the learned policy. That is, we consider how many tasks starting from Tn, Tn+1 , · · · the policy can solve. The larger the number of unseen tasks the policy can solve, the better its generalizability. • (Certificate-Guided) We use our framework in Section 3.3 to compute the percentage of certificate violations. The lower the percentage, the better its generalizability. By demonstrating a strong correlation between the two metrics, we will confirm the effectiveness of our framework in assessing generalization. To ensure fairness, all RL algorithms are trained on identical tasks from the inductive family. In the ground truth evaluation, all algorithms are tested on the same unseen tasks. For each inductive task, the certificate is trained once and used to evaluate all algorithms. 

RL Algorithms. We evaluate a diverse set of state-of-the-art generalizable RL algorithms that have the ability to generalize to similar but different tasks (for details, see Appendix E): • Standard (Non-Generalizable) RL Algorithms, such as ARS and its variants (ARS + Reward Aggregation and ARS + Goal Conditioning) and PPO [ 19 ], which serve as strong baselines despite lacking explicit generalization mechanisms. • Generalizable RL algorithms across three categories: 

– Inductive Generalization algorithms PSMP [ 11 ] and GenRL-ARS [ 20 ], which leverage inductive structures between tasks; 

– Meta-Learning algorithms MAML-Reinforce [ 9 ] and VariBAD-A2C [ 23 ], enabling rapid adap-tation through task-specific representations; 8– Goal-Conditioned algorithms C-Learning [ 17 ] and HER-DDPG [ 2 ], which specialize in goal-conditioned generalization. 

Environments and Inductive Tasks. In the interest of space, we discuss our results on three environments of increasing difficulty: 1) Car environment [ 11 ], which involves moving a rectangular car from an initial location to a goal location in a continuous 2D plane; 2) Reacher two-arm 

environment, which involves controlling a planar two-link robotic arm to move its end effector to a target position; and 3) Fetch-Reach environment [ 4], which involves a 7-DOF robotic arm moving its end effector from an initial position to a goal position in a continuous 3D space. A more detailed description of the environments, task families, and experimental setup is provided in Appendix D. Illustrations of inductive reach-avoid tasks for the Car environment are given in Fig. 1a and Fig. 2. The inductive reach-avoid task for the Fetch-Reach environment is to navigate from a moving initial location to a stationary goal location, similar to Fig. 2. We also consider the reachability variant of all these tasks where the obstacle is absent. Full descriptions of environments, tasks, and results on more environments are presented in Appendices C, E and D. 

How to read Violation Plots . The results are presented using violation plots that display the percentage of certificate violations and the number of successfully solved tasks for various RL algorithms (see Figs. 3, 5 and 4). Each bar shows the mean percentage of violations over 10 runs with error bars indicating the variance. The number of solved tasks (e.g., 2/15 ) is annotated above the bar, providing ground-truth evidence for the correctness of the certificate. This means that the algorithm generalized to 2 out of 15 unseen tasks. High violation rates correspond to poor generalization, as indicated by a low number of solved tasks, while low violation rates indicate better generalizability, as indicated by a high number of solved tasks. For reach-avoid tasks, "OC" (Obstacle Collision) is used to indicate when a trajectory fails by colliding with an obstacle, with all steps after the collision treated as violations. 

5.2 Observations and Results Certificate violations are a good measure of generalizability. All our experiments show that a lower percentage of certificate violations correlates with a higher number of successfully solved unseen tasks, hence indicating better generalizability properties of RL algorithms. Similarly, a higher percentage of certificate violations correlates with a lower number of successfully solved unseen tasks. Our evaluation results also align with priors one may have w.r.t. algorithm performance. For instance, standard (non-generalizable) RL approaches ARS and PPO perform poorly in all experiments. 

Reach-avoid tasks are hard generalization benchmarks. Most RL algorithms performed poorly on reach-avoid tasks, as shown by high certificate violations and low solved task counts. In the high-dimensional obstacle environments such as Car and Fetch, even generalizable RL algorithms struggled, with some runs showing over 90% violations. This illustrates that obstacles create a significant challenge for RL generalization. To analyze further, we tested in low-dimensional obstacle environments, such as Car2D, and observed similarly poor performance (Results are shown in Fig. 6 in the Appendix). This highlights that obstacles are inherently difficult constraints, even in simpler settings, underscoring their role as a strict constraint for generalization in locomotion-based navigation tasks. In contrast to reach-avoid tasks (tasks with obstacles), RL algorithms in environments without obstacles demonstrated better performance. Generalizable algorithms, such as GenRL and VariBAD, consistently achieved low violations. This underscores the relative simplicity of reachability tasks compared to reach-avoid tasks, where obstacle avoidance is not a factor and algorithms without explicit generalization capabilities perform poorly regardless of the task. 

# 6 Conclusion 

This work presents a novel framework for evaluating and comparing the generalization capabilities of RL agents. Our framework is based on the proposed notion of certificates of correct generalization, which we use to provide a method for assessing RL agents’ performance on unseen tasks. Our results demonstrate that minimizing certificate violations strongly correlates with better generalization, making this approach a reliable litmus test for evaluating RL generalizability. The experiments also confirm the effectiveness of our framework. 9Acknowledgment 

Research reported in this publication was partly supported by an Amazon Research Award, Fall 2024 10 References 

[1] Abate, A.; Ahmed, D.; Giacobbe, M.; and Peruffo, A. 2021. Formal synthesis of lyapunov neural networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters 5(3):773–778. [2] Andrychowicz, M.; Wolski, F.; Ray, A.; Schneider, J.; Fong, R.; Welinder, P.; McGrew, B.; Tobin, J.; Abbeel, P.; and Zaremba, W. 2017. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. [3] Beck, J.; Vuorio, R.; Liu, E. Z.; Xiong, Z.; Zintgraf, L.; Finn, C.; and Whiteson, S. 2023. A survey of meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08028 .[4] Brockman, G.; Cheung, V.; Pettersson, L.; Schneider, J.; Schulman, J.; Tang, J.; and Zaremba, W. 2016. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 .[5] Chang, Y.; Roohi, N.; and Gao, S. 2019. Neural lyapunov control. In NeurIPS , 3240–3249. [6] Chatterjee, K.; Henzinger, T. A.; Lechner, M.; and Zikelic, D. 2023. A learner-verifier framework for neural network controllers and certificates of stochastic systems. In TACAS , 3–25. [7] Dawson, C.; Gao, S.; and Fan, C. 2023. Safe control with learned certificates: A survey of neural lyapunov, barrier, and contraction methods for robotics and control. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39(3):1749–1767. [8] Edwards, A.; Peruffo, A.; and Abate, A. 2024. Fossil 2.0: Formal certificate synthesis for the verification and control of dynamical models. In ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control (HSCC) , 26:1–26:10. [9] Finn, C.; Abbeel, P.; and Levine, S. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 1126–1135. [10] Hochreiter, S. 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation .[11] Inala, J. P.; Bastani, O.; Tavares, Z.; and Solar-Lezama, A. 2020. Synthesizing programmatic policies that inductively generalize. In International Conference on Learning Representations .[12] Kirk, R.; Zhang, A.; Grefenstette, E.; and Rocktäschel, T. 2023. A survey of zero-shot generalisation in deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 76:201– 264. [13] Korkmaz, E. 2024. A survey analyzing generalization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02349 .[14] Lechner, M.; Zikelic, D.; Chatterjee, K.; and Henzinger, T. A. 2022. Stability verification in stochastic control systems via neural network supermartingales. In AAAI , 7326–7336. [15] Malik, D.; Li, Y.; and Ravikumar, P. 2021. When is generalizable reinforcement learning tractable? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .[16] Mathiesen, F. B.; Calvert, S. C.; and Laurenti, L. 2023. Safety certification for stochastic systems via neural barrier functions. IEEE Control Systems Letters 7:973–978. [17] Naderian, P.; Loaiza-Ganem, G.; Braviner, H. J.; Caterini, A. L.; Cresswell, J. C.; Li, T.; and Garg, A. 2021. C-learning: Horizon-aware cumulative accessibility estimation. International Conference on Learning Representations .[18] Nagabandi, A.; Finn, C.; and Levine, S. 2019. Deep online learning via meta-learning: continual adaptation for model-based rl. International Conference on Learning Representations .[19] Schulman, J.; Wolski, F.; Dhariwal, P.; Radford, A.; and Klimov, O. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .[20] Subramanian, V.; Kushwah, R.; Roy, S.; and Bansal, S. 2025. Inductive generalization in reinforcement learning from specifications. In International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis , 277–298. Springer. 11 [21] Zhang, H.; Wu, J.; Vorobeychik, Y.; and Clark, A. 2023. Exact verification of relu neural control barrier functions. In NeurIPS .[22] Zikelic, D.; Lechner, M.; Henzinger, T. A.; and Chatterjee, K. 2023. Learning control policies for stochastic systems with reach-avoid guarantees. In AAAI , 11926–11935. [23] Zintgraf, L.; Schulze, S.; Lu, C.; Feng, L.; Igl, M.; Shiarlis, K.; Gal, Y.; Hofmann, K.; and Whiteson, S. 2021. Varibad: Variational bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research 22(289):1–39. 12 Appendix A Limitations 

The framework relies on the availability of high-quality demonstration trajectories to train the certificate function, which may not always be feasible in complex or poorly understood environments. It also assumes access to task-trajectory pairs that are representative of the broader task distribution, limiting its applicability in settings with high task variability or sparse feedback. 

# B Societal Impact 

The proposed framework enables more rigorous evaluation of reinforcement learning generalization, which is essential for deploying AI systems in real-world, safety-critical settings such as robotics and autonomous vehicles. By identifying failure modes and comparing generalization ability across agents, it can help improve reliability and trust in AI. 

# C Training Details 

The experimental setup includes the following details: • Number of Training Tasks: 5 tasks for Car and Car2D environments, and 4 tasks for Reacher and Fetch environments. • Number of Unseen Tasks: 15 tasks for Car and Car2D environments, and 6 tasks for Reacher and Fetch environments. • Number of Repetitions of the Experiments: 10. • Training Compute: SLURM cluster running Intel Xeon Gold 6226 CPUs, operating at 2.7 GHz with 24 cores per node. Each node is equipped with 192 GB of RAM. • Our codebase is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/certificates-B6D7. Learning hyperparameters for our framework are given in Tables 1 and 2. 

Hyperparameter Car-Parking Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 128 Sequence Length 20 20 50 Dropout Rate 0.2 0.2 0.2 Optimizer Adam Adam Adam Gradient Clipping ±0.5 ±0.5 ±0.5

Network Architecture 2 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 32 nodes ( tanh ); 2 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 32 nodes ( tanh ); 3 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 64 nodes ( tanh ); output layer ( ReLU ) output layer ( ReLU ) output layer ( ReLU )

Table 1. Hyperparameters for the LSTM-based Reachability Certificate Function 

# D Experimental Setup 

Our approach is evaluated across several environments, including the Car, Car2D, Reacher Two-Arm Robot, and Fetch-Reach settings, which feature diverse tasks and specifications. All tasks involve moving from an initial state to a target state where reachability is the main objective, with the environment subject to different dynamics and state spaces. The Car environment has a 4-dimensional state space, including x and y positions, orientation, and velocity, with 2 actions: velocity and steering direction. The Car2D environment has a simplified 2-dimensional state space and observation space, consisting of the x and y coordinates of the agent, 13 Algorithm 1 Learning Reach-Avoid Certificates 

Input : Inductive task family {T i}Ni=0 with goal sets {Gi} and initial state distributions {ηi}.Training tasks: Ti for i = 0 , . . . , n − 1.Testing tasks: Ti for i = n, . . . , N .

Output : Trained certificate function C(s, i ). 

> 1:

Generate oracle trajectories ζi = ( si, 0, s i, 1, . . . , s i,l i ) for training tasks Ti (i = 0 , . . . , n ) to solve their respective goal sets Gi. 

> 2:

Initialize LSTM model C(s, i ) with random weights.  

> 3:

while the model has not converged do  

> 4:

Compute the loss: 

Loss =

> n−1

X

> i=0

X 

> (si,j )lj=0 ∈ζi

+ λsafe 

> l

X

> j=0

max {0, −C(si,j , i )} · 1si,j ∈Xs

| {z }

> Penalizes to enforce condition (1)

+

> l−1

X

> j=0

max {0, C (si,j +1 , i ) + εi − C(si,j , i )} · 1(si,j ,s i,j +1 )∈Xs

| {z }

> Penalizes to enforce condition (2)

+ X 

> (si+1 ,j )lj=0 ∈ζi+1

max {0, C (si+1 ,0, i + 1) + εi − C(si,l , i )}· 1si,l ∈Gi

| {z }

> Penalizes to enforce condition (3)

+ λunsafe 

> l

X

> j=0

max {0, C (si,j , i )} · 1si,j ∈Xu

| {z }

> Penalizes to enforce condition (4)

! 

> 5:

Perform backpropagation and update the weights of C(s, i ). 

> 6:

end while  

> 7:

return trained certificate function C(s, i ).

Hyperparameter Car-Parking Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 128 Sequence Length 20 20 50 Dropout Rate 0.2 0.2 0.2 Optimizer Adam Adam Adam Gradient Clipping ±0.5 ±0.5 ±0.5

Network Architecture 2 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 32 nodes ( tanh ); 2 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 32 nodes ( tanh ); 3 hidden LSTM lay-ers, 64 nodes ( tanh ); output layer output layer output layer (no activation) (no activation) (no activation) 

Table 2. Hyperparameters for the LSTM-based Reach-Avoid Certificate Function with 2 actions: velocity and direction. The OpenAI Fetch-Reach environment involves a robotic arm with an 8-dimensional state space, including the x, y, z positions of the end effector, state of the left and right gripper, and the x, y, z velocities of the end effector, with 3 actions: displacement along 14 the x, y, and z axes. The Reacher Two-Arm Robot environment uses a 2-dimensional state space representing the x and y coordinates of the end effector, with 2 actions controlling the angles of the two joints. The inductive tasks in these environments are systematically defined by updating the initial distribu-tions and target goals according to the functions update_init and update_goal, respectively: • Car & Car2D Environment (Fig. 1): 

– Setting 1: the initial distribution is updated by shifting the initial position along the x-axis by a fixed value C, i.e., 

ηi+1 (s) = ηi(s + ( C, 0)) .Gi+1 = Gi + (0 , 0) .

– Setting 2: the goal is updated by shifting the target position along the x-axis by C, i.e., 

ηi+1 (s) = ηi(s + (0 , 0)) .Gi+1 = Gi + ( C, 0) .

– Setting 3: both the initial and target positions are shifted along the x-axis by C,combining both updates. 

ηi+1 (s) = ηi(s + ( C, 0)) .Gi+1 = Gi + ( C, 0) .

• Reacher two-arm robot environment (Fig. 4a): The goal is to move a box from height 

H − C in the Source stack to height C + 1 in the Target stack where H is the initial height of the source tower. 

ηi+1 (s) = ηi(s + (0 , H − C)) .Gi+1 = Gi + (0 , C + 1) .

• Fetch-Reach Environment : In this environment, the inductive tasks are defined by moving the initial distribution along the y-axis by a fixed increment C, while keeping the goal region fixed, i.e., 

ηi+1 (s) = ηi(s + (0 , C, 0)) .Gi+1 = Gi.

Thus, each successive task starts from a shifted initial position, but the target goal remains stationary. 

# E Algorithms and Hyperparameters 

The evaluated algorithms are categorized as follows: • Standard RL Algorithms: ARS , ARS+GC , ARS+RA , and PPO are baseline reinforcement learning methods known for their effectiveness in diverse tasks. These algorithms lack explicit mechanisms for generalization, focusing instead on optimizing performance in specific tasks. • Inductive Generalization Algorithms: PSMP and GenRL leverage inductive biases to general-ize across tasks with structural similarities. These methods enhance transferability by exploiting shared properties within task families. • Meta-Learning Algorithms: MAML and Varibad are designed for rapid adaptation to new tasks with minimal training. MAML employs gradient-based meta-learning, while Varibad uses variational inference for task embeddings, enabling zero-shot generalization. • Goal-Conditioned RL Algorithms: C-Learning and HER explicitly incorporate goals into policy learning, optimizing for tasks requiring specific goal states. These algorithms are well-suited for environments with dynamic or goal-driven objectives. Hyperparameters used for these algorithms are given in Tables 3 to 10 15 Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Number of Directions Sampled 30 30 30 Number of Top Sam-ples Used 8 8 8Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )

Table 3. Hyperparameters for ARS, ARS + GC, ARS + RA 

Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 256 Discount Factor 0.99 0.99 0.99 GAE Parameter 0.95 0.95 0.95 Clipping Parameter 0.2 0.2 0.2 Value Loss Coeffi-cient 0.5 0.5 0.5 Entropy Coefficient 0.01 0.01 0.01 Replay Buffer Size 10 4 10 4 10 4

Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )

Table 4. Hyperparameters for PPO 

Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 256 Maximum Number of Modes 2 2 2

λ 100 100 100 Student Action Func-tion Grammar Proportional Proportional Proportional Switching Condition Grammar Boolean tree (depth 1 or 2) Boolean tree (depth 1 or 2) Boolean tree (depth 1 or 2) Sampling for Teacher Initialization 10 top trajectories (CEM) 10 top trajectories (CEM) 10 top trajectories (CEM) Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )

Table 5. Hyperparameters for PSMP 16 Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Number of Directions Sampled 30 30 30 Number of Top Sam-ples Used 8 8 8Reward Aggregation Scheme softmin softmin softmin Batch Size 64 64 256 Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )

Table 6. Hyperparameters for GenRL-ARS 

Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 256 Number of Meta-Tasks 4 5 5Number of Inner Loop Steps 0 0 0Discount Factor 0.99 0.99 0.99 Entropy Coefficient 0.01 0.01 0.01 Policy Network Ar-chitecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )Optimizer Adam Adam Adam Gradient Clipping ±0.5 ±0.5 ±0.5

KL-Divergence Regu-larization Enabled, coefficient = 0.1 Enabled, coefficient = 0.1 Enabled, coefficient = 0.1 Trajectory Length 200 steps 200 steps 200 steps Meta-Batch Size 4 tasks 5 tasks 5 tasks 

Table 7. Hyperparameters for MAML-Reinforce 17 Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 256 Epsilon 1 × 10 −5 1 × 10 −5 1 × 10 −5

Discount Factor 0.95 0.95 0.95 Max Gradient Norm 0.5 0.5 0.5 Value Loss Coeffi-cient 0.5 0.5 0.5 Entropy Coefficient 0.01 0.01 0.01 GAE Parameter 0.95 0.95 0.95 ELBO Loss Coeffi-cient 1.0 1.0 1.0 Task Embedding Size 5 5 5Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )Encoder Architecture Fully connected (40 nodes), GRU (hidden size 64), Fully connected (40 nodes), GRU (hidden size 64), Fully connected (40 nodes), GRU (hidden size 64), output layer (10 out-puts, ReLU )output layer (10 out-puts, ReLU )output layer (10 out-puts, ReLU )Reward Decoder Ar-chitecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )Decoder Loss Func-tion Binary Cross Entropy Binary Cross Entropy Binary Cross Entropy 

Table 8. Hyperparameters for Varibad-A2C 

Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Batch Size 64 64 256 Gradient Steps per Episode 64 64 64 Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )Target Network Up-date Frequency Every 10 steps Every 10 steps Every 10 steps Discount Factor 0.9 0.9 0.9 

κ 3 3 3

Table 9. Hyperparameters for C-Learning 18 Hyperparameter Car & Car2D Reacher Fetch-Reach 

Episode Length 30 30 100 Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4 1 × 10 −4

Critic Learning Rate 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3

Batch Size 64 64 256 Discount Factor 0.98 0.98 0.98 Replay Buffer Size 10 4 10 4 10 4

Policy Noise 0.2 0.2 0.2 Target Network Up-date Rate 0.005 0.005 0.005 Hindsight Strategy Future strategy (rela-bel goals) Future strategy (rela-bel goals) Future strategy (rela-bel goals) Hindsight Fraction 0.8 0.8 0.8 Network Architecture 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 2 hidden layers, 32 nodes ( ReLU ), 3 hidden layers, 64 nodes ( ReLU ), output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh ) output layer ( tanh )

Table 10. Hyperparameters for HER-DDPG  

> (a)

Car2D: Moving Initial Point with obstacle (b) Car2D: Moving Goal Point with obstacle  

> (c)

Car2D: Moving Initial and Goal Point with obstacle 

Figure 6. Performance evaluation of tasks on the simpler Car2D environment. (a)-(c) present the evaluation results, showing the percentage of certificate violations and the number of successfully solved tasks for various RL algorithms. Each marker represents the mean percentage of violations over 10 runs, with error bars indicating the range (minimum to maximum). The numbers annotated next to each marker (e.g., 0/15 ) denote the number of successfully solved tasks out of the total test tasks. Higher violations correspond to poor generalization, while a lower percentage of violations indicates better generalization. 19