Title: Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27963v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:45:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale 

# Conor James Green and Mithuna Thottethodi 

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University {green456,mithuna}@purdue.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

Data center network design plays a critical role in AI train-ing by supporting scaling to thousands of accelerators. An open problem, designing a near-optimal throughput-oriented network—topology, routing, and collectives—has not been achieved at scale and with broad applicability to physical or implementation constraints. We address this problem with a compelling use-case, Google’s TPU v4/5p supercomputer where the topology may be reconfigured to achieve higher all-to-all throughput, supporting large, parallelized AI train-ing. We show that the existing TPU networks leave terabytes per second of throughput on the table and we fill that gap. This paper presents Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale (TONS), an automated network synthesis framework that meets the high-throughput demands of modern com-puting. TONS formulates topology synthesis as a linear opti-mization problem that maximizes a throughput-centric proxy metric, using theory and heuristics to scale to thousands of nodes. We further introduce a deadlock-free routing scheme compatible with limited virtual channels and optical switch faults, enabling the synthesized topologies to realize their predicted throughput gains in simulation. Evaluating uni-form random and all-to-all traffic, TONS networks have a geometric mean speedups of 2.1 × and 1.6 × over the best TPU v4/5p torus variants. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

The rapid progress of artificial intelligence (AI) and large language models (LLMs) has been driven by scaling model size, dataset size, and training compute [ 47 ]. State-of-the-art models now reach billions to trillions of parameters [ 8 ,10 , 53 , 56 , 62 , 81 ], pushing training from single accelerators to distributed execution spanning thousands of devices. At these scales, end-to-end throughput is frequently limited by sustained communication rather than peak compute, and modern training stacks explicitly co-design parallelization and scheduling with the network to achieve acceptable uti-lization [4, 44, 59, 65, 89, 93]. Distributed training uses data, tensor, pipeline, and/or ex-pert parallelism, introducing synchronized collectives into the critical path. The parallelism techniques require frequent gradient synchronization via all-reduce or reduce-scatter+all-gather [ 43 , 65 , 69 ] and bandwidth-heavy all-reduce/all-gather between layers [ 59 , 73 ]. Although overlap and pipelining can reduce exposed communication [ 39 , 58 ], large-scale studies still report regimes where communication becomes a domi-nant limiter and scaling efficiency diminishes as bandwidth per device drops [ 26 , 59 , 93 ]. Moreover, MoE-style routing induces token dispatch/gather phases implemented as all-to-all, which can dominate step time even with aggressive overlap [41]. Collective libraries continue to improve [ 11 , 70 , 88 ] but topology remains a hard constraint: no schedule can over-come fundamental bottlenecks from insufficient cut capacity, limited path diversity, or load concentration. This motivates a broad line of work showing that irregular and expander-inspired designs can deliver substantially higher throughput than classical structured networks [ 5, 77 , 85 , 92 ]. Many fac-tors affect the end throughput for networks but analytical analysis on the topology provides strong upper bounds on performance. Recent research has pointed to the maximum concurrent flow (MCF) [ 71 ] of a topology to indicate the throughput as it represents the maximum routable/usable throughput [ 5, 92 ] and a tighter bound than topological met-rics such as cut bounds (bisection bandwidth [ 14 ] or sparsest cut [ 54 ]) or link occupancy [ 23 ]. Many topologies have been hand-crafted or algorithmically designed to improve this value either directly or through proxies (e.g., diameter). Mo-tivated by collective-heavy AI/ML training traffic, we focus on direct interconnects because prior works show direct topologies can deliver high aggregate throughput and uti-lization (at a fixed port budget) and remain robust across traffic patterns [77, 85, 92]. To exemplify scalability and implementability under strict constraints, we target Google’s TPU v4 and v5p AI training supercomputers [ 2 , 45 ]. These hyperscale TPU clusters serve and train products for conventional services like YouTube, Gmail, and Google Maps as well as Google’s flagship AI model, Gemini [ 84 ]. TPU pods connect electrically wired 64-chip “cubes” using an optically reconfigurable interconnect (Palomar OCS and related designs) to build pod-scale direct networks [ 45 , 50 , 51 , 63 , 75 , 83 ]. In practice, the control plane instantiates prismatic 3D tori (regular or twisted) [ 9 , 45 ] and uses reconfiguration primarily for partitioning and switch-ing between these variants despite substantial headroom for richer topology choices under the same physical con-straints. Zu et al. describe additional operational constraints at this scale: routing is implemented via static forwarding 

> 1
> arXiv:2605.27963v1 [cs.NI] 27 May 2026

tables with a small virtual-channel budget for deadlock free-dom, and fault tolerance requires offline routing under fail-ures [ 94 ]. Evaluating an established network, this paper does not raise any ethical issues. Despite clear opportunity, improving pod-scale fabrics faces three obstacles. (i) Solution space: even under strict degree and port constraints, the number of possible topol-ogy permutations grows super-exponentially while all-to-all-style demand induces Θ(𝑛 2) communicating pairs. (ii) Ob-jective fidelity: directly optimizing end performance would require modeling routing realizability, deadlock avoidance, and collective scheduling inside the synthesis loop but opti-mizing weak proxies results in poor performance. (iii) Imple-mentability: high-throughput designs are often irregular and inapplicable to many physical constraints [ 48 , 77 , 85 , 90 , 92 ], yet TPU routing must remain compatible with static forward-ing, limited VCs, and OCS connectivity rules [94]. We propose Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale (TONS), a network design framework that automatically generates topologies with optimal/near-optimal analytical throughput and implements deadlock-free routing to re-alize these gains, while maintaining OCS feasibility and routing constraints. TONS formulates topology construc-tion as a mixed integer linear program (MILP) targeting a throughput-aligned proxy objective based on Leighton– Rao-style cut/flow foundations [ 23 , 49 ], enabling scalable synthesis without simulation in the loop. This work makes the following contributions. 

• Linear programming formulation that generates TPU-feasible topologies optimized for an MCF-aligned proxy objective. 

• Theory- and symmetry-based reductions that enable pod-scale topology generation. 

• Deadlock-free routing algorithm with a small VC budget that achieves optimal/near-optimal routed throughput, sup-ports fault tolerance, and balances VC load. 

## 2 BACKGROUND 2.1 Analytical Models on Performance 

Large-scale AI training and inference increasingly runs on distributed accelerator fabrics where step time depends on sustained communication throughput as much as compute. Parallel training mixes data/model parallelism, making bandwidth-heavy collectives (e.g., all-reduce, all-gather) and, in many workloads, dense reshuffles such as all-to-all performance-critical [ 5, 92 ]. Accordingly, we focus on throughput (the sat-uration point under concurrent demand) rather than single-message latency [14, 23]. We separate (i) topology-limited throughput (graph bot-tlenecks) and (ii) routing-limited throughput (load concen-tration under static routing) [ 14 , 22 ]. Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale uses proxies for (i)–(ii) to make synthesis tractable, then validates candidates with explicit routability constraints and simulation (Sections 5–7). A standard throughput objective is maximum concurrent flow (MCF): the largest 𝜆 such that every commodity in a traffic matrix can simultaneously send 𝜆 units subject to link capacities [ 71 ]. Directly optimizing topology for MCF is expensive, so we rely on topology-only bounds and routing-aware proxies. Per-node injection limits throughput by total egress capacity [ 14 , 66 ], while cut constraints limit through-put by cut capacity (specializing to bisection under uniform all-to-all) [ 14 , 54 ]. For deterministic routing, the inverse of the maximum directed edge load ( max channel load ) cap-tures how routing concentrates demand and upper-bounds uniform throughput [ 14 , 82 ]. Finally, cut-based quantities such as the sparsest cut provide scalable approximations to multicommodity throughput (e.g., via Leighton–Rao-style guarantees), and are most reliable when paired with routed analysis and simulation [23, 49, 54]. 

## 2.2 TPU v4/5p Pod Structure and OCS 

Google’s TPU v4/5p pod interconnect uses optical circuit switching (OCS) to scale beyond a single electrically-cabled building block [ 1 , 45 ]. The system is assembled from 64-chip 

cubes arranged as a 4 × 4 × 4 3D mesh. On its six faces, each cube has optical ICI links that connect to hardwired OCSes to realize a job-level inter-cube topology [ 45 ]. The OCS is software reconfigurable to directly connect/pair edges via a MEMS-based mirror, effectively creating a directly connected topology [ 63 , 75 , 83 ]. In production, Google deploys various configurations of 3D prismatic tori (PT) and prismatic doubly twisted tori (PDTT) as baseline job topologies up to 8192 nodes [45]. This setting imposes constraints uncommon in general DCN synthesis: fixed intra-cube wiring, fixed optical port budgets per cube face, and OCS-imposed connection restric-tions (circuits connect only within a switch group). Moreover, forwarding is deterministic and configured per job (i.e., static routing tables) [ 45 ], so routing choices directly shape max channel load and achievable throughput under all-to-all or similar demand (Section 5). Google utilizes minimal hop XYZ dimension ordered routing (DOR) and datelines for deadlock freedom, performing heuristic or ILP-based route optimiza-tions for equivalent distance paths. Because the network uses wormhole-style flow control, routing must also be deadlock-free. Cyclic channel dependencies, represented in a channel depency graph (CDG) can be eliminated by turn restrictions and/or escape virtual networks [ 13 , 18 , 27 ]. Finally, at pod scale, failures are expected. Google devises “wild first rout-ing” (WFR) where XYZ DOR paths that are disallowed due to a fault take a few hops through neighbors following the “sandwich rule” [94]. 

> 2

The baseline pod topologies (e.g., tori) have vertex/edge symmetry that can reduce synthesis and routing complexity by representing equivalent commodities as a small canonical set [ 82 ]. We use translations and/or reflections on the 3D coordinate grid to define a minimal canonical set 𝑆 , a map 

𝐶 (𝑢 ) that returns the transformation taking 𝑢 to 𝑢 𝑐 ∈ 𝑆 ,and an induced transform 𝑇 𝑢 (𝑣 ) applied to destinations, as formalized in Equation 1. 

(𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸 ⇐⇒ (𝑢 𝑐 ,𝑇 𝑢 (𝑣 )) ∈ 𝐸 where 𝑢 𝑐 ∈ 𝑆, 𝑇 𝑢 : 𝑉 → 𝑉 , 𝑇 𝑢 (𝑣 ) = 𝑣 ′. (1) 

## 2.3 Linear Optimization 

Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale casts topology synthesis and routing selection as linear optimization prob-lems. A continuous linear program (LP) optimizes a linear objective over linear constraints with continuous variables. Mixed-integer and integer linear programs (MILPs and ILPs) introduce discrete (binary/integer) variables to express com-binatorial structure (e.g., selecting edges, enforcing if-then logic), at the cost of worst-case NP-hardness [ 35 ]. For MILP, many solvers calculate the dual concurrently providing an upper (for maximization) bound on the objective. A standard scalability tool is relaxation: dropping integrality constraints yields an LP that upper-bounds the MILP objective and often provides a useful guide for synthesis but at the cost of global optimality. For our sparse class of problems, the interior point method was the fastest and it relies on an 𝐴𝐴 𝑇 for a constraint matrix 

𝐴 . This means that both the number of variables and con-straints affect scalability. Finally, solver performance is gov-erned not only by the number of variables and constraints, but also by sparsity. Interior-point methods (e.g., Gurobi’s barrier solver) repeatedly factor sparse linear systems whose cost depends on the fill-in induced by the constraint matrix. In practice, model formulations that preserve sparsity can be orders of magnitude faster and less memory-intensive [ 33 ]. This motivates the symmetry reductions and formulation choices in Section 4 and Section 5. 

## 3 RELATED WORK 

TONS performs optimization-based network synthesis for optically reconfigurable fabrics. Rather than selecting from a small family of rule-based templates (e.g., Clos or tori), TONS uses LP/ILP/MILP formulations and relaxations to op-timize throughput-oriented proxy objectives and produce irregular, non-regular topologies. To our knowledge, no prior work directly generates topologies using an MCF-based linear optimization formulation. Most either generate candidates heuristically and evaluate them with MCF iteratively [ 12 , 30 ,37 , 76 , 77 ] or optimize different objectives (e.g., power/latency, tail performance, or reconfiguration cost) [20, 28, 55, 67, 74, 78 ]. TONS targets the physical and control-plane constraints of TPU v4/5p pods—fixed intra-cube wiring, constrained OCS port groupings, and static forwarding—so we review work on optical reconfigurability, direct/irregular topologies, optimization frameworks, and throughput-centric theory. 

Optical circuit switching and reconfigurable data-center fabrics – Helios [ 24 ] and c-Through [ 87 ] introduced hybrid electrical/optical fabrics that use OCS to accelerate high-bandwidth traffic patterns. Google’s Jupiter fabrics op-erationalize topology engineering with OCS and software-defined control at datacenter scale [ 63 , 75 ]. These systems target rack/cluster networking, whereas TONS targets di-rect topology accelerator pods with stricter wiring/routing constraints and high-throughput workloads, including syn-chronized collectives. 

Direct and irregular datacenter topologies – A broad line of work explores direct or server-centric DCNs beyond Clos hierarchies, including recursively defined DCell [ 32 ]and modular BCube [ 31 ]. CamCube advocates container-scale 3D tori with end-host forwarding [ 3 ], while SWDC and SpaceShuffle add structured randomness to improve path di-versity and throughput with scalable routing [ 72 , 90 ]. Scafida proposes an asymmetric, scale-free-inspired generator to support heterogeneity [ 34 ]. While these designs motivate moving beyond regular tori, they do not address TPU-style constraints (fixed intra-cube wiring, OCS port groupings) nor the static single-path forwarding model, and thus are not directly portable. 

Optimization-based network design – REWIRE uses an optimization framework for unstructured DCN design but scales only to modest sizes [ 12 ]. COUDER optimizes OCS datacenters under traffic uncertainty and evaluates hop-count/throughput improvements under quasi-static recon-figuration [ 80 ], while Perseus jointly optimizes topology and cabling complexity but focuses on physical wire length rather than collective throughput [ 57 ]. In contrast, TONS targets all-to-all throughput under stringent structural con-straints and scales to thousands of nodes while remaining compatible with static forwarding. 

High-throughput graph constructions and throughput-centric theory – Irregular and expander-inspired DCNs such as Jellyfish [ 77 ] and Xpander [ 85 ], and low-diameter HPC networks such as Slim Fly [ 6 ], show that high ex-pansion and path diversity can outperform structured de-signs in throughput. However, these systems typically as-sume packet-switched routers with flexible (often multipath) routing, whereas TONS operates under static single-path forwarding with a small VC budget. VL2 [ 29 ] popularized Valiant Load Balancing [ 86 ] as an oblivious mechanism to support broad traffic matrices, including under failures [ 91 ], 

> 3

but its assumptions differ from TPU-style deterministic for-warding. Finally, throughput under concurrent demand is analyzed by maximum concurrent flow and cut-based bounds: Leighton– Rao formalize approximate max-flow/min-cut relationships for uniform multicommodity flow [ 49 ], and Jyothi et al. ad-vocate throughput-centric evaluation and clarify when cut metrics are predictive [23]. TONS adopts a cut-based proxy aligned with these foundations to enable scalable synthesis. 

## 4 TOPOLOGY DESIGN 4.1 Topology Generation Overview 

TONS synthesizes the optical inter-cube connectivity for a given job configuration under TPU/OCS wiring rules. Even with constant radix and structured port groupings, the num-ber of feasible optical matchings grows combinatorially, mak-ing simulation-in-the-loop search impractical. We therefore optimize a throughput-aligned proxy based on the approxi-mate sparsest cut for uniform all-to-all demand. We start from an established MCF LP formulation and introduce topology connection variables so the program gen-erates a topology rather than only evaluates a fixed graph. We then apply: (i) a TPU-specific reduction that shrinks the triangle-inequality footprint without restricting configura-bility, (ii) symmetry reductions that collapse equivalent com-modities/constraints to enable pod-scale runs, and (iii) an iterative LP relaxation that accelerates synthesis while pre-serving feasibility. The output is an optical adjacency matrix 

𝑀 that is directly implementable via OCS configuration and serves as the input to the routing and deadlock-avoidance pipeline in Section 5. 

## 4.2 Basic Topology Generation 

We synthesize topologies that maximize a throughput upper bound under all-to-all demand. We use maximum concurrent flow (MCF) as the guiding proxy and cast synthesis as linear optimization: (1) start from an LP that captures MCF, (2) modify it to include topology connections as variables, and (3) impose TPU/OCS feasibility constraints modularly. For (1) we utilize the dualized MCF formulation as de-fined by Leighton and Rao (LR) [ 49 ]. The LR formulation is intended to approximate the sparsest cut of a graph by (exactly) finding the MCF and is provided as (LR) .

(𝐿𝑅 ) min 𝜆 =∑︁  

> (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸

𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑀 · 𝑑 

s.t. ∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 ,𝑗 ≥𝑖 

𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 ≥ 1

𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 − 𝑑 𝑖,𝑘 − 𝑑 𝑘,𝑗 ≤ 0

∀ distinct 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 ≥ 0 ∀𝑖, 𝑗 

(LR) defines a semi-metric 𝑑 or in simple terms, “appor-tions the smallest amount of total distance so that the cu-mulative distances between the source/sink pairs is not too small” [ 49 ]. The (LR) formulation is a function of a sym-metric channel input graph, 𝑀 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ), with edge set 𝐸 or equivalently the (flattened) edge/adjacency vector, 𝑀 𝑖,𝑗 . The objective value is the exact MCF, 𝜆 .Accomplishing (2) cannot be directly performed with (LR) 

because it would introduce multiplication between the adja-cency and distance variables in the objective. Furthermore, the objective is minimization so a direct substitution would find the edges and distance values with the minimal MCF. Therefore, we utilize the theory of duality for linear pro-grams to relate the distance and edge variables by only linear operations and cause a maximization objective sense. 

4.2.1 Dual-Based Formulation. In the primal formulation 

(LR) , the RHS of equations are labeled 𝑏 . After dualization, the formulation has a maximization sense and variables only have constant coefficients. By the theory of duality, the ob-jective value of the primal and dual are equal for optimal solutions and for sub-optimal solutions, this dualized ob-jective will be strictly less than the maximally achievable MCF [ 68 ]. For clarity, we write the dualized formulation in matrix-vector form. maximize  

> 𝑦

𝜆 = 𝑏 𝑇 𝑦 

s.t. 𝐴 𝑇 𝑦 ≤ 𝑀 𝑦 ≥ 0

In the primal, the rows of 𝐴 correspond to variables 𝑑 ∈

R𝑛 2

and the columns of 𝐴 correspond to the constraints (first column for sum of distances and other 𝑛 3 for triangle inequal-ity). In the dual, 𝐴 𝑇 has the same meaning but swapping rows and columns. It introduces a new variable 𝑦 that represents the constraints (demand satisfaction and triangle inequality). We now consider the edge set as variables, labeling 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 for each edge (𝑖, 𝑗 ) to distinguish from the previous user-input 

𝑀 , without creating a quadratic program. This formulation is now over two variables 𝑦 and 𝑚 and seeks to maximize the MCF, 𝜆 , represented by the objective. Intuitively, the formulation would connect every single node, i.e. 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 = 1 ∀ distinct 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 . Any constraints on topology construction may be added by independently con-straining 𝑚 to accomplish goal (3). Specifically, we constrain the 𝑚 to valid TPU v4/5p topologies that follow: reflexiv-ity, symmetry, and valid optical connections. Reflexivity and symmetry are provided in Table 1 C1-2 but in practice, han-dled in code by directly substituting 𝑚 𝑖,𝑖 with 0 and any 

𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 where 𝑖 > 𝑗 with 𝑚 𝑗,𝑖 . Valid optical connections fol-low OCS connectivity between (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 ) co-ordinates as de-scribed in Section 2.2 to define the total valid connections, 

> 4

Figure 1: Analytical throughput of directed, regular four radix topologies from literature (Kautz [ 48 , 79 ], GenKautz [ 40 ], Xpander [ 85 ], and random/Jellyfish [ 77 ]) versus topologies generated by our synthesis formulation, TONS . For each size, the y-axis is the maximum concurrent flow multiplied by the number of nodes (scale invariant metric). 

𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 = 𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑋 

Ð 𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑌 

Ð 𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑍 (C3 in Table 1). Let matrix 𝐵 and vector 𝑝 represent these valid topology con-straints. By the RHS of the primal, 𝑏 = [1, 0, ..., 0] so the objective can be simplified to 𝑏 𝑇 𝑦 = 𝑦 0 = 𝜆 . For later ease of understanding, we label all 𝑦 associated with the primal triangle inequality for 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 as 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 .With these modifications, this formulation accomplishes: (1) the objective is exactly the MCF, (2) it is a linear program with edge connection variables, 𝑚 , and (3) constraints on 𝑚 

can be added/removed without affecting (1) or (2). We label this complete, MILP the name of the paper, Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale (TONS), and is provided in matrix-vector form (TONS) and, with subsequent improve-ments, in Table 1. 

(𝑇𝑂𝑁 𝑆 ) max 𝜆 

s.t. 

𝐴 𝑇 𝑦 − 𝑚 ≤ 0

𝐵𝑚 ≤ 𝑝 𝑦 ≥ 0, 𝑚 ∈ { 0, 1}

4.2.2 Empirical Validation of Approach. In a preliminary analysis to validate the (TONS) formulation, we compare against known good topologies with constraints (four radix, undirected) matching prior works [ 92 ]. The matrix 𝐵 and vector 𝑝 were set to keep the maximum out and in degrees of 𝑚 less than four and the symmetry constraint was ex-cluded. We evaluated the MCF of four commonly cited topolo-gies in the data center network (DCN) or AI/ML domain: Kautz [ 48 , 79 ], GenKautz [ 40 ], Xpander [ 85 ], and Jellyfish (random) [ 77 ]. Kautz graphs deterministically generated for 

𝑁 = (1 + 𝑟 )𝑟 𝑚 for 𝑁 nodes, 𝑟 radix, and 𝑚 given parame-ter. GenKautz graphs are a generalization of Kautz graphs to apply to any combination of 𝑁 and 𝑟 . Xpander graphs start with a small, 𝑟 regular graph and perform “lifts” to the desired size. Jellyfish topologies are degree-bounded random graphs. We generated directed, four radix direct topologies for 10 to 80 nodes—includes two instances of Kautz—and plot as a size invariant metric, per source injection rate, in Figure 1. For random, for each size, we created 100 topologies and took the highest value. We compare the aforementioned ap-proaches to TONS-generated topologies, generated through linear optimization to directly improve the MCF and in-clude them in Figure 1. A trend is clear: for all sizes in this sweep, TONS topologies are equal to or better by a few per-cent than all other approaches. For node sizes without a Kautz topology, TONS generated novel and strictly superior topologies, and for this example, generated all topologies in less than a day. These results validate the formulation and give “proof of opportunity” to our approach. We now target the obstacles with LP-based topology generation: scaling up to 100 × the size of these preliminary results and implement-ing a full network stack for routing, deadlock avoidance, fault-tolerance, and collective communication. 

## 4.3 Formulation Scaling 

4.3.1 One-Leg Reduction. The first obstacle to scalability in (LR) is the Θ(𝑛 3) family of triangle inequalities. Let 𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 

denote the set of possibly connected links; under TPU v4/5p constraints, |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 | = 𝑛  

> 64

. We reduce the variable 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 foot-print to 𝑂 (𝑛 2 |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 |) by only instantiating 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 s.t. (𝑖, 𝑘 ) ∈ 

𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 , which preserves correctness while substantially re-ducing memory in practice. Though |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 | = 𝑂 (𝑛 ) for cube face nodes, if connections become precluded iteratively (Sec-tion 4.3.3) then it becomes 𝑂 (1).We explain this concept in the primal (LR) because it is easier to comprehend. The idea is that for an optimal solution to (LR) , at least one triangle inequality must be tight because one intermediate 𝑘 upper bounds the distance 𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 for all pairs. If this is the case then which 𝑘 performs this can be limited to a subset 𝐾 = {𝑘 |𝑚 𝑖,𝑘 = 1}. This line of thinking is similar to Nguyen and Minoux [ 61 ] but has stronger guarantees applied to optimization. Due to space, we present the full proof of this idea for the primal in Appendix A and utilize it in the dual. We call this variable reduction, “one-leg” for the one active leg of the triangle inequality. We apply this idea to the dualized formulation (TONS) by setting all 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 = 0

when (𝑖, 𝑘 ) ∉ 𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 as seen in C5 of Table 1. In practice, we directly set 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 = 0 for known invalid connections (𝑖, 𝑘 ).

4.3.2 Vertex Symmetry. We further scale synthesis by en-forcing edge symmetry, analogous to the symmetry reduc-tions used for TPU routing Section 2.2. This collapses many equivalent edge variables into a small canonical set, reduc-ing the number of decision variables without changing the induced topology class. 

> 5

Table 1: Constraints + Objectives for TONS Topology Generation Label Objective (O)/Constraint (C)/Variable (V) Description 

O1 maximize  

> 𝑚,𝑦

𝜆 MCF maximization C1 ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑅, 𝑚 𝑖,𝑖 = 0, 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑖, ∗, 𝑦 Δ𝑖, ∗,𝑖 , 𝑦 Δ∗,𝑖,𝑖 = 0 Ignore self-adjacency C2 ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑅, 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑚 𝑗,𝑖 Link symmetry C3 ∀𝑖, Í𝑥 ∈𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑋 𝑚 𝑖,𝑥 = 1, Í𝑜 ∈𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑌 𝑚 𝑖,𝑦 = 1, Í𝑧 ∈𝐿 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙,𝑍 𝑚 𝑖,𝑧 = 1 X, Y, Z link limitations C4 ∀ distinct 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑅 𝜆 − Í𝑘 ∈𝑅 𝑦 Δ𝑎,𝑏,𝑘 + Í𝑗 ∈𝑅 𝑦 Δ𝑎,𝑗,𝑏 + Í𝑖 ∈𝑅 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑎,𝑏 − 𝑚 𝑎,𝑏 ≤ 0 Dualized LR C5 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 = 0 ∀( 𝑖, 𝑘 ) ∉ 𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 One-Leg C6 ∀𝑗, 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑚 𝑖 𝑐 ,𝑇 𝑖 ( 𝑗 ) ∀𝑖 s.t. 𝑇 𝑖 (𝑖 ) = 𝑖 𝑐 Edge Symmetry C7 ∀𝑗, 𝑘, 𝑦 Δ𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 = 𝑦 Δ𝑖 𝑐 ,𝑇 𝑖 ( 𝑗 ),𝑇 𝑖 (𝑘 ) ∀𝑖 s.t. 𝑇 𝑖 (𝑖 ) = 𝑖 𝑐 Edge Symmetry C8 𝜆 ≥ 𝑓 +1/32 |𝑅 | Fault-tolerance V1 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 ∈ [ 0, 1] or 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 ∈ { 0, 1} Adjacency matrix V2 𝑦 𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 ∈ [ 0, 1] LR dual variables We define a canonical set, 𝑆 , to be one cube (64 nodes) which yields canonical variables 𝑚 𝑖 𝑐 ,𝑗 ∀𝑖 𝑐 ∈ 𝑆, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 . Then by translational symmetry, all non-canonical equivalents, 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 ,use translational symmetry to map their canonical represen-tation, 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑚 𝑖 𝑐 ,𝑇 𝑖 ( 𝑗 ) . This equality is given in C6 in Table 1 but in practice it is achieved by only creating canonical vari-ables and reconstructing all others on demand. Applying symmetry not only reduces the number of vari-ables from 𝑂 (𝑛 2 |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 |) to 𝑂 (𝑛 |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 |) but also reduces the number of constraints. This symmetry makes all constraints (C1-C5 in Table 1) for a non-canonical source 𝑖 redundant and as such, reduces the number of constraints from Θ(𝑛 2)

to Θ(𝑛 ). This reduces the overall complexity (Section 2.3) from 𝑂 (𝑛 4 |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 |) to 𝑂 (𝑛 2 |𝐿 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 |) , an 𝑛 2 reduction. Apply-ing this technique allows the formulation to scale to the largest topology configurations and as will be shown, does not significantly reduce the performance of the synthesized topologies. 

4.3.3 Integrality Relaxation. The previous two scaling techniques profoundly reduce the complexity of the formula-tion but there are no polynomial algorithms to solve MILPs in general and the time to find solutions explodes rapidly. To overcome this final obstacle, we apply a heuristic algorithm to iteratively solve a relaxed LP of (TONS) . While there is little theoretical grounding to this heuristic, if the binary constraint on the adjacency matrix is relaxed to continu-ous (same [0, 1] bounds) then the problem becomes a linear program and much easier to solve. Essentially, many MILP solvers do this under the hood by first solving the relaxed LP and using an intelligent branch-and-bound algorithm to re-gain integrality for all binary/integer variables [ 7 , 33 ] but it is computationally difficult. Therefore, we solve the linear program and greedily set adjacency ma-trix values. We select 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 number edges per LP solve by choosing the (𝑖, 𝑗 ) edges with the highest 𝑚 𝑖,𝑗 values. The choice of 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 affects solution quality so we often set that 

(a) MILP (b) LP 

Figure 2: Progress of MILP (a) and LP (b) (non-symmetric) variants of TONS average hops (blue) and MCF objective (red) over time for a 256 node configura-tion. For MILP, each dot is an incumbent solution and each star is the (dual) bound. For LP, each dot is the objective value for each solution (final dot has binary edges). Included is TPU-applicable random with stan-dard deviation shaded. 

value to one but it is included for completeness. Intuitively, this is forcing integrality on the most “critical” edges for that solution instance. Due to space, the complete algorithm for this relaxed approach is provided in Appendix B. For small topologies, the LP results in topologies with lower MCF by a few percent. However, the greedy, iterative LP approach has significant speed and memory footprint improvements over the MILP variant. Due to the difficulty of the MILP formulation, it cannot find quality solutions within reasonable time and compute/memory constraints. As such, in practice, the LP results in superior topologies. 

> 6

Figure 3: Per-source injection rate (MCF time number of nodes) for best PT, PDTT, and TONS sweeping topol-ogy sizes. Theoretical limit (dashed) is based on size and radix but unrealizable for TPU/OCS constraints. 

(a) PT (b) PDTT (c) TONS LP SYM 

Figure 4: Visualization of the 256 node topologies be-tween nodes (blue) with electrical (black) and optical (red) links. Clockwise around the circle, the nodes are grouped by cubes and ordered by z, y, x (ascending). 

## 4.4 Resultant Topologies 

We generate topologies for all sizes 1 for four variants of TONS: MILP, MILP with symmetry, LP, and LP with symmetry. We use AMD EPYC 7763 “Milan” CPUs with up to 256GB of memory and Gurobi version 12.0.0. An example of the aver-age hops and MCF objective changing over time for a 256 non-symmetric synthesis run is plotted in Figure 2. We see that both the MILP and LP comprehensively beat the heuris-tic baselines (PT, PDTT) and the standard deviation for a random (TPU constrained) topology. Furthermore, we see the benefit of the iterative LP approach: faster topology syn-thesis with little objective loss. While these non-symmetric solutions take hours, the symmetric LP variant completes in 3 minutes for 256 nodes. At 8192 nodes, it takes five days. Only LP with symmetry scales to the complete 8192 nodes and we plot the per source injection rate (number of nodes times MCF) versus PT and PDTT in Figure 3. In Figure 3, we also include a theoretical bound on the per source injection rate for any six radix, undirected graph as derived by Basu et al.: 𝜆 ≤ 𝑟 /𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑟 (𝑛 ) for 𝑛 nodes and radix 𝑟 . This theoretical bound does not obey TPU v4/5p constraints but is true up-per bound to provide context. TONS topologies not only 

> 1While PT and PDTT topologies differ based on the job dimensions due to their algorithmic construction, TONS topologies are the same regardless of the configuration.

have higher analytical throughput than the baselines but scale well, matching the curvature of a non-realizable upper bound. A complete table of analytical metrics is provided in Appendix C. To give some idea about what causes these higher MCF values, we visualize one size (256 nodes) in Figure 4. The pris-matic torus baselines concentrate optical connectivity into regular patterns, whereas TONS-generated designs select optical edges to improve multiple cuts simultaneously rather than optimizing a single bisection. This is precisely what the MCF proxy encourages: instead of maximizing one/two bot-tlenecks as in twisted tori, the optimizer improves the worst bottlenecks, both cut and link utilization bounds. Visually, the topologies in Figure 4 suggest that edge selection differs significantly across designs even when degree is identical. For reference, the bisection improved by PDTT over PT by design [ 9 ] is across the tightest two bisection cuts, 45 ° slanted diameters in Figure 4(b). 

## 4.5 Alternative Formulations 

Alternative MCF Formulations. Alternative MCF formula-tions assume a fixed path set derived from an input graph [ 71 ]. Here we synthesize the graph itself, so a path-based formu-lation would require either (i) enumerating paths in a graph that does not yet exist or (ii) iteratively regenerating paths as the topology changes, tightly coupling synthesis and routing at prohibitive cost. A node-edge formulation is also problematic: constraint existence depends on whether an edge exists and encod-ing this cleanly introduces products between edge-selection and flow variables, yielding a non-scalable quadratic pro-gram [ 17 ]. Likewise, formulations that explicitly model all 

𝑛 (𝑛 − 1) commodities require variables for each commodity over each edge and flow conservation at every node, lead-ing to 𝑂 (𝑛 3)-scale flow variables/constraints in the constant-radix regime, far larger than our reduced formulation. Finally, the node-arc MCF variant that defines only 𝑛 commodities (max flow from each source) is appealing [ 71 ], but we did not find a symmetry-compatible instantiation that preserves the reductions required for pod-scale synthesis. 

Cut-Based Approaches. An alternative throughput-oriented LP is the sparsest cut [ 54 ]. At first glance, this seems well-suited to Benders decomposition [ 64 ] or cutting-plane meth-ods [ 46 ] where critical cuts are added lazily. In practice, however, adding cut constraints iteratively requires pro-hibitively many rounds: LR-style relaxations typically have 

Θ(𝑛 2) tight triangle constraints (for each (𝑖, 𝑗 ), some 𝑘 attains 

𝑑 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑑 𝑖,𝑘 + 𝑑 𝑘,𝑗 ), suggesting on the order of 𝑛 2 constraints may be needed before convergence. Enumerating all cuts is intractable and prior cut-enumeration approaches scale only to very small networks (e.g., ≤ 30 nodes) [28]. 

> 7

Algorithm 1 Allowed Turns (AT) 

1: Input: 𝐺 ⊲ Topology 

2: Initialize: 𝐷 ← complete_cdg (𝐺 )

3: Initialize: 𝐴 ← ∅ ⊲ Allowed turns 

4: if robust then 

5: 𝑆 0,𝑆 1 ← ocs_disjoint_spanning_tree (𝐺 )

6: 𝐴 ,𝐷 ← add_turns (𝐴 ,𝑆 0,𝐷 ,force_vc=0) 

7: 𝐴 ,𝐷 ← add_turns (𝐴 ,𝑆 1,𝐷 ,force_vc=1) 

8: end if 

9: 𝑆 ← spanning_tree (𝐺 ) ⊲ Enforced routability 

10: 𝐴 ,𝐷 ← add_turns (𝐴 ,𝑆 ,𝐷 ,force_vc=0) 

11: 𝑇 ′ ← prioritized_turns (𝐺 )

12: 𝐴 ,𝐷 ← add_turns (𝐴 ,𝑇 ′,𝐷 ,single_turn=True) 

13: 𝐴 ,𝐷 ← add_turns (𝐴 ,𝑇 ′,𝐷 )

14: P = BFS(G,A) ⊲ Set of all deadlock-free paths 

## 5 DEADLOCK FREE AND FAULT TOLERANT ROUTING 

The topologies synthesized in Section 4 improve analytical throughput proxies but are not directly implementable using torus-specific routing rules. To realize these gains in a TPU-style lossless fabric, we must produce (i) static forwarding tables selecting a single path per source–destination pair, (ii) a VC assignment within a small VC budget, and (iii) fault-tolerant reachability under single-OCS failures. Making an arbitrary routing function deadlock-free within a bounded number of VCs is NP-complete, but it is often possible to construct a good deadlock-free routing using a limited VC budget [ 15 ]. Prior work (e.g., Nue) integrates VC allocation and CDG maintenance while committing to routes early, but the resulting routing functions can be overly conservative and throughput-suboptimal [ 15 ]. Throughput-Optimized Networks at Scale instead decouples deadlock freedom from route selection: we first construct a large deadlock-free candidate path set using an allowed-turn con-struction on the channel dependency graph (CDG), then solve a throughput-maximizing ILP to choose one path per flow. As shown in Section 7.4, this achieves near-optimal throughput relative to an unconstrained (deadlocky) routing baseline, while remaining implementable and extensible to fault tolerance. 

## 5.1 Allowed Turns and All Paths 

Arbitrary topologies complicate deadlock freedom because simple rule-based schemes (e.g., dimension ordering + datelin-ing used for tori) do not generalize: a fixed rule can strand some source–destination pairs without a valid path. A com-mon approach allocates routes to VCs as layered virtual networks using CDG-based sufficient conditions (acyclic-ity), but it provides no guarantee on the number of VCs required [ 16 , 52 ]. Nue demonstrates that one can target a fixed VC budget by routing while maintaining a CDG [ 15 ], but early route commitments reduce path diversity and can degrade throughput. TONS first constructs a deadlock-free turn set and all deadlock-free paths then selects globally optimal routes from 

Algorithm 2 add_turns 

1: Input: 𝐴 ⊲ Allowed turns 

2: Input: 𝑇 ⊲ Turn set 

3: Input: 𝐷 ⊲ Complete cdg 

4: Input: single_turn, force_vc ⊲ Optional 

5: for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 do 

6: 𝑇 ← turns_with_vcs (𝑡 ,force_vc) 

7: for 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 do 

8: if ¬deadlocky (𝑡 , 𝐷 ) then 

9: 𝐴 ← 𝑡 ∪ 𝐴 

10: 𝐷 ← 𝑡 ∪ 𝐷 

11: if single_turn then 

12: break ⊲ break to next base turn 

13: end if 

14: end if 

15: end for 

16: end for 

17: return 𝐴 ,𝐷 

that set. Starting from the complete CDG 𝐷 over VC-labeled channels 𝐸 , we greedily add turns into a global allowed set 

𝐴 only when the insertion preserves acyclicity; any routing restricted to 𝐴 is deadlock-free by construction. Algorithm 1 summarizes the approach and add_turns (Algorithm 2) im-plements the guarded insertion rule. We denote directed edges by 𝑒 𝑖,𝑗 ∈ 𝐸 and VC-labeled channels by 𝑒 𝑖,𝑗,𝑣 ∈ 𝐸 ;base turns are (𝑒 𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑒 𝑗,𝑘 ) ∈ 𝑇 with VC-labeled counterparts 

(𝑒 𝑖,𝑗,𝑣 0 , 𝑒 𝑗,𝑘,𝑣 1 ) ∈ 𝑇 . Compared to Nue, AT is lightweight be-cause it operates on turns (not flows) and defers route se-lection to the routing ILP in Section 5.3. With symmetry enabled, we add/reject turns in symmetry classes and accept a class only if no member introduces a CDG cycle. Because turn addition is greedy, the insertion order mat-ters. We evaluate three prioritization heuristics in Section 7.4: 

APL (“all path list”) orders turns by decreasing frequency across the set of all candidate paths; CPL (“chosen path list”) orders turns by decreasing frequency in the single-path rout-ing produced by the ILP; and Random adds turns in arbitrary order. APL yields the highest path diversity but CPL yields the lowest maximum channel load amongst these variants and is used for TONS/AT results under 4096 nodes (faster Random used for larger). To guarantee routability, we seed 𝐴 with a spanning-tree turn set as in Nue [ 15 ]: we build a tree rooted at a central node and add its up/down turns to VC0 (Algorithm 1, lines 9– 10), ensuring at least one path between any pair (though not necessarily minimal). To retain path diversity and reduce bias from the prioritization order, we initially allow at most one VC-labeled instance 𝑡 per base turn 𝑡 (Algorithm 1, line 12; Algorithm 2, lines 12–13) before expanding to all admissible VC assignments. 

## 5.2 Fault Tolerance 

TPU v4/5p pods must remain operational under optical faults [ 94 ]. We adopt a conservative model consistent with TPU prac-tice: an OCS fault disables all links routed through that OCS, 

> 8

the fault is detected and broadcast before job execution, and routing tables are selected accordingly [45]. We augment all-path discovery (Algorithm 1) so that the candidate path set contains deadlock-free backups under any single OCS failure. A sufficient condition is the existence of 

𝑡 OCS-disjoint spanning trees: then at least 𝑡 − 1 OCS faults can be tolerated while preserving connectivity via a tree that avoids the failed OCS. We use Nash–Williams [ 60 ] provided in Equation 2 as a sufficient condition for 𝑡 edge-disjoint spanning trees and extend the argument to OCS-disjointness under TPU’s structured OCS grouping. ∑︁  

> 𝐶 ∈𝑃

𝐸 (𝐶 ) ≥ 𝑡 (𝑘 − 1). (2) In our setting, we connect this condition to a lower bound on the number of distinct OCS links crossing any partition as a function of MCF, yielding a conservative requirement of the form 𝜆 ≥ 𝑡  

> 32 𝑛

for 𝑛 nodes and 𝑡 OCS-disjoint spanning trees. We derive the complete proof of this property in Appendix D but the proof sketch using worst-case analysis is as follows. The MCF, 𝜆 , is greater than or equal to the cut bound and implies the minimum number of edges leaving a cube or groups of cubes and similarly, the lower bound on number of OCS distinct edges. We then perform algebra on Equation 2 to derive a conservative lower bound on 𝜆 in terms of the number of nodes and possible faults. During topology generation, we encode this as constraint C8 in Table 1 for a user-specified budget for number of toler-able faults, 𝑓 , via 𝑓 = 𝑡 + 1. All synthesized TONS topologies satisfy this property and empirically many support substan-tially more than one OCS fault. We label this fault-tolerance scheme robust ; it is implemented in the AT stage lines 4-8 of Algorithm 1. For the single-fault model ( 𝑓 = 1 =⇒ 𝑡 ≥ 2), we find two OCS-disjoint spanning trees using a concurrent BFS rooted at hop-distance antipodes: the trees are grown simultaneously while marking an OCS as consumed when used by one tree 2. With a robust allowed turns set, 𝐴 , sets of all paths are generated for each possible fault and routed using the ILP (Section 5.3) similar to Google’s WFR [94]. 

## 5.3 Routing 

Given the deadlock-free candidate path set produced by AT, we must select exactly one path per source–destination pair (static forwarding). We choose routes to minimize conges-tion using maximum channel load as the objective, since it directly upper-bounds achievable uniform throughput: if the most-loaded channel carries 𝐿 max routes, then under uniform demand the per-flow rate is at most 1/𝐿 max . This matches the 

> 2We note that constructing many disjoint trees efficiently is nontrivial. We suspect matroid intersection extensions of Edmonds’ algorithm are appropriate [19] but leave this for future work.

routing objective used for PDTT in Zu et al. [ 94 ] and is stan-dard in throughput-oriented routing formulations [28, 82]. Our ILP uses one indicator variable per candidate path; selecting a path increments the load variables of every edge on that path. A scalar variable 𝐿 max is constrained to be at least every edge load, and the solver minimizes 𝐿 max . As in prior work, the quality of the solution depends on the pro-vided candidate set: shortest-path sets are often sufficient on regular tori, while the AT-generated minimal all paths set is essential for irregular topologies to preserve deadlock-freedom under VC constraints. Empirically, for both torus baselines and TONS topologies, the routed bound is typi-cally tight relative to analytical continuous upper bounds, indicating that routing is not the dominant limiter in most configurations (Section 7.4). 

## 5.4 VC Allocation 

After route selection, the chosen paths and allowed turns list are used to allocate VCs to turns in the path. We con-sider each path individually and perform a breadth-first search along the complete CDG to find the allowed VC transi-tions/selections. A naïve approach biases towards VC 0. The BFS starts at VC 0 and traverses along VC 0 until a turn is dis-allowed when it transitions to VC 1 and continues trying to allocate to VC 0. However, we found this caused significant load imbalance between the VCs so we propose an online load balancing algorithm. As turns are allocated to VCs, the count of hops per VC is maintained. Before beginning VC allocation for the next path, the VC with the lowest hop count is marked “priority” and the BFS checks that VC for all turns in that path. We find this achieves near perfect balance ( Section 7.4). 

## 6 EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 

We evaluate TONS using complementary analytical metrics and cycle-level simulation. Our experiments target the pa-per’s three claims: (i) synthesized topologies improve throughput-oriented proxies under TPU/OCS constraints, (ii) allowed-turn routing with a small VC budget preserves most of the attainable throughput while remaining deadlock-free, and (iii) these gains translate to all-to-all-style communication without degrading all-gather/all-reduce. Because TPU pods are not externally reconfigurable for arbitrary topologies or routing in practice [ 1 ], we rely on analytical evaluation and simulation. 

## 6.1 Simulation of Networks 

We simulate selected configurations using Chiplet Network Simulator (CNSim) [ 25 ], a cycle-accurate, packet-parallel simulator validated against gem5 [21] and BookSim2.0 [42] for synthetic traffic. We extend CNSim to ingest arbitrary 

> 9

Figure 5: Relative saturation points (higher is better) for uniform random traffic simulations normalized to the best PT and DOR (blue hashed). DOR (hashed) and AT (solid) routing were applied to tori while TONS uses AT. Table 2: Simulation Parameters Parameter Value 

Clock frequency 1.05 GHz Link bandwidth 128 GB/s (unidirectional) Link latency 50 cycles electrical, 25 cycles optical Router latency 25 cycles Injection latency 25 cycles Router radix 6Flit width 128 B Total & escape VCs 4 & 2 Buffer slots per VC 200 flits adjacency matrices, static routing tables, and per-flow escape-VC assignments. We model 4 VCs total and reserve 2 as deadlock-free escape VCs [18]. 

Simulation Parameters. We tune parameters to match pub-lished TPU v4/5p values where available: TPU v5p clock and link bandwidth rounded to the integer flits per cycle [ 2]. For link latency, we conservatively estimate propagation from published system imagery [ 45 ] for a 5 m maximum cable length, <100 ns router delays, and 10-100 ns of delay for elec-trical links [ 83 ]. We roughly assume a 25 cycle injection latency. Buffers are sized to sustain the modeled bandwidth delay product with margin. 

6.1.1 Saturation Point. We measure network throughput by simulating uniform random traffic in CNSim [ 25 ]. CN-Sim sweeps injection rates and reports saturation at the first observed timeout (flits sent > flits received). We use an injection-rate step of 0.01; other simulator parameters follow Table 2. 

6.1.2 Collective Communication. We evaluate all-gather, all-reduce, and all-to-all using existing schedulers. For all-gather and all-reduce, we use MultiTree [ 38 ] (scales to our largest topologies and achieves near-optimal schedules). For all-to-all, we use the optimization-based formulations of Basu et al. [ 5 ]: decomposed-MCF at sizes where it scales, and pMCF (with symmetry) at larger sizes. We report schedule quality as link utilization (epochs under cumulative link bandwidth). For a subset of configurations, we translate link-by-link trans-fer schedules into traces (MSCCLang-style XML [ 11 ] and netrace [ 36 ]) and simulate them in CNSim [ 25 ] to validate analytical expectations. 

6.1.3 Fault Tolerance. Our fault model follows Google’s description for TPU v4/5p pods [ 45 ]: a fault disables all links routed through one OCS, at most one OCS faults at a time, and the fault is known before job execution. For each of the 48 single-OCS fault scenarios, we load the corresponding fault-avoiding routing tables and measure the saturation point under the same traffic and simulator settings. 

## 7 RESULTS 

We evaluate TONS via analytical metrics and cycle-level simulation. The primary result (Figure 5) is the saturation-throughput improvement of TONS topologies under AT rout-ing. We then report (i) collective-communication utilization, (ii) robustness under OCS faults, and (iii) routing ablations that justify our AT turn prioritization and VC load balancing. 

## 7.1 Saturation Point 

We quantify throughput using uniform random traffic simu-lation, reported as the saturation point. Figure 5 compares baseline structured topologies (PT and PDTT) against TONS-generated designs across a wide range of node counts and job shapes. For each configuration we evaluate tori with both (i) baseline dimension-ordered routing (DOR) where applica-ble, and (ii) TONS’s allowed-turn routing (AT), isolating the contribution of routing from that of topology. All values are normalized to the best PT+DOR saturation point for that job configuration. TONS topologies deliver large throughput gains across scales. Depending on configuration, TONS improves satu-ration by roughly 1.6×–3.1× over the best structured torus baseline. Overall, TONS has a geometric mean improvement 

> 10

Figure 6: Link utilization of generated schedules for all-gather (top), all-reduce (middle), and all-to-all (bot-tom) for the best PT (blue), PDTT (orange), and TONS (green). all-gather and all-reduce have a 100% theoreti-cal upper bound; for all-to-all, the limit is derived from MCF (dashed). 

of 2.07 × over the current baseline. For sizes/configurations without PDTT, TONS has a 2.39 × higher saturation point over the best PT and for sizes with PDTT, a 1.65 × improve-ment. These gains not only persist but increase at the largest evaluated sizes (up to 8192 nodes), validating the ability to scale. Applying AT routing to a baseline torus yields only mod-est improvements (typically on the order of ∼1.1–1.2 ×). The improvements of AT with respect to DOR are due to VC im-balances as explored in Section 7.4 while the loss (PDTT 2048 and 8192 nodes) is likely due to using the random variant of AT. While AT improves performance marginally, the benefit is fundamentally topological . Finally, the TONS LP SYM re-sults match or exceed the non-symmetric LP solutions across large node counts, supporting the claim that symmetry can be used as a scalability lever without sacrificing throughput. 

## 7.2 Collective Communication 

We evaluate all-gather, all-reduce, and all-to-all using the scheduling methodology in Section 6.1.2. For simplicity, we evaluate TONS LP SYM and the best PT per size as repre-sentative samples. Figure 6 shows that all designs achieve near-ideal utilization for all-gather and all-reduce, consistent with prior observations that these collectives admit highly efficient schedules on regular low-diameter fabrics [ 38 , 45 ]. Importantly, TONS does not sacrifice performance on these primitives 3 

> 3We suspect the few data points of higher utilization are due to diameter and average hop differences affecting the greedy MultiTree [ 38 ] algorithm.

Figure 7: Cumulative network throughput under trace-driven simulation (CNSim) for 256-node (left) and 1024-node (right) PT (blue), PDTT (orange), and TONS (green), sweeping collective/buffer sizes (log scale) until saturation. MCF-based upper bound (dashed) included. 

Figure 8: Saturation points for all possible OCS faults for 256 node baseline PDTT WFR (blue) and TONS ro-bust AT (red). The baseline, no OCS fault saturation point for each is shown by the dotted line. 

For all-to-all, TONS consistently achieves higher utiliza-tion than PT/PDTT, tracking the higher topological (MCF-based) limit, indicating improved concurrent throughput un-der the most communication-intensive pattern targeted by our synthesis objective. Figure 7 substantiates the schedule-based analysis with trace-driven simulation for two represen-tative topology sizes, 256 and 1024 nodes, where the smallest possible 4 collectives are not immediately in saturation. The networks soon reach saturation where TONS networks show 9 TB/s and 47 TB/s higher cumulative throughput for 256 and 1024 nodes, respectively, exactly matching analytical expec-tations. 

## 7.3 Fault Tolerance 

The performance of the routing technique for jobs with OCS faults was measured by their saturation points for each of the 48 possible single OCS faults. We compare a 256 node PDTT using WFR (Section 2.2) against TONS using robust routing and include each design’s no-fault saturation point as a ref-erence. The histograms of the saturation points are plotted in Figure 8. Figure 8 shows two clear outcomes. First, TONS 

> 4128 B flits imply minimums.
> 11

Figure 9: Isolation of AT turns prioritization measuring (left) maximum channel load and (right) average hops (both, lower is better) relative to topology bounds. 

sustains substantially higher absolute throughput than PDTT under every fault scenario, indicating that the robust AT rout-ing is not sacrificing significant performance. Second, while both designs experience degradation under faults, TONS’s distribution remains centered at a much higher saturation point; qualitatively, TONS shifts the entire fault-throughput, leaving significant headroom even in the degraded regime. 

## 7.4 AT Routing 

We isolate the effects of TONS routing choices. We evaluate (i) turn-prioritization heuristics within the AT framework, (ii) the greedy VC load-balancing mechanism, and (iii) the resulting VC utilization relative to DOR on torus baselines. 

Turn prioritization and symmetry. 

Figure 9 reports maximum channel load (left) and aver-age hops (right), both normalized to topological bounds, for AT variants and a (likely deadlocky) unconstrained routing function. Two takeaways matter for the paper’s claims. First, symmetry-reduced routing preserves throughput. The sym-metric and non-symmetric variants achieve nearly identical normalized performance across all prioritization schemes, demonstrating that the large computational savings from symmetry do not impose a measurable throughput penalty in this setting. Second, enforcing deadlock freedom via AT in-curs low loss relative to unconstrained routing and the choice of prioritization materially affects that loss. Our preferred turn priority scheme, CPL, only incurs 5% higher concen-trated channel load relative to an unconstrained variant. In particular, the CPL heuristic provides a favorable tradeoff, retaining most of the unconstrained throughput while lim-iting hop inflation. By contrast, weaker prioritization (e.g., random) both reduces throughput and increases hops. 

VC load balancing. Static single-path routing can create severe imbalance across virtual channels, which is problem-atic in low-VC designs where a small number of congested VCs can dominate head-of-line blocking. Figure 10 evaluates hops-per-VC under an intentionally unbalanced assignment versus TONS’s greedy online VC load balancing. The load-balanced variants achieve near-uniform hops-per-VC, indi-cating that the algorithm effectively spreads long paths and high-volume flows across the available VC budget. 

Figure 10: Analytical evaluation of the number of hops per VC between unbalanced and load balanced turn prioritization for 1024 node TONS LP SYM. 

Figure 11: Analytical evaluation of the number of hops per VC for load balanced AT versus DOR. DOR vs. AT on tori. Finally, we compare VC utilization between traditional DOR and AT on torus baselines. While DOR and AT can have similar max channel load on regular tori, their VC occupancy differs substantially because DOR’s datelining structure often concentrates traffic into a subset of VCs. Figure 11 shows that DOR skews hops heavily to-ward VC 0, leaving VC 1 underutilized, whereas AT achieves substantially more balanced VC usage by construction. This balance is especially valuable in the TPU setting, where the VC budget is small and congestion sensitivity is high. 

## 8 CONCLUSION 

We demonstrate that optimization-driven network synthesis can produce implementable pod-scale topologies that out-perform established structured designs under throughput-oriented demand. TONS generates TPU/OCS-feasible direct networks via LP/ILP/MILP formulations guided by a flow proxy and couples them with deadlock-free static routing under a two-VC budget. Across analytical metrics and cycle-level simulation, TONS delivers higher sustained throughput without sacrificing any form of performance. The resulting designs remain robust under the targeted OCS fault model and our routing/VC assignment avoids pathological load/VC imbalance. Broadly, these results suggest that modern ac-celerator fabrics have substantial headroom beyond torus families. TONS topologies can be implemented today without hardware changes and adapt modularly to new constraints in next generation computing. 

> 12

## A PROOF OF OPTIMAL MCF USING “ONE-LEG” TRIANGLE INEQUALITY 

Let 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ) be a connected undirected graph. Consider the two linear programs: 

(LR) Full metric formulation. Variables 𝑑 𝑖 𝑗 for 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 :

min 

> 𝑑

∑︁ (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 

𝑑 𝑖 𝑗 

s.t. ∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 

𝑑 𝑖 𝑗 ≥ 1,𝑑 𝑖 𝑗 ≤ 𝑑 𝑖𝑘 + 𝑑 𝑘 𝑗 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 distinct ,𝑑 𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑑 𝑗𝑖 ≥ 0 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 , 𝑑 𝑖𝑖 = 0 ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 . 

Let 𝑑 ∗ be an optimal solution and denote 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ := Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.

(LR_OL) One-leg formulation. Variables 𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 for 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 :

min 

> 𝑏

∑︁ (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 

s.t. ∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≥ 1,𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤ 𝑏 𝑖𝑘 + 𝑏 𝑘 𝑗 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 distinct with (𝑖, 𝑘 ) ∈ 𝐸, 𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑏 𝑗𝑖 ≥ 0 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 , 𝑏 𝑖𝑖 = 0 ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 . 

Let 𝑏 ∗ be an optimal solution and denote 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ := Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.Then 

𝑧 𝑏 ∗ = 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ .

Moreover, from any optimal solution 𝑏 ∗ of (LR_OL) one can construct a feasible solution 𝑑 ′ of (LR) with 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥ 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

for all 

𝑖, 𝑗 and 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

= 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

for all (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 , so 𝑑 ′ is optimal for (LR). We split the argument into two inequalities: 

𝑧 𝑏 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ and 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ .

1. Feasible-set inclusion: 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ .

By definition, 𝑑 ∗ satisfies 

𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖𝑘

+ 𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑘 𝑗

∀ 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 distinct .

In particular, this holds for all triples with (𝑖, 𝑘 ) ∈ 𝐸 . Thus 𝑑 ∗

satisfies all the triangle inequalities required by (LR_OL), and it clearly satisfies the normalization and symmetry/nonnegativity conditions as well. Hence 

𝑑 ∗ is feasible for (LR_OL) .

Since (LR_OL) minimizes the same objective over a (weakly) larger feasible region, we obtain 

𝑧 𝑏 ∗ = min  

> 𝑏 feasible for (LR_OL)

∑︁ (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤∑︁  

> (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸

𝑑 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

= 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ .

2. Shortest-path closure: 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ .

Let 𝑏 ∗ be an optimal solution of (LR_OL). Define edge weights on 𝐺 by 

𝑤 𝑢𝑣 := 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑢𝑣

for each (𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸. 

For any 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 , define 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

to be the shortest-path distance from 𝑖 to 𝑗 in 𝐺 with edge weights 𝑤 :

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

:= min 

> 𝑃 :𝑖 ⇝𝑗

∑︁ (𝑢,𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑃 

𝑤 𝑢𝑣 ,

where the minimum is over all paths 𝑃 from 𝑖 to 𝑗 in 𝐺 . Since 

𝐺 is connected, every pair has at least one such path, so 𝑑 ′

> 𝑖 𝑗

is finite. 

2.1. Metric property and basic conditions. 

By construction, 𝑑 ′ is a shortest-path metric on 𝑉 with nonnegative symmetric weights. In particular, 

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

= 𝑑 ′

> 𝑗𝑖

, 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖𝑖

= 0, 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥ 0 ∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 , 

and for all 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 ,

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖𝑘

+ 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑘 𝑗

.

Thus 𝑑 ′ satisfies the full triangle inequalities required by (LR). 

2.2. One-leg inequalities imply 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.

We first show that for any feasible 𝑏 of (LR_OL), and for any 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 and any simple path 

𝑃 : 𝑖 = 𝑣 0, 𝑣 1, . . . , 𝑣 𝑚 = 𝑗 with (𝑣 𝑟 , 𝑣 𝑟 +1) ∈ 𝐸 for all 𝑟, 

we have 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤

> 𝑚 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =0

𝑏 𝑣 𝑟 𝑣 𝑟 +1 . (3) We prove (3) by induction on the path length 𝑚 .

Base case 𝑚 = 1. Then 𝑃 consists of a single edge (𝑖, 𝑗 ),and (3) reads 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤ 𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ,

which is trivially true. 

Inductive step. Assume (3) holds for all paths of length 

𝑚 − 1. Now consider a path of length 𝑚 ≥ 2:

𝑖 = 𝑣 0, 𝑣 1, . . . , 𝑣 𝑚 = 𝑗 . 

Let 𝑘 := 𝑣 1. Since (𝑖, 𝑘 ) = (𝑣 0, 𝑣 1) ∈ 𝐸 , the one-leg triangle inequality for (LR_OL) gives 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤ 𝑏 𝑖𝑘 + 𝑏 𝑘 𝑗 .

The suffix 𝑘 = 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, . . . , 𝑣 𝑚 = 𝑗 is a path of length 𝑚 − 1, so by the induction hypothesis, 

𝑏 𝑘 𝑗 ≤

> 𝑚 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =1

𝑏 𝑣 𝑟 𝑣 𝑟 +1 .

Combining these inequalities yields 

𝑏 𝑖 𝑗 ≤ 𝑏 𝑖𝑘 + 𝑏 𝑘 𝑗 ≤ 𝑏 𝑣 0 𝑣 1 +

> 𝑚 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =1

𝑏 𝑣 𝑟 𝑣 𝑟 +1 =

> 𝑚 −1

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =0

𝑏 𝑣 𝑟 𝑣 𝑟 +1 ,

> 13

completing the induction. Applying this to 𝑏 = 𝑏 ∗, and then taking the minimum over all paths from 𝑖 to 𝑗 , we obtain 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ min 

> 𝑃 :𝑖 ⇝𝑗

∑︁ (𝑢,𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑃 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑢𝑣

= 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 . 

Thus 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

∀ 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 . (4) 

2.3. Normalization for 𝑑 ′.

Since 𝑏 ∗ is feasible for (LR_OL), we have ∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥ 1.

Using (4), we get entrywise 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥ 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

, hence ∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥∑︁  

> 𝑖 ∈𝑉

∑︁ 𝑗 ∈𝑉 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≥ 1.

Together with the metric property and nonnegativity/symmetry established in 2.1, this shows that 𝑑 ′ is feasible for (LR). 

2.4. Objective equality on edges. 

We now compare 𝑑 ′ and 𝑏 ∗ on edges. Fix any edge (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 

𝐸 .By definition of 𝑑 ′, there exists a path 𝑃 from 𝑖 to 𝑗 realizing the minimum: 

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

=∑︁ 

> (𝑢,𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑃

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑢𝑣

.

In particular, the single-edge path 𝑃 = {( 𝑖, 𝑗 )} is one candi-date, so 

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.

On the other hand, applying (4) with (𝑖, 𝑗 ) we have 

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

≤ 𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.

Hence, for all (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 ,

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

= 𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

.

The objective of both (LR) and (LR_OL) is 

𝑓 (𝑥 ) =∑︁  

> (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸

𝑥 𝑖 𝑗 .

Therefore, 

𝑓 (𝑑 ′) =∑︁  

> (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸

𝑑 ′ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

=∑︁  

> (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸

𝑏 ∗ 

> 𝑖 𝑗

= 𝑓 (𝑏 ∗) = 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ .

Since 𝑑 ′ is feasible for (LR), optimality of 𝑑 ∗ implies 

𝑧 𝑑 ∗ = min   

> 𝑑 feasible for (LR)

𝑓 (𝑑 ) ≤ 𝑓 (𝑑 ′) = 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ .

3. Combining the inequalities. 

From Part 1 we have 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ , and from Part 2 we have 

𝑧 𝑑 ∗ ≤ 𝑧 𝑏 ∗ . Thus 

𝑧 𝑏 ∗ = 𝑧 𝑑 ∗ ,

and 𝑑 ′ constructed from 𝑏 ∗ is an optimal solution of (LR). 

## B INTEGRALITY RELAXATION ITERATIVE ALGORITHM 

Algorithm 3 Relaxed, Iterative LP  

> 1:

Input: 𝐷 = (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑐 ) ⊲ Given system dimensions  

> 2:

Input: 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 ⊲ Recalculation interval  

> 3:

Output: 𝑀 ⊲ Complete (binary) topology  

> 4:

Initialize 𝑀 ← electrical_connections (𝐷 ) 

> 5:

Initialize 𝑉 ← valid_connections (𝑀 ) 

> 6:

while |𝑀 | < 6𝑥𝑦𝑧 do  

> 7:

ˆ𝑀 ← LP_TONS (𝑀 ,𝑉 ,𝐷 ) ⊲ Continuous map ˆ𝑀  

> 8:

for 𝑖 < 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 do  

> 9:

𝑒 ← max_optical_connection ( ˆ𝑀 ,𝑉 ) 

> 10:

𝑀 ← 𝑀 ∪ 𝑒  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

end while 

> 14

## C COMPLETE ANALYTICAL METRICS 

Size Topology Diameter Avg. Hops MCF 

PT 4x4x8 8 4.032 0.00781 PDTT 4x4x8 6 3.465 0.01364 TONS MILP 6 3.373 0.01401 TONS LP 6 3.359 0.01406 128 TONS LP SYM 6 3.368 0.01403 PT 4x4x12 10 5.026 0.00347 TONS MILP 6 3.623 0.00867 TONS LP 6 3.560 0.00882 192 TONS LP SYM 6 3.560 0.00883 PT 4x8x8 10 5.020 0.00391 PT 4x4x16 12 6.024 0.00195 PDTT 4x8x8 6 4.329 0.00544 TONS MILP 7 3.833 0.00606 TONS LP 6 3.750 0.00627 256 TONS LP SYM 6 3.739 0.00636 PT 4x8x12 12 6.016 0.00174 TONS MILP 7 4.127 0.00380 TONS LP 7 4.029 0.00389 384 TONS LP SYM 6 4.055 0.00392 PT 8x8x8 12 6.012 0.00195 PT 4x8x16 14 7.014 0.00098 PT 4x4x32 20 10.020 0.00049 TONS MILP 8 4.384 0.00260 TONS LP 7 4.258 0.00276 512 TONS LP SYM 7 4.259 0.00276 PT 8x8x12 14 7.009 0.00087 768 TONS LP SYM 7 4.642 0.00169 PT 8x8x16 16 8.008 0.00049 PT 4x16x16 18 9.009 0.00049 PT 4x8x32 22 11.011 0.00024 PT 4x4x64 36 18.018 0.00012 PDTT 8x8x16 12 6.976 0.00084 1024 TONS LP SYM 8 4.852 0.00119 PT 8x12x16 18 9.006 0.00033 PT 8x8x24 20 10.007 0.00022 PT 4x4x96 52 26.017 0.00005 1536 TONS LP SYM 8 5.116 0.00077 PT 8x16x16 20 10.005 0.00024 PDTT 8x16x16 12 8.723 0.00033 2048 TONS LP SYM 8 5.355 0.00056 PT 12x16x16 22 11.004 0.00016 PT 4x4x192 100 50.016 0.00001 3072 TONS LP SYM 9 5.641 0.00034 PT 16x16x16 24 12.003 0.00012 4096 TONS LP SYM 9 5.877 0.00025 PT 16x16x24 28 14.002 0.00005 6144 TONS LP SYM 10 6.201 0.00015 PT 16x16x32 32 16.002 0.00003 PDTT 16x16x32 24 13.986 0.00005 8192 TONS LP SYM 10 6.464 0.00012 15 D FEASIBILITY OF OCS FAULT-TOLERANCE 

We study when a TPU-style pod network admits 𝑡 ≥ 2 OCS-disjoint spanning trees . Such a collection implies connectivity under up to 𝑓 ≤ 𝑡 − 1 OCS-domain (color) faults, because at least one tree remains intact when at most 𝑓 colors fail. We proceed by relating a throughput proxy—the maximum concurrent flow (MCF) value—to the Nash–Williams crite-rion for the existence of 𝑡 edge-disjoint spanning trees [ 60 ]. Our key step is a conservative lower bound: if the network’s MCF is large enough, then every partition required by Nash– Williams has enough distinct OCS colors crossing it, and 𝑡 

OCS-disjoint trees exist. 

## D.1 Setup and Definitions 

Let 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ) be a valid TPU pod graph with 𝑛 := |𝑉 |

routers arranged into 𝑛 𝑛 𝑐 electrical cubes of size 𝑛 𝑐 = 64 . We form the cube graph 𝐺 ′ = (𝑉 ′, 𝐸 ′) by contracting each cube into a supernode, so |𝑉 ′ | = 𝑛 /𝑛 𝑐 . Edges 𝐸 ′ correspond to inter-cube optical connections (OCS links); electrical links remain inside cubes and are not represented in 𝐺 ′.

Cuts and MCF.. For any subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 , let 𝛿 𝐺 (𝑆 ) be the set of edges with exactly one endpoint in 𝑆 and let |𝛿 𝐺 (𝑆 )| be its cardinality. Define the (uniform-demand) edge expansion 

(a.k.a. sparsity) 

Φ𝐺 (𝑆 ) := |𝛿 𝐺 (𝑆 )| |𝑆 | ( 𝑛 − | 𝑆 |) . (5) Let 𝜆 denote the maximum concurrent flow value of 𝐺 under uniform all-pairs demands and the given edge capacities. A standard cut argument implies that for every nontrivial cut 

𝑆 ,

𝜆 ≤ Φ𝐺 (𝑆 ). (6) Equivalently, if we have a certified lower bound 𝜆 on the MCF, then every cut must have at least 

|𝛿 𝐺 (𝑆 )| ≥ 𝜆 |𝑆 | ( 𝑛 − | 𝑆 |) . (7) In what follows, we apply (9) to cuts induced by unions of cubes, and we interpret the resulting edge-count lower bounds as lower bounds on the number of OCS links leaving a set of cubes in 𝐺 ′.

OCS colors. Each OCS link in 𝐸 ′ is labeled by a color (an OCS domain ID) from a set of 48 colors. By construction, across the entire pod each color appears exactly twice (i.e., there are two links of each color), so 

|𝐸 ′ | = 96 and ∀ colors 𝑐, |{ 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 ′ : col (𝑒 ) = 𝑐 }| = 2.

(8) Consequently, any set of 𝑚 OCS links must contain at least 

⌈𝑚 /2⌉ distinct colors (since one color can contribute at most two links). 

## D.2 From Nash–Williams to a Throughput and Color Budget Condition 

We work with partitions that respect cube boundaries: each part is a union of whole cubes. Let P = {𝑃 0, . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 −1 } be such a partition of 𝑉 into 𝑘 ≥ 2 parts and write 𝑝 𝑖 := |𝑃 𝑖 |

(routers). Let 𝐶 (𝑃 0, . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 −1) denote the number of directed 

edges of 𝐺 that cross between distinct parts (equivalently, the sum of directed cut sizes, divided by two to correct double counting). 

Nash–Williams. For an undirected graph, the Nash–Williams / Tutte theorem states that 𝐺 ′ contains 𝑡 edge-disjoint span-ning trees iff every partition of 𝑉 ′ into 𝑘 parts has at least 

𝑡 (𝑘 − 1) inter-part edges [ 60 ]. In our setting we strengthen the requirement to OCS-disjoint spanning trees, meaning the trees are edge-disjoint and use disjoint sets of OCS colors. 

Color-disjoint sufficient condition. A conservative sufficient condition for the existence of 𝑡 OCS-disjoint spanning trees is: for every cube-respecting partition P into 𝑘 parts, there are at least 𝑡 (𝑘 −1) distinct OCS colors on inter-part edges. We lower bound this quantity using the cut guarantee induced by a throughput certificate. 

From throughput to distinct inter-part colors. Assume a throughput certificate 𝜆 such that for every part 𝑃 𝑖 , the di-rected cut size satisfies 

|𝛿 𝐺 (𝑃 𝑖 )| ≥ 𝜆 𝑝 𝑖 (𝑛 − 𝑝 𝑖 ). (9) Summing over parts and correcting double counting yields 

𝐶 (𝑃 0, . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 −1) ≥ 12 

> 𝑘 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =0

|𝛿 𝐺 (𝑃 𝑖 )| ≥ 𝜆 

2 

> 𝑘 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =0

𝑝 𝑖 (𝑛 −𝑝 𝑖 ). (10) To relate crossing edges to crossing colors , we use the per-cube wiring constraint (8) . In the most adversarial ar-rangement, each distinct color contributes two directed arcs at a cube, so exposing 𝑚 directed arcs across a cube-level cut reveals at least ⌈𝑚 /2⌉ distinct colors, but never more than 

48 . Aggregating this argument across a partition, we obtain the following throughput-driven sufficient condition. 

Lemma D.1 (Throughput-driven sufficient condition). 

If 

𝜆 ≥ 𝑡 

32 𝑛 , (11) 

then every cube-respecting partition P satisfies the strength-ened Nash–Williams requirement of at least 𝑡 (𝑘 − 1) distinct inter-part OCS colors. Consequently, 𝐺 ′ admits 𝑡 OCS-disjoint spanning trees. Color budget saturation and the effective upper bound on 

𝑡 . The condition (11) captures a throughput limitation. Inde-pendently, OCS-disjoint trees cannot share colors and there 

> 16

are only 48 colors, so 

𝑡 ≤ 48 . (12) Combining (11) and (12) , the maximum number of OCS-disjoint spanning trees that can be certified from 𝜆 is 

𝑡 max ≤ min ⌊32 𝑛𝜆 ⌋, 48 . (13) This explains why a topology may satisfy 32 𝑛𝜆 > 48 (sug-gesting more than 48 trees from the throughput bound alone) while still being limited to at most 48 OCS-disjoint trees by the finite color alphabet. 

Connectivity under 𝑓 color faults. Let a color fault remove all edges of a failed color from 𝐺 ′. Because the 𝑡 spanning trees are OCS-disjoint, any single color fault can destroy edges from at most one tree; therefore, under 𝑓 color faults at most 𝑓 trees are destroyed and at least 𝑡 − 𝑓 trees re-main intact. If 𝑓 ≤ 𝑡 − 1, then at least one spanning tree survives, which implies cube-to-cube connectivity. Since routers within a cube remain electrically connected, this im-plies that every router can still reach every other router in the pod. Thus, a sufficient condition for tolerating up to 𝑓 color faults is the existence of 𝑡 ≥ 𝑓 +1 OCS-disjoint spanning trees. Using (13) , a conservative throughput-and-budget condition is 

𝜆 ≥ 𝑓 + 132 𝑛 and 𝑓 ≤ 47 . (14) 

Empirical check. In our experiments, we report both terms in (13) : the throughput-implied count ⌊32 𝑛𝜆 ⌋ and the hard cap of 48 colors. This makes clear when fault tolerance is limited by global throughput versus by the finite OCS color budget. 

## REFERENCES 

[1] [n. d.]. TPU v4. https://cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/v4. ([n. d.]). [Ac-cessed 11-09-2025]. [2] 2026. TPU v5p. https://docs.cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/v5p. (2026). [Accessed 11-09-2025]. [3] Hussam Abu-Libdeh, Paolo Costa, Antony Rowstron, Greg O’Shea, and Austin Donnelly. 2010. Symbiotic routing in future data centers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2010 conference . 51–62. [4] Paul Barham, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jeff Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Steven Hand, Daniel Hurt, Michael Isard, Hyeontaek Lim, Ruoming Pang, Sudip Roy, et al . 2022. Pathways: Asynchronous distributed dataflow for ml. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 4 (2022), 430–449. [5] Prithwish Basu, Liangyu Zhao, Jason Fantl, Siddharth Pal, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Joud Khoury. 2024. Efficient all-to-all collective communication schedules for direct-connect topologies. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing . 28–41. [6] Maciej Besta and Torsten Hoefler. 2014. Slim fly: A cost effective low-diameter network topology. In SC’14: proceedings of the international conference for high performance computing, networking, storage and analysis . IEEE, 348–359. [7] Christian Bliek1ú, Pierre Bonami, and Andrea Lodi. 2014. Solving mixed-integer quadratic programming problems with IBM-CPLEX: a progress report. In Proceedings of the twenty-sixth RAMP symposium .16–17. [8] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. (2020). arXiv:cs.CL/2005.14165 https://arxiv.org/abs/2005. 14165 [9] Jose M Camara, Miquel Moreto, Enrique Vallejo, Ramon Beivide, Jose Miguel-Alonso, Carmen Martínez, and Javier Navaridas. 2010. Twisted torus topologies for enhanced interconnection networks. IEEE Trans-actions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 21, 12 (2010), 1765–1778. [10] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiri-donov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. 2022. PaLM: Scal-ing Language Modeling with Pathways. (2022). arXiv:cs.CL/2204.02311 https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311 [11] Meghan Cowan, Saeed Maleki, Madanlal Musuvathi, Olli Saarikivi, and Yifan Xiong. 2023. Mscclang: Microsoft collective communication language. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 . 502–514. [12] Andrew R. Curtis, Tommy Carpenter, Mustafa Elsheikh, Alejandro López-Ortiz, and S. Keshav. 2012. REWIRE: An optimization-based framework for unstructured data center network design. In 2012 Pro-ceedings IEEE INFOCOM . 1116–1124. https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOM. 2012.6195470 [13] Dally and Seitz. 1987. Deadlock-Free Message Routing in Multipro-cessor Interconnection Networks. IEEE Trans. Comput. C-36, 5 (1987), 547–553. https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.1987.1676939 [14] William James Dally and Brian Patrick Towles. 2004. Principles and practices of interconnection networks . Elsevier. [15] Jens Domke, Torsten Hoefler, and Satoshi Matsuoka. 2016. Routing on the Dependency Graph: A New Approach to Deadlock-Free High-Performance Routing. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (HPDC ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/2907294.2907313 [16] Jens Domke, Torsten Hoefler, and Wolfgang E. Nagel. 2011. Deadlock-Free Oblivious Routing for Arbitrary Topologies. In 2011 IEEE In-ternational Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium . 616–627. https://doi.org/10.1109/IPDPS.2011.65 

> 17

[17] Yuanyuan Dong, Eli V Olinick, T Jason Kratz, and David W Matula. 2015. A compact linear programming formulation of the maximum concurrent flow problem. Networks 65, 1 (2015), 68–87. [18] J. Duato. 1995. A necessary and sufficient condition for deadlock-free adaptive routing in wormhole networks. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 6, 10 (1995), 1055–1067. https://doi.org/10. 1109/71.473515 [19] Jack Edmonds. 1965. Maximum matching and a polyhedron with 0, 1-vertices. Journal of research of the National Bureau of Standards B 69, 125-130 (1965), 55–56. [20] Anup Gangwar et. al. 2020. Automated Synthesis of Custom Networks-on-Chip for Real World Applications. In Proceedings of the 39th Interna-tional Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 41, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3400302.3415656 [21] Jason Lowe-Power et. al. 2020. The gem5 Simulator: Version 20.0+. 

CoRR abs/2007.03152 (2020). arXiv:2007.03152 https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2007.03152 [22] Natalie Enright Jerger et. al. 2014. NoC Architectures for Silicon Interposer Systems: Why Pay for more Wires when you Can Get them (from your interposer) for Free?. In 2014 47th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture . 458–470. https://doi. org/10.1109/MICRO.2014.61 [23] Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi et. al. 2016. Measuring and Understanding Throughput of Network Topologies. In SC ’16: Proceedings of the In-ternational Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . 761–772. https://doi.org/10.1109/SC.2016.64 [24] Nathan Farrington, George Porter, Sivasankar Radhakrishnan, Hamid Hajabdolali Bazzaz, Vikram Subramanya, Yeshaiahu Fainman, George Papen, and Amin Vahdat. 2010. Helios: a hybrid electri-cal/optical switch architecture for modular data centers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2010 Conference . 339–350. [25] Yinxiao Feng, Yuchen Wei, Dong Xiang, and Kaisheng Ma. 2024. Eval-uating Chiplet-based Large-Scale Interconnection Networks via Cycle-Accurate Packet-Parallel Simulation. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24) . 731–747. [26] Jared Fernandez, Luca Wehrstedt, Leonid Shamis, Mostafa Elhoushi, Kalyan Saladi, Yonatan Bisk, Emma Strubell, and Jacob Kahn. 2025. Efficient Hardware Scaling and Diminishing Returns in Large-Scale Training of Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-search (2025). [27] Christopher J. Glass and Lionel M. Ni. 1992. The Turn Model for Adap-tive Routing. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’92) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 278–287. https://doi.org/10.1145/139669. 140384 [28] Conor James Green and Mithuna Thottethodi. 2024. NetSmith: An Op-timization Framework for Machine-Discovered Network Topologies. In Proceedings of the 53rd International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 421–432. https://doi.org/10.1145/3673038.3673060 [29] Albert Greenberg, James R. Hamilton, Navendu Jain, Srikanth Kandula, Changhoon Kim, Parantap Lahiri, David A. Maltz, Parveen Patel, and Sudipta Sengupta. 2009. VL2: A Scalable and Flexible Data Center Network. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2009 Conference on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’09) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 51–62. https://doi.org/10.1145/1592568. 1592576 [30] Chen Griner, Johannes Zerwas, Andreas Blenk, Manya Ghobadi, Stefan Schmid, and Chen Avin. 2021. Cerberus: The power of choices in datacenter topology design-a throughput perspective. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems 5, 3 (2021), 1–33. [31] Chuanxiong Guo, Guohan Lu, Dan Li, Haitao Wu, Xuan Zhang, Yun-feng Shi, Chen Tian, Yongguang Zhang, and Songwu Lu. 2009. BCube: a high performance, server-centric network architecture for modular data centers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2009 conference on Data communication . 63–74. [32] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Kun Tan, Lei Shi, Yongguang Zhang, and Songwu Lu. 2008. Dcell: a scalable and fault-tolerant network structure for data centers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2008 conference on Data communication . 75–86. [33] Gurobi Optimization, LLC. 2023. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual. (2023). https://www.gurobi.com [34] László Gyarmati and Tuan Anh Trinh. 2010. Scafida: A scale-free network inspired data center architecture. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 40, 5 (2010), 4–12. [35] Juris Hartmanis. 1982. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness (Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson). 

SIAM Rev. 24, 1 (1982), 90–91. https://doi.org/10.1137/1024022 [36] Joel Hestness and Stephen W Keckler. 2011. Netrace: Dependency-tracking traces for efficient network-on-chip experimentation. The University of Texas at Austin, Dept. of Computer Science, Tech. Rep 

(2011). [37] Yuanfang Hu, Yi Zhu, Hongyu Chen, Ronald Graham, and Chung-Kuan Cheng. 2006. Communication latency aware low power NoC synthesis. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual Design Automation Conference . 574– 579. [38] Jiayi Huang, Pritam Majumder, Sungkeun Kim, Abdullah Muzahid, Ki Hwan Yum, and Eun Jung Kim. 2021. Communication Algorithm-Architecture Co-Design for Distributed Deep Learning. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Archi-tecture (ISCA) . 181–194. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00023 [39] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al . 2019. Gpipe: Efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019). [40] Imase and Itoh. 1983. A design for directed graphs with minimum diameter. IEEE Trans. Comput. 100, 8 (1983), 782–784. [41] Chenyu Jiang, Ye Tian, Zhen Jia, Shuai Zheng, Chuan Wu, and Yida Wang. 2024. Lancet: Accelerating mixture-of-experts training via whole graph computation-communication overlapping. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6 (2024), 74–86. [42] Nan Jiang, Daniel U. Becker, George Michelogiannakis, James Balfour, Brian Towles, D. E. Shaw, John Kim, and William J. Dally. 2013. A detailed and flexible cycle-accurate Network-on-Chip simulator. In 

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) . 86–96. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISPASS.2013. 6557149 [43] Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Chang Lan, Bairen Yi, Yong Cui, and Chuanx-iong Guo. 2020. A Unified Architecture for Accelerating Distributed DNN Training in Heterogeneous GPU/CPU Clusters. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) .USENIX Association, 463–479. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ osdi20/presentation/jiang [44] Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Yinmin Zhong, Qi Huang, Yangrui Chen, Zhi Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Xiang Li, Cong Xie, Shibiao Nong, et al .2024. {MegaScale }: Scaling large language model training to more than 10,000 {GPUs }. In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24) . 745–760. [45] Norm Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian 

> 18

Towles, et al . 2023. Tpu v4: An optically reconfigurable supercom-puter for machine learning with hardware support for embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the 50th annual international symposium on computer architecture . 1–14. [46] Michael Jünger, Gerhard Reinelt, and Stefan Thienel. 1995. Practi-cal problem solving with cutting plane algorithms in combinatorial optimization. DIMACS series in discrete mathematics and theoretical computer science 20, 1995 (1995), 111–152. [47] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Ben-jamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 (2020). [48] W Kautz. 1968. Bounds on directed (d, k) graphs. Theory of cellular logic networks and machines, Final Report (1968), 20–28. [49] Tom Leighton and Satish Rao. 1999. Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use in designing approximation algorithms. J. ACM 46, 6 (Nov. 1999), 787–832. https://doi.org/10.1145/331524.331526 [50] Hong Liu, Ryohei Urata, Kevin Yasumura, Xiang Zhou, Roy Bannon, Jill Berger, Pedram Dashti, Norm Jouppi, Cedric Lam, Sheng Li, et al . 2023. Lightwave fabrics: at-scale optical circuit switching for datacenter and machine learning systems. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference . 499–515. [51] Hong Liu, Ryohei Urata, Kevin Yasumura, Xiang Zhou, Roy Bannon, Jill Berger, Pedram Dashti, Norm Jouppi, Cedric Lam, Sheng Li, et al .2024. Reconfigurable Lightwave Fabrics for ML Supercomputers. In 

2024 Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC) .IEEE, 1–3. [52] O. Lysne, T. Skeie, S.-A. Reinemo, and I. Theiss. 2006. Layered routing in irregular networks. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 17, 1 (2006), 51–65. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2006.12 [53] Ben Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, J Kaplan, P Dhariwal, A Neelakantan, P Shyam, G Sastry, A Askell, S Agarwal, et al . 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165 

1, 3 (2020), 3. [54] David W. Matula and Farhad Shahrokhi. 1990. Sparsest cuts and bottlenecks in graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics 27, 1 (1990), 113– 123. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-218X(90)90133-W [55] William M Mellette, Rob McGuinness, Arjun Roy, Alex Forencich, George Papen, Alex C Snoeren, and George Porter. 2017. Rotornet: A scalable, low-complexity, optical datacenter network. In Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communica-tion . 267–280. [56] AI Meta. 2025. The llama 4 herd: The beginning of a new era of natively multimodal ai innovation. https://ai. meta. com/blog/llama-4-multimodal-intelligence/, checked on 4, 7 (2025), 2025. [57] Jayaram Mudigonda, Praveen Yalagandula, and Jeffrey C Mogul. 2011. Taming the flying cable monster: A topology design and optimiza-tion framework for {Data-Center } networks. In 2011 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 11) .[58] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil R Devanur, Gregory R Ganger, Phillip B Gibbons, and Matei Zaharia. 2019. PipeDream: Generalized pipeline parallelism for DNN training. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM symposium on operating sys-tems principles . 1–15. [59] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGres-ley, Mostofa Patwary, Vijay Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catanzaro, et al . 2021. Efficient large-scale language model training on gpu clusters using megatron-lm. In Proceedings of the international conference for high performance computing, networking, storage and analysis . 1–15. [60] C St JA Nash-Williams. 1961. Edge-disjoint spanning trees of finite graphs. Journal of the London Mathematical Society 1, 1 (1961), 445– 450. [61] Viet Hung Nguyen and Michel Minoux. 2021. Linear size MIP formu-lation of Max-Cut: new properties, links with cycle inequalities and computational results. Optimization Letters 15, 4 (2021), 1041–1060. [62] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Dev-ille, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Kon-stantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Nee-lakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambat-tista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Tur-ley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin 

> 19

Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lau-ren Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. (2024). arXiv:cs.CL/2303.08774 https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 [63] Leon Poutievski, Omid Mashayekhi, Joon Ong, Arjun Singh, Mukar-ram Tariq, Rui Wang, Jianan Zhang, Virginia Beauregard, Patrick Con-ner, Steve Gribble, Rishi Kapoor, Stephen Kratzer, Nanfang Li, Hong Liu, Karthik Nagaraj, Jason Ornstein, Samir Sawhney, Ryohei Urata, Lorenzo Vicisano, Kevin Yasumura, Shidong Zhang, Junlan Zhou, and Amin Vahdat. 2022. Jupiter evolving: transforming google’s datacenter network via optical circuit switches and software-defined networking. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIGCOMM ’22) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 66–85. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544265 [64] Ragheb Rahmaniani, Teodor Gabriel Crainic, Michel Gendreau, and Walter Rei. 2017. The Benders decomposition algorithm: A literature review. European Journal of Operational Research 259, 3 (2017), 801– 817. [65] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. 2020. ZeRO: Memory Optimizations Toward Training Trillion Param-eter Models. (2020). arXiv:cs.LG/1910.02054 https://arxiv.org/abs/1910. 02054 [66] Yves Robert, Sameer Shende, Allen Malony, Alan Morris, Wyatt Spear, Scott Biersdorff, Burton Smith, Dali Wang, Daniel Ricciuto, Wilfred Post, Michael Berry, François Irigoin, Katherine Yelick, S.L. Graham, Paul Hilfinger, Dan Bonachea, Amir Kamil, Kaushik Datta, and J. Moss. 2011. Encyclopedia of Parallel Computing . 2025–2029. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-0-387-09766-4_59 [67] Brandon Schlinker, Radhika Niranjan Mysore, Sean Smith, Jeffrey C Mogul, Amin Vahdat, Minlan Yu, Ethan Katz-Bassett, and Michael Rubin. 2015. Condor: Better topologies through declarative design. In 

Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data Communication . 449–463. [68] Alexander Schrijver. 1998. Theory of linear and integer programming .John Wiley & Sons. [69] Alexander Sergeev and Mike Del Balso. 2018. Horovod: fast and easy distributed deep learning in TensorFlow. (2018). arXiv:cs.LG/1802.05799 https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05799 [70] Aashaka Shah, Vijay Chidambaram, Meghan Cowan, Saeed Maleki, Madan Musuvathi, Todd Mytkowicz, Jacob Nelson, Olli Saarikivi, and Rachee Singh. 2023. TACCL : Guiding Collective Algorithm Synthe-sis using Communication Sketches. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) . 593–612. [71] Farhad Shahrokhi and D. W. Matula. 1990. The maximum concurrent flow problem. J. ACM 37, 2 (April 1990), 318–334. https://doi.org/10. 1145/77600.77620 [72] Ji-Yong Shin, Bernard Wong, and Emin Gün Sirer. 2011. Small-world datacenters. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Symposium on Cloud Com-puting (SOCC ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2038916.2038918 [73] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2020. Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism. (2020). arXiv:cs.CL/1909.08053 https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053 [74] Arnav Shukla, Harsh Sharma, Srikant Bharadwaj, Vinayak Abrol, and Sujay Deb. 2025. Taming the Tail: NoI Topology Synthesis for Mixed DL Workloads on Chiplet-Based Accelerators. (2025). arXiv:cs.AR/2510.24113 https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24113 [75] Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, Glen Anderson, Ashby Armis-tead, Roy Bannon, Seb Boving, Gaurav Desai, Bob Felderman, Paulie Germano, et al . 2015. Jupiter rising: A decade of clos topologies and centralized control in google’s datacenter network. ACM SIGCOMM computer communication review 45, 4 (2015), 183–197. [76] Ankit Singla, P. Brighten Godfrey, and Alexandra Kolla. 2014. High Throughput Data Center Topology Design. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14) . USENIX Association, Seattle, WA, 29–41. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi14/technical-sessions/presentation/singla [77] Ankit Singla, Chi-Yao Hong, Lucian Popa, and P. Brighten Godfrey. 2012. Jellyfish: Networking Data Centers Randomly. In 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 12) . USENIX Association, San Jose, CA, 225–238. https://www.usenix. org/conference/nsdi12/technical-sessions/presentation/singla [78] K. Srinivasan, K.S. Chatha, and G. Konjevod. 2006. Linear-programming-based techniques for synthesis of network-on-chip ar-chitectures. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Sys-tems 14, 4 (2006), 407–420. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2006.871762 [79] Lawrence C Stewart and David Gingold. 2006. A new generation of cluster interconnect. White Paper, SiCortex Inc (2006). [80] Min Yee Teh, Shizhen Zhao, Peirui Cao, and Keren Bergman. 2020. COUDER: Robust Topology Engineering for Optical Circuit Switched Data Center Networks. (2020). arXiv:cs.NI/2010.00090 https://arxiv. org/abs/2010.00090 [81] Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al . 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239 (2022). [82] Brian Towles, William J Dally, and Stephen Boyd. 2003. Throughput-centric routing algorithm design. In Proceedings of the fifteenth annual ACM symposium on Parallel algorithms and architectures . 200–209. [83] Ryohei Urata, Hong Liu, Kevin Yasumura, Erji Mao, Jill Berger, Xiang Zhou, Cedric Lam, Roy Bannon, Darren Hutchinson, Daniel Nelson, et al . 2022. Mission Apollo: Landing optical circuit switching at data-center scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10041 (2022). [84] Amin Vahdat and Mark Lohmeyer. 2023. Enabling next-generation AI workloads: Announcing TPU v5p and AI Hypercom-puter. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/ introducing-cloud-tpu-v5p-and-ai-hypercomputer. (2023). [Accessed 11-09-2025]. [85] Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Dinitz, and Michael Schapira. 2016. Xpander: Towards optimal-performance datacenters. In Proceed-ings of the 12th International on Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies . 205–219. [86] Leslie G. Valiant. 1982. A scheme for fast parallel communication. 

SIAM journal on computing 11, 2 (1982), 350–361. [87] Guohui Wang, David G Andersen, Michael Kaminsky, Konstantina Papagiannaki, TS Eugene Ng, Michael Kozuch, and Michael Ryan. 2010. c-Through: Part-time optics in data centers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2010 Conference . 327–338. [88] Yongji Wu, Yechen Xu, Jingrong Chen, Zhaodong Wang, Ying Zhang, Matthew Lentz, and Danyang Zhuo. 2024. MCCS: A Service-based Approach to Collective Communication for Multi-Tenant Cloud. In 

Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference . 679–690. [89] Yuanzhong Xu, HyoukJoong Lee, Dehao Chen, Blake Hechtman, Yan-ping Huang, Rahul Joshi, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, Andy Ly, Marcello Maggioni, Ruoming Pang, Noam Shazeer, Shibo Wang, Tao Wang, Yonghui Wu, and Zhifeng Chen. 2021. GSPMD: Gen-eral and Scalable Parallelization for ML Computation Graphs. (2021). arXiv:cs.DC/2105.04663 https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04663 

> 20

[90] Ye Yu and Chen Qian. 2016. Space Shuffle: A Scalable, Flexible, and High-Performance Data Center Network. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 27, 11 (2016), 3351–3365. https://doi.org/10. 1109/TPDS.2016.2533618 [91] Rui Zhang-Shen and Nick McKeown. 2008. Designing a fault-tolerant network using valiant load-balancing. In IEEE INFOCOM 2008-The 27th Conference on Computer Communications . IEEE, 2360–2368. [92] Liangyu Zhao, Siddharth Pal, Tapan Chugh, Weiyang Wang, Jason Fantl, Prithwish Basu, Joud Khoury, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2025. Efficient {Direct-Connect } Topologies for Collective Communications. In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Imple-mentation (NSDI 25) . 705–737. [93] Lianmin Zheng, Zhuohan Li, Hao Zhang, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhifeng Chen, Yanping Huang, Yida Wang, Yuanzhong Xu, Danyang Zhuo, Eric P Xing, et al . 2022. Alpa: Automating inter-and {Intra-Operator }

parallelism for distributed deep learning. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) . 559–578. [94] Yazhou Zu, Alireza Ghaffarkhah, Hoang-Vu Dang, Brian Towles, Steven Hand, Safeen Huda, Adekunle Bello, Alexander Kolbasov, Arash Rezaei, Dayou Du, Steve Lacy, Hang Wang, Aaron Wisner, Chris Lewis, and Henri Bahini. 2024. Resiliency at Scale: Man-aging Google’s TPUv4 Machine Learning Supercomputer. In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implemen-tation (NSDI 24) . USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 761–774. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi24/presentation/zu