Title: Towards Generalizable Robotic Data Flywheel: High-Dimensional Factorization and Composition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25583v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 01:27:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Towards Generalizable Robotic Data Flywheel: High-Dimensional Factorization and Composition 

# Yuyang Xiao ∗,†, Yifei Zhou ∗, Haoran Wang , Wenxuan Ou , Yuxiao Liu †

ByteDance Seed 

> ∗

Equal contribution , †Corresponding authors 

# Abstract 

The lack of sufficiently diverse data, coupled with limited data efficiency, remains a major bottleneck for generalist robotic models, yet systematic strategies for collecting and curating such data are not fully explored. One major challenge in achieving generalization lies in the inherently high-dimensional nature of robotic data. Task diversity arises from implicit factors that are sparsely distributed across multiple dimensions and are difficult to define explicitly. To address this challenge, we introduce F-ACIL , a heuristic Factor-Aware Compositional Iterative 

Learning framework for data factorization and compositional generalization. F-ACIL decomposes the data distribution into structured factor spaces such as object, action, and environment. Based on the factorized formulation, we develop a factor-wise data collection and an iterative training paradigm that promotes compositional generalization over the high-dimensional factor space, leading to more effective utilization of real-world robotic demonstrations. With extensive real-world experiments, we show that F-ACIL can achieve more than 45% performance gains with 5–10 ×

fewer demonstrations comparing to that of which without the strategy. The results suggest that structured factorization offers a practical pathway toward efficient compositional generalization in real-world robotic learning. We believe F-ACIL can inspire more systematic research on building generalizable robotic data flywheel strategies. More demonstrations can be found at our website: 

https://f-acil.github.io/  

> Date:

March 27, 2026  

> Correspondence:

xiaoyuyang.derek@bytedance.com , liuyuxiao.876@bytedance.com 

# 1 Introduction 

Data is the fuel of intelligence. For vision-language-action models(VLAs) in robotic manipulation, performance is fundamentally constrained by the coverage and structure of training data. [ 2, 8]. In practice, real-world demonstrations are collected with limited variations [ 8 , 14 , 23 ], which results in a long-tailed data distribution. For instance, not only objects are typically arranged within a small set of fixed layouts, the action sequences in long-horizon tasks are also constrained by the collectors’ habitual patterns formed through repeated daily work, and so forth. Furthermore, real-world demonstrations are frequently gathered under convenient settings, ultimately causing distribution shift from training to real-world distribution. As a result, the overall data coverage typically forms a Gaussian-like distribution, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Such imbalanced distributions limit the robustness of learning-based models, hindering compositional generalization and degrading performance. 1      

> arXiv:2603.25583v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026 (a) Gaussian-like (b) Quasi-uniform
> (c) F-ACIL: Sparse Gaussian Mixture
> Figure 1 Illustration of data distribution with specific properties. (1)The 3D surfaces (blue-purple) represent different training data distributions, while the contour maps(warm amber) show the shared evaluation distribution. (2)We compare three data distribution: (a) a narrow Gaussian-like distribution with limited coverage, (b) a quasi-uniform distribution with full coverage but low efficiency, and (c) F-ACIL with multiple gaussian modes, which achieves efficient, broad coverage via factor-wise composition.

To overcome the coverage bias introduced by Gaussian-like data distributions, recent efforts build more diversified datasets with a Quasi-uniform distribution.(see Fig. 1b). Importantly, A fundamental challenge is to identify the axes of variation in the data distribution [ 8, 10 ], i.e., the specific factors along which diversification is required to ensure comprehensive coverage. For instance, the works of [ 8, 23 , 47 ] introduce structured variations through underlying factors (e.g., object geometry, appearance, illumination, and background context), promoting balanced coverage of robotic data distributions and improving generalization. However, naive expansion toward a quasi-uniform distribution across multiple axes in high-dimensional factor spaces often leads to the curse of dimensionality. While this approach increases data diversity, it suffers from low data efficiency and ultimately restricts effective generalization for robotic learning. Hence, the distribution required for effective generalization is neither Gaussian-like nor Quasi-uniform. In this work, we introduce F-ACIL for factor-aware compositional iterative learning. As illustrated in Fig. 1c, we model the data distribution as the sparse mixture of Gaussian-like modes, where each mode captures coherent variations. By leveraging structured compositions across multiple modes in high-dimensional factor spaces, we believe that model can generalize beyond individual distribution and significantly reduce the need for 2Figure 2 Overview. (1)F-ACIL explicitly decomposes robotic manipulation into three factors: Object, Action, and Environment. This factorized representation is introduced to systematically expand the distribution of training data in real-world robotic learning. (2)F-ACIL with factorized representation allows principled compositional generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD) instances. 

exhaustive uniform coverage. In general, Fig. 2 provides an overview of F-ACIL, which consists of structured axes for factorization and mechanisms for compositional generalization. F-ACIL maps the robotic states onto these structured axes: F-ACIL-Object, F-ACIL-Action, and F-ACIL-Environment. Regarding the process of compositional generalization, F-ACIL reduces the complexity of exploring high-dimensional spaces and efficiently extends the generalization beyond the observed data distribution, and thus alleviating the need for exhaustive uniform coverage and improving data efficiency. Overall, we use F-ACIL to achieve compositional generalization across high-dimensional spaces and demonstrate its effectiveness on two representative manipulation skill families: Pick-and-Place and Open-and-Close 

(Fig. 3). We empirically compare F-ACIL with strategy that do not incorporate factor-aware iterative learning. The results show that F-ACIL achieves over 45% performance improvement while requiring 5–10 × fewer demonstrations, highlighting its substantial gains in data efficiency and generalization. Furthermore, we find that effective compositional generalization relies on mixtures of factors with appropriate ratios, which are progressively refined through an iterative data flywheel. 

# 2 Related Work 

3Figure 3 Capabilities . In both Pick-and-Place and Open-and-Close, all cases exhibit robust compositional generaliza-tion across out-of-domain objects, actions, and environments. 

2.1 Factor-aware Robotic Evaluation  

> Robotic Manipulation Benchmark.

Recent works on building robotic benchmark [ 11 , 16 , 31 ] emphasize task diversity and semantic generalization. In these settings, visual backgrounds, illumination, and camera configurations [ 8, 23 , 47 ] are typically fixed or only slightly perturbed, providing a controlled but limited evaluation of policy robustness. Thus, several studies [ 8, 44 , 47 ] strive to refine generalization metrics and evaluation protocols, introducing more systematic perturbations and standardized benchmarks for comparative analysis. While these benchmarks enhanced reproducibility and facilitate fair comparisons, the limited robotic actions and environments they produced constrain [ 10 , 42 ] the systematic analysis of factor-wise policy adaptation. Therefore, we introduce F-ACIL, which helps us perform systematic analysis by organizing robotic data into structured object, action, and environment factors.  

> VLAs With Real-World Evaluation.

Vision -Language - Action models(VLAs) aim to unify visual perception, language understanding, and action generation [ 6, 21 , 37 ] within a single multi-model framework, enabling generalist robot policies that follow natural instructions and interact with diverse environments. Early works such as RT -2 [ 1] study how internet -scale vision -language pretraining can be fine-tuned with robotic trajectory 4data to transfer semantic understanding to action spaces. Approaches that fuse vision–language models (VLMs) with action experts [ 7, 41 ] further improve reasoning and control by integrating reinforcement learning objectives and structured reasoning modules. Despite these advances, VLA evaluations [ 8, 17 , 23 , 24 ] often largely focus on aggregate task success or semantic intent, without systematically disentangling how individual factor(e.g., object properties, action element, and environmental conditions) affects generalization performance. In contrast, F-ACIL directly evaluates how VLAs adapt to compositional variations, enabling a more precise understanding of how policies manipulate objects across diverse environments and various poses. Moreover, F-ACIL helps to provide insights on how different factors influence generalization robustness. 

2.2 Compositional Iterative Learning  

> Compositional Generalization.

Compositional generalization enables models to systematically composite learned primitives for novel tasks[ 15 , 22 , 25 ]. Works focus on VLMs [ 3, 18 , 29 ] reveal persistent gaps in compositional reasoning under out-of-distribution conditions, highlighting the need for explicit cross-modal grounding mechanisms. Diffusion-based visuomotor policies [4] have been proposed to generate multi-model action distributions, achieving strong performance across a wide range of manipulation tasks. Wang et al. [ 34 ]employs a latent policy space where repertoire elements are interpolated, synthesizing behaviors compositionally from varied sources. Furthermore, [20 , 26 ] state the importance of cross-task and cross-modal reasoning capabilities, pointing out that existing VLMs still face significant weakness in compositional generalization, and emphasizing the importance of vision-language alignment and accurate visual grounding. Similarly, Driess et al. [ 5] propose compositional object-centric dynamic models that represent scenes as a set of independent object latents, generalizing to environments with varying numbers of objects. Investigations into the joint development of language and sensorimotor representations [ 33 , 35 , 40 ] have shown that increasing variation in task components enhances generalization to unseen verb–noun compositions in robotic systems. Moreover, [ 18 , 38 , 46 ] suggests that task representations learned via internet data facilitate zero-shot adaptation by leveraging policy conditioning on novel combinations of disentangled factors. We introduce F-ACIL, a factor-wise robotic learning framework that exploits compositional structures inherent in observed distribution to enable efficient generalization. Instead of exhaustive enumeration over all possible factors, F-ACIL iteratively expands along selected dimensions, leveraging relationships among different spaces to extrapolate to unseen compositions with fewer demonstrations, shifting generalization from passive coverage-based scaling to active dimension-aware expansion.  

> Data-efficient Robotic Learning.

Improving data efficiency has become a central challenge in robotic learning, as collecting real-world robotic data is expensive and time-consuming. Focusing on learning better visual and semantic representations, Gao et al. [ 9] demonstrate an efficient path of data acquisition, with variation along individual factors can yield strong compositional generalization if policies are able to exploit factor structure in the available data. The works of [ 16 , 36 , 38 ] suggest that task representations learned from semantic keypoints also efficiently facilitate zero-shot adaptation. In addition, Huang et al. [ 14 ] substantially improves compositional generalization and robustness while requiring significantly less training data by compressing diverse task variations and failure-recovery behaviors into fewer episodes. Several studies have demonstrated that structured inductive biases and object-centric decompositions significantly enhance learning efficiency. For instance, Zhang et al. [ 43 ] show that incorporating action locality into representation learning dramatically improves success rates on imitation tasks using only a handful of demonstrations. Similarly, Zhao et al. [45] state hierarchical object-centric skill decomposition enables strong generalization from minimal demonstrations by abstracting transferable skill primitives. Furthermore, hierarchical off-policy RL methods [ 12 , 24 , 28 ] also exploit task decompositions to reduce required interactions. Beyond algorithmic improvements, recent works has also investigated data scaling and dataset diversity in imitation learning. Hu et al.[ 13 ] show that the diversity of environments and objects plays a more important role than the absolute number of demonstrations in achieving robust generalization. In addition, efforts in multitask and dexterous manipulation emphasize to begin improving data efficiency and mitigating problem of asymptotic optimization[ 2, 19 , 30 ]. However, these approaches rarely exploit the latent correlations within the dataset, leaving the potential for compositional generalization under limited data largely unexplored. In this work, we propose F-ACIL, which explicitly mines the correlation among multiple factors to enable compositional generalization in high-dimensional spaces and achieves substantially higher data efficiency than prior approaches. Importantly, F-ACIL not only reduces the 5Table 1 Object factors 

Factor Dimension Description Example Objects 

> Texture

(T ) Transparent Light transmission with refraction Transparent water cup Specular Mirror-like surface reflection Aluminum can Diffuse Rough surface with uniform reflection Metal bowl, Foil tray Absorptive Strong light absorption Towel, Tape roll 

> Geometry

(G) Cylindrical Axis-symmetric geometry Cup, Aluminum can Dish-like Roughly concave. Tray, Plate Rod-like Large aspect ratio Knife, Fork Irregular No specific shape Towel, Tissue 

> Size

(S) Small Requires high grasp accuracy Tape roll Medium Easy single-grasp objects Water cup Large Requires wider grasping volume Lay’s Chips, Towel number of required demonstrations, but also preserves previously acquired reliable generalization capabilities. 

# 3 F-ACIL 

In this section, we formally outline the construction of F-ACIL. We begin by formulating the factorized state representation, and subsequently establish a compositional generalization framework. 

3.1 Factorized State Representation  

> Factor System.

Given an end-to-end vision–language–action policy: 

πθ : S → A , (1) its generalization capability is fundamentally governed by the coverage of the state space S that induced by the training distribution. However, S is typically high-dimensional and structurally entangled, making direct analysis impractical. To obtain a tractable and meaningful representation, we adopt a factorized perspective based on the physical structure of the real world. Motivated by the idea of structural decomposition, we approximate the state space as the cartesian product of three principal factor dimensions: 

S ≈ O × A × E , (2) where O denotes object-related factors, A captures action-related factors encoding spatial relationships, and 

E represents environmental factors. The factor system provides a physically grounded abstraction of S that enables systematic analysis of coverage and generalization in large-scale VLA training. Model generalization is determined by the coverage of these factor spaces through factor-wise decomposition. To build intuition and make these ideas concrete, we now examine the definition of each factor space.  

> F-ACIL-Object.

Objects exhibit diverse properties, making exhaustive factor modeling impractical. We therefore select a small set of primary sub-dimensions that captures the most significant variations in visual observations. Specifically, we factorize object-related variations into three components: texture , geometry ,and size , as summarized in Tab. 1. The object factors considered in this work can be formulated as: 

o = ( t, g, s ) ∈ O , (3) where t, g, and s denote the texture, geometry, and size of the object, respectively.  

> F-ACIL-Action.

Directly modeling action-related factors is challenging due to the high variability of robot demonstrations. For many manipulation tasks (e.g., "put ⋆ into ⋆"), the model is not required to follow a 6Table 2 Action factors 

Factor Dimension Description Range  

> Position

x Forward direction of the robot workspace 

y Left direction of the robot workspace 

z Up direction of the robot workspace  

> Orientation

roll( r) Rotation around x-axis [−π, π )

pitch( p) Rotation around y-axis [−π, π )

yaw( y) Rotation around z-axis [−π, π ) 

> Table 3 Environment factors

Factor Dimension Description Examples  

> Macro

Light Intensity( I) Overall brightness of the scene Normal Indoor(200-500 lux) Color Temperature( T ) Warm or cool illumination Warm Light(2700K - 3500K) Shadow Direction( D) Direction of the shadow Left, Mid, Right  

> Micro

Surface Material( M ) The material of local scenes Transparent, Absorptive Background Clutter( C) The level of clutter in the scene Clean, Light Clutter, Heavy Clutter specific trajectory as long as the task is successfully completed. Therefore, we characterize action diversity through variations in the initial scene configuration. Depending on our hardware configuration, we decide to analyze the 6-D spatial distribution of the demonstra-tion. As shown in Tab. 2, the action factor is defined as: 

a = ( x, y, z, ϕ, θ, ψ ) ∈ A , (4) where (x, y, z ) represents the object position and (ϕ, θ, ψ ) denotes the roll, pitch, and yaw angles.  

> F-ACIL-Environment.

Environmental factors introduce substantial variations in visual observations and often affect the robustness of robotic manipulation. To model these variations in a structured manner, we divide environmental factors into two levels: Macro and Micro .Macro-level factors describe global imaging conditions that influence the entire scene, such as shadow direction, lighting intensity, and color temperature. These variables primarily affect the overall features perceived by the model. Micro-level factors characterize properties of the local workspace. Comparing to macro factors, these elements mainly introduce localized visual changes around the manipulation region and may directly interfere with object perception. Dividing environmental factors allows us to represent diversity with a small number of interpretable variables, while still capturing the major sources of variation. The resulting environmental factors are summarized in Tab. 3. Formally, we define the environmental factor as: 

e = ( i, t, d, m, c ) ∈ E , (5) where i, t, d, m and c denote the light intensity, color temperature, shadow direction, surface material and background clutter. 

3.2 Factor-Wise Composition and Generalization 

In this part, we begin by formulating generalization in the single-factor case. We then extend the formulation to multi-factor scenarios. Finally, we present a data collection strategy guided by the factor-wise compositional generalization. 7Figure 4 Demonstrations collected for iteration 1 under O space The initial demonstrations are sampled along the main diagonal of the factor space, with an equal number of samples per composition. The background color encodes the success rate(SR). Black dots mark the compositions included in the dataset, denoted as D1.

3.2.1 Defining Factor-Wise Generalization  

> Low-Dimensional Iteration.

We formulate generalization along each factor dimension through a "group action" 1

perspective. Taking the object factor space O as an example. First, we define a function f that maps a dataset to the object factor space: 

f : D → O , (6) where D denotes the dataset. f (D) denotes the corresponding factor compositions under object factor. For example, the dataset mentioned in Fig. 4, denoted as D1, is uniformly distributed over four factor compositions. Formally, 

f (D1) = [( Transparent , Cylindrical ), (Diffuse , Dish-like ), (Specular , Rod-like ), (Absorptive , Irregular )] . (7) Then we characterize the range of the factor space that a model can generalize to via an orbit closure induced by an empirical transformed set. Given a set of collected demonstrations D, f (D) ⊂ O denote the collected object factors. We define the orbit of D under transformations HO as 

Orb HO (D) := { g · s | g ∈ HO , s ∈ f (D) }, (8) where HO denotes the set of empirical transformations obtained from evaluation along O. Intuitively, 

Orb HO (D) denotes the set of object factors to which a model trained on dataset D can generalize. However, f (D) does not necessarily lie within Orb HO (D). As illustrated in Fig. 4, the Orb HO (D1) is the region where the success rate over τ . Notably, the composition (Absorptive, Irregular) belongs to f (D1)

but lies outside Orb HO (D1). This discrepancy reveals that certain factor compositions are inherently more difficult to learn than others. Thus, achieving reliable generalization requires a greater number of samples. Our goal is therefore to identify a training dataset D′ so that 

Orb HO (D′) = O, (9) while minimizing the cardinality 2 of its factor representation, 

|f (D′)| ≪ |O| . (10) 

> 1This is an analogy to the mathematical definition of group actions. We define the term orbit in a similar spirit.
> 2The number of unique elements in the set.

8The definition implies that there are many factor compositions that are not in demonstrations, but the model can still generalize across the entire object factor space O. 

> Multi-Dimensional Iteration.

The definition of Orb HO (D) can extends seamlessly to multi-factor spaces. For example, on the product space O × A (short for OA ), we define the family of dataset that helps model to generalize across entire factor space as follows: 

{D | f (D) ⊂ OA , Orb HOA (D) = OA} . (11) Consequently, our goal is to identify a dataset from this family that achieves full generalization with a relatively small volume. 

3.2.2 Data Collection Strategy 

We adopt a hierarchical data collection strategy that includes 

• sequential factor exploration 

• iterative subset search within each factor space The strategy enables scalable exploration of the full factor space while mitigating combinatorial explosion.  

> Sequential Factor Expansion.

As discussed in Sec. 3.1, we prioritize the factor spaces according to their relative impact on generalization, following the order 

O → A → E . (12) According to Eq. 12, the exploration of the factorized state representation is conducted in a sequential manner following the hierarchy, i.e., progressively expanding from O to A and finally to E.Starting from the object space O, we first identify a dataset DO , with f (DO ) ⊂ O such that 

Orb HO

 DO

 = O, (13) Based on f (DO ), we extend the search to the reduced product space f (DO )A, rather than directly considering the full cartesian product space OA . Searching the entire OA space simultaneously would incur much higher computational cost and slow down the iterative process. Therefore, we approximate the object space using the compact representative set f (DO ) in order to accelerate the exploration. Let DOA denote the empirically obtained minimal dataset satisfying 

Orb Hf (DO )A

 DOA 

 = f (DO )A. (14) This implies that model trained on DOA can generalize to the reduced space f (DO )A ⊂ OA . Although this condition does not guarantee the generalization to the full product OA , we further show (in Sec. 4.2) that 

Orb HOA 

 DOA 

 = OA . (15) Hence, model trained on DOA generalizes to the entire object-action space OA . Similarly, in terms of coverage, exploring OA is effectively equivalent to the sequential expansion from f (DO ) to f (DO )A.Same procedure applies to the expansion from f (DOA ) to f (DOA )E. Ultimately, we obtain an empirically minimal dataset DOAE such that 

Orb HOAE 

 DOAE 

 = OAE , (16) that is, a relatively compact representative set whose orbit under HOAE covers the full factor space. Overall, the proposed sequential factor expansion achieves the same coverage as the direct exploration over the full cartesian product space, while requiring substantially less computational cost and data. Comprehensive empirical evidence is presented in the Sec. 4. 9Figure 5 Iterative Search Procedure in Object Space In each iteration, different colors indicate the performance under specific factor compositions. The background color encoding follows the same scheme as in Fig. 4. Points highlighted in blue mark factor compositions that are newly added into the demonstrations in the current iteration. The number of points reflects the distribution of ratio across different factor compositions.  

> Iterative Subset Search.

Within each factor space, we employ an iterative search procedure, as illustrated in Fig. 5, to identify a minimal dataset with sparse factor representations (e.g., DO , DOA and DOAE mentioned above), whose induced orbit achieves full coverage of the corresponding space. Taking the object space as an example, our algorithm begins by constructing an initial training dataset (e.g., 

D1 in Fig. 4) composed of samples with diagonal factor configurations. A model is then trained on this dataset. Then, the model is evaluated on a factor-based benchmark specifically designed to measure performance across different object factors. From the evaluation, we obtain the individual success rate for each object factor and the overall success rate aggregated across all factors, resulting in an success rate tensor R.We define tensor S as follows: 

Si =

> n

X

> m=1

X  

> j:jm=im

Rj − (n − 1) Ri, (18) where i = ( i1, . . . , i n), j = ( j1, . . . , j n). We identify poorly performed factor compositions and augment the training data accordingly. Fig. 5 shows how we adopt a compositional generalization paradigm to selectively choose samples from poorly performing factor space regions. The key idea is that by learning from a limited number of carefully chosen compositions, our model can capture transferable structural regularities, and therefore is able to generalize to unseen factor compositions. The model is then retrained on the expanded dataset, and the process is repeated until the overall success rate exceeds the threshold τ . The complete procedure is summarized in Alg. 1 and Alg. 2. The iterative search procedure over the reduced product space f (DO )A is conceptually analogous to that over the object space O. In the object-space search, we obtain a dataset DO which ensures full generalization across O. When we subsequently apply the same iterative procedure to f (DO )A, the mapping f (DO ) remains fixed throughout the process. As the result, the search procedure is equivalent to optimizing the action-factor distribution while preserving the already-stabilized object-factor coverage induced by DO . Such approach 10 Algorithm 1 Iterative Factor-Based Data Expansion  

> Require:

Factor set O, factor-based benchmark BO , success threshold τ , dataset unit size n 

> 1:

Construct Ddiag by collecting data from hyper-diagonal factor configurations, with cardinality n for each factor composition.  

> 2:

Train model πθ on D = Ddiag   

> 3: while

true do  

> 4:

Evaluate πθ on benchmark BO 

> 5:

Compute success rate for each factor r(o), ∀o ∈ O , get success rate tensor R 

> 6:

Compute overall success rate 

r ← 1

|O| 

X

> o∈O

r(o) (17)   

> 7: if

r ≥ τ then    

> 8: break
> 9: end if
> 10:

Update demonstrations D by Alg. 2 ▷ Update dataset by factorization and composition  

> 11:

Retrain model πθ on updated D   

> 12: end while
> 13: return

πθ , D

Algorithm 2 Collecting Data based on Factorization and Composition  

> Require:

Success tensor R, factor set O, selected data set D, success threshold τ , dataset unit size n and function f as defined in Eq. 6  

> 1:

Compute aggregated tensor S from R by Eq. 18  

> 2:

M ← { o | o ∈ O , r (o) > τ }  

> 3: while

M̸ = O do ▷ Stop until every element in factor set is marked  

> 4:

s ← arg min o∈O\M S ▷ Identify the poorly performed factor across all dimensions  

> 5:

Mark s and update M ← M ∪ { s}  

> 6: for all

d ∈ f (D) do  

> 7:

Mark all vertices of the hypercube spanned by {s, d} 

> 8:

Update M accordingly   

> 9: end for
> 10:

Collect dataset ∆D such that f (∆ D) = {s} and |∆D| = n 

> 11:

D ← D ∪ ∆D   

> 12: end while
> 13: return

D

allows us to systematically explore the optimal factor ratio in the action space A on top of a high-quality base distribution over objects. The iterative search over OAE is performed accordingly. 

3.2.3 Compositional Generalization and Factor Design 

Our data collection strategy is fundamentally built upon the principle of compositional generalization, which serves as the primary mechanism for achieving superior data efficiency. For example, the direction of shadow can be naturally treated as a well-defined factor. We represent this factor as a 3 × 3 matrix, where the rows {Top , Middle , Bottom } discretize positions along the vertical direction of the tabletop (y-axis), and the columns {Left , Center , Right } discretize positions along the horizontal direction of the tabletop (x-axis). As shown in Fig. 6a, the observed factor combinations (X: Right, Y: Bottom) and (X: Left, Y: Middle) can successfully generalize, via compositional generalization, to the unseen combinations (X: Right, Y: Middle) and (X: Left, Y: Bottom). 11 (a) Valid Factor-wise Generalization (b) Invalid Factor-wise Generalization   

> Figure 6 Empirical Study on Factors Design (a) Shadow direction constitutes a successful factor design, as strong compositional generalization is observed. (b) Light-source position and direction serve as a counterexample, where compositional generalization fails to hold.

However, compositional generalization between factors does not always hold. For example, the position and direction of the light source do not necessarily satisfy compositional generalization. We represent position and direction of the light as a 2 × 2 matrix with positions: {Left-side , Right-side } and directions: 

{Toward left , Toward right }. As illustrated in Fig.6b, the directed lighting configurations, (P: Right-side, D: Toward left) and (P: Left-side, D: Toward right), cannot be validly generalized to (P: Left-side, D: Toward left) or (P: Right-side, D: Toward right) setup, as this would leave the object in darkness. The above counterexample illustrates that compositional generalization is not guaranteed for arbitrary factors and depends critically on how factors are defined. 

We acknowledge that defining factors is inherently challenging, as the physical world comprises a vast and highly entangled set of variables. Consequently, the goal is not to identify the single optimal factorization, but rather to select a set of proper factors that are both effective and practical. To this end, we propose the following several guiding principles for factor design: 

• Coverage: The factor system should provide comprehensive coverage of the target space. Since our ultimate goal is to achieve strong generalization in real-world scenarios and our evaluation is conducted on a factor-based benchmark, any factor system that only partially represents the real world will lead to catastrophic failures in model performance. However, there exists a critical trade-off between coverage and granularity: overly fine-grained factors enhance representational fidelity at the cost of data efficiency, whereas overly coarse factors fail to span the full space, resulting in performance gaps. 

• Experiment-driven: The selection of factors is driven primarily by their empirical impact on model performance. In general, the most critical factors are those that have the strongest influence on overall success rate. For example, variations in object texture induce substantial shifts in the visual distribution and, in turn, significantly affect policy performance. In contrast, although changes in object color produce noticeable visual differences, they have only a limited effect on task success; we therefore exclude color from the object factor space. The same empirical principle applies to compositional generalization. As shown in Fig. 6, it is essential to verify that compositional generalization holds across the chosen factors before finalizing the representation. Our data collection strategy fundamentally relies on this property: should compositional generalization fail to hold, the iterative factor expansion would no longer ensure coverage of the full product space, making the entire approach ineffective. 12 4 Experiments 

We conducted extensive real-world experiments to validate the efficacy of F-ACIL. Notably, we aim to address the following questions: 

• Does F-ACIL suffice to achieve generalization over full product space? 

• How much does F-ACIL accelerate the data flywheel compared to naive full-space iteration? 

• How do we perform compositional generalization to improve data efficiency under a fixed budget? 

• How does the growth of dimensionality affect the model performance? 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

4.1.1 Model and Data. 

We select model with backbone inherits from GR-3 [ 2]. Importantly, we keep the original backbone architecture intact, since all the performance gains stem from the proposed factor-wise iterative learning and compositional strategy. Furthermore, we train the VLA policy from scratch while freezing the backbone parameters during iterative learning, allowing us to isolate the effect of structured sampling. We collect real-world manipulation demonstrations using ByteMini[ 32 ]. The collected trajectories involve grasping, placing tabletop objects, and hinge interactions such as opening and closing the door of the oven and microwave. Rather than passively aggregating demonstrations, data collection follows the process of F-ACIL, where task instances are progressively expanded along selected factor dimensions across iterations. In addition, data collection is tightly coupled with the training iterations, where new compositions are selectively instantiated based on prior generalization performance. This strategy ensures that the demonstrations emphasize compositional coverage rather than exhaustive enumeration of the full compositional space. 

4.1.2 Factorize Demonstrations. 

Based on the structured state representation of F-ACIL, we factorize the experimental demonstrations into three dimensions: Object ( O)-Action( A)-Environment( E). We acknowledge that the state representation adopted in F-ACIL is neither unique nor necessarily optimal. Rather, it is designed to expose semantically controllable and physically meaningful variations in robotic manipulation tasks, building a reliable data flywheel and efficiently improving compositional generalization.  

> F-ACIL-Object.

(1)We consider three object-related factors: texture, geometry, and size. For Pick-and-Place tasks, objects are factorized along texture and geometry, while size is not explicitly considered due to constraints on gripper, as objects that are too large or too small cannot be reliably grasped. For Open-and-Close tasks, objects are factorized along texture (including transparency, specular reflection, and diffuse appearance) and size, whereas geometry is not explicitly factorized since hinge structures across appliances (e.g., microwave, oven, and drawer) are largely consistent. (2)We construct a 4 × 4 factor matrix for Pick-and-Place and a 

4 × 3 factor matrix for Open-and-Close tasks. Alg. 1 is the applied to derive a minimal subset that allows generalization across the object space.  

> F-ACIL-Action.

(1)Action space is parameterized by planar position and rotation. Specifically, both skills fluctuate the planar position (x, y ), while the vertical dimension z is not explicitly varied due to practical hardware constraints and stability considerations in real-world data collection. For rotation, we only vary the dimension of yaw( y) while keeping other rotation axis fixed to maintain controlled and reproducible real-world execution. (2)For Pick-and-Place, all three dimensions are retained, yielding a 4 × 2 × 3 tensor. In contrast, for Open-and-Close, we consider a 4 × 2 action factor space. During exploration in f (DO )A, the ratio of object factor inherited from f (DO ) is preserved.  

> F-ACIL-Environment.

(1)We introduce two factors in this space: Macro and Micro. For the Macro dimen-sion, environments are factorized by shadow direction and color temperature, while light intensity is kept approximately constant to isolate other variations. At the Micro level, we randomly vary the surface material 13 Figure 7 Generalization evaluation on f (DO )A and OA . (left) The overall success rates evaluated on f (DO )A and on the complete OA space exhibit only a slight difference. (right) Time needed for one iteration of the data flywheel between entire OA and reduced f (DO )A.

while keeping background clutter fixed. (2)The environment factor space forms a 3 × 3 matrix for both Pick-and-Place and Open-and-Close. 

4.1.3 Settings. 

During the real-world iterative process, we perform five tests for each subset in the evaluation set when assessing different skills. We measure an action is successful through applying skill-specific metrics, such as the grasp success rate for Pick-and-Place. Each test is assigned a score, and the final result is reported as the average score across the five runs. We evaluate the policy using region-based scoring. Only fully completed operations receive a score of 1, while partially completed or failed attempts receive a score of 0. This binary scoring scheme provides a rigorous and consistent metric for evaluating the compositional generalization of specified policy. Finally, the scores from all experimental settings are calculated to assess the performance of the current policy and guide the design of the next iteration if necessary. Notably, we consider below three groups to evaluate the improvement in data efficiency and the performance differences in compositional generalization introduced by F-ACIL. 1. F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio group : Based on Alg. 1, constructs demonstrations by progressively increasing the coverage of task-relevant factors while controlling the ratio among factor spaces. 2. F-ACIL-Factors-Mixture group : Increases the overall number of demonstrations from a quasi-uniform distribution without explicitly accounting for the factor structure. 3. Gaussian group : Samples demonstrations purely at random from a gaussian distribution without exploiting factor-aware data composition. 

4.2 Main Results. 

> Q1: Does F-ACIL suffice to achieve generalization over full product space?

Empirical results confirm that generalization achieved on the compact subset f (DO )A transfers seamlessly to the entire product space OA . The resulting DOA (obtained by Alg. 1) satisfies 

Orb Hf (DO )A

 DOA 

 = f (DO )A, (19) which implies that the policy can generalize over f (DO )A. However, its generalization capability over the full 

OA space remains unclear. Therefore, empirical evaluation is required to verify whether training on DOA 

enables generalization to the complete OA space. As shown in Fig. 7 (left), as the data volume increases, the evaluation gap between f (DO )A and the complete 14 Figure 8 Comparison of data strategies across factor spaces. Each curve corresponds to a different data collection strategy used. F-ACIL-O, -OA and -OAE represent the iterative subset search under different factor spaces. 

OA gradually diminishes. This empirical trend suggests that: 

Orb HOA 

 DOA 

 = OA . (20) In other words, once a subset achieves generalization within the restricted space f (DO )A, it tends to extend to the full OA space. This finding further indicates that once the model achieves robust generalization within the compact subset, there is a strong likelihood that this generalization extends to the entire factor space. 

> Q2: How much does F-ACIL accelerate the data flywheel compared to naive full-space iteration?

We compare the time cost of a single iteration of the data flywheel under the full product space OA and the reduced space f (DO )A in the right panel of Fig. 7. For the Pick-and-Place task in the full OA space, one complete iteration requires evaluating all possible factor combinations, resulting in 4 × 2 × 3 × 4 × 4 = 384 

possibilities and 384 ×5 = 1920 evaluations. In the reduced space f (DO )A, the object factor set is much smaller (|f (DO )| = 7 , as shown in iteration 4 of Fig. 5), reducing the number of possibilities to 4 × 2 × 3 × 7 = 168 .While this already represents a meaningful reduction, the cost remains substantial. To further lower the rollout budget without sacrificing coverage, we adopt a random sampling strategy guided by the factor ratios in DO . Specifically, for each evaluation, we sample the object factor composition according to the factor ratio within f (DO ). As a result, the rollout count drops dramatically to just 4 × 2 × 3 × 5 = 120 , 16 × less than original number. This reduction dramatically accelerates the data flywheel by 16 ×, transforming what was once prohibitively expensive into a highly efficient and scalable iteration cycle. 

> Q3: How do we perform compositional generalization to improve data efficiency under a fixed budget?

We study the generalization of F-ACIL in three factorized spaces: object, action, and environment. As illustrated in Fig. 8, there is a consistent trend that the proposed F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio strategy achieves 15 Table 4 Changes in success rate with changes in dimensions 

Task Benchmark Gaussian-32k Gaussian-16k Gaussian-8k Gaussian-4k Gaussian-2k Pick-and-Place F-ACIL-O 73.3 69.2 63.3 51.4 39.8 F-ACIL-OA 69.2 54.3 41.7 35.4 22.8 F-ACIL-OAE 40.1 35.2 30.4 24.8 19.4 Open-and-Close F-ACIL-O 58.3 48.4 40.6 31.7 25.8 F-ACIL-OA 55.5 41.6 36.2 30.4 23.5 F-ACIL-OAE 37.3 31.8 29.2 25.8 20.4 comparable performance with substantially fewer demonstrations across both skill groups (Pick-and-Place and Open-and-Close). In Pick-and-Place experiments within the object factor space, F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio achieves around 80–90% success rate with fewer than 4k trajectories for both skills. In contrast, F-ACIL-Factors-Mixture typically requires approximately 8k demonstrations to reach a comparable performance level, corresponding to an approximate 2–3 × reduction in data requirement. This advantage persists as the factor dimensionality increases. In the object–action setting of Open-and-Close, F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio exceeds 80% success with 4k demonstrations and further improves to 85% with 8k, whereas F-ACIL-Factors-Mixture requires roughly 16k demonstrations to approach a similar threshold, indicating a 3–4 × gain in data efficiency. In the most challenging object–action–environment factor space, both skills trained with F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio achieve approximately 85–95% success using 6–8k demonstrations. Notably, factor-aware strategies already provide substantial gains in the low-data regime (e.g., 1k demonstrations of F-ACIL-Factor-Ratio and F-ACIL-Factor-Mixture), indicating that environmental variations can be transferred more effectively once object and action factors have been factorized and generalized through iterative learning. Compared to these structured factor-wise strategies, the Gaussian baseline demonstrates the worst generalization, with performance improving slowly only as much more demonstrations are introduced. In practice, it often requires over 32k demonstrations to reach performance levels that F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio achieves with 2-4k samples, corresponding to at least 5–10 × increments in data efficiency. Furthermore, the comparison reveals that strategy which overlook rational factor design and appropriate data ratios tend to require dramatically larger datasets before the expected generalization could emerge. Despite these trends, the two skill groups also exhibit distinct behaviors. For Pick-and-Place, performance improves more smoothly as the amount of demonstrations increases, and the gap between the F-ACIL-Factors-Ratio and F-ACIL-Factors-Mixture remains relatively consistent across different factor spaces. This trend suggests that compositional coverage mainly facilitates generalization over object-centric variations of the simple skill. However, Open-and-Close experiment exhibits substantially larger performance gaps in the object–action factor space. Typically, the failure rate of F-ACIL-Factor-Mixture remains high when the number of demonstrations is below 8k, whereas the F-ACIL-Factor-Ratio achieves better performance. This suggests that skills involving articulated interactions are more sensitive to variations along the action-related components, making them more vulnerable to distribution shifts between training and evaluation. Consequently, careful distribution design with appropriate factor-wise ratio adjustment is critical for improving generalization. 

> Q4: How does the growth of dimensionality affect the model performance?

A common belief in the robotic learning community is that simply increasing dataset size will reliably lead to higher performance, as predicted by scaling laws. This intuition is not entirely unfounded: empirical evidence consistently shows exponential improvements in model performance with scale. The results in Tab. 4 provide a concrete proof of this pattern: performance improves monotonically with dataset size. However, the slope (i.e., the scaling exponent α in the scaling relation L ≈ N −α ) of these power laws can vary dramatically depending on the dimensionality of the data manifold or task space. Blindly scaling up dataset volume without accounting for dimensionality often results in substantially diminished returns — a manifestation of the curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional regimes. 16 Figure 9 Scaling Pattern w/o F-ACIL under Different Benchmark We compare the power-law fits under different benchmark. Each benchmark reflects the model’s generalization ability over the corresponding factor space: O (object),    

> OA (object–action), and OAE (full space).

As shown in Fig. 9: 

• In low-intrinsic-dimensional regimes, scaling exponents tend to be smaller, yielding faster and more efficient performance gains from additional data. For the Pick-and-Place task, the fitted scaling exponent reaches to -0.291 when evaluated on the object-only benchmark O. Similarly, for the Open-and-Close task, the exponent under the O benchmark is -0.196. 

• In higher-dimensional regimes, the scaling exponent increases, acquiring more data exponentially to achieve comparable improvements. For Pick-and-Place, the exponent progressively increase from -0.291 (on O) to -0.220 (on OA ) and further to -0.101 (on the full OAE space). A qualitatively similar trend holds for Open-and-Close, where the exponent rises to -0.172 under OA and -0.087 under OAE . 

> While scaling laws provide a principled foundation expecting gains from larger datasets, their practical efficacy highly depend on the underlying dimensionality of the data.

Effective strategies should therefore incorporate dimensionality-aware design rather than relying solely on data volume expansion. 

# 5 Limitations & Conclusions  

> Limitations and future work.

The variety of factor space and depth of factor dimensions can be extended further. In this work, we are unable to cover some promising factors space like language and embodiment due to limited time and resources. For factor dimensions such as object geometry, they can be further decomposed to align with the state space of the robot policy. In addition, while we assume factors are independent to each other in our formulation, it is recognized that factors like objects, actions, and environments could be subtly interleaved, offering opportunities for more sophisticated factorization. An efficient way to explore more factor spaces and potential compositions is through robot simulation [ 27 , 39 ]. Comparing to real-world experiments mentioned previously, simulation experiment allows quantitative factor configuration and more diverse setups. For example, instead of small, medium, and large, the size of objects can be categorized by the volumes of the bounding box in the simulation. Besides, by combining data 17 generation methods and automatic evaluation, simulation can largely accelerate data flywheel. Looking ahead, the effective application of F-ACIL in large-scale, real-world settings requires further investi-gation. Our current formulation assumes structured factor spaces where object, action, and environment can be reasonably enumerated and discretized. However, real-world robotic systems often involve additional com-plexities, including long-horizon task composition, dynamic environments, and evolving object distributions. Addressing these challenges may require extensions such as hierarchical factorization, adaptive refinement, and real-time discovery, which could broaden the applicability of F-ACIL beyond experimental scenarios.  

> Conclusions.

In this work, we present F-ACIL to improve data efficiency in robot policy learning with factorized state representations and sequential factor-wise exploration. By decomposing the high-dimensional state space into object, action, and environment factor spaces, F-ACIL enables more systematic data collection. To further reduce data requirements while maintaining coverage of the full factor space, F-ACIL leverages compositional generalization across factors, allowing models trained on sparse factor combinations to generalize broadly. Compared to Gaussian baselines, F-ACIL achieves more than 45% performance gain with 5–10 × fewer demonstrations. Overall, our results highlight the importance of structured factorization and composition for building more efficient and generalizable data flywheel for robotic learning. 18 6 Acknowledgements 

We appreciate Chilam Cheang and Wanli Peng for their contributions during the early stages of the project, particularly in brainstorming and material preparation. We thank Pengfei Zhang, Yongpeng Yang, Xin Zhao, Mingyang Wang, Yang Zhao, Shuzhai Guo, Juyi Bai, and Tianxiang Gong, Ziye Liu, and Xiaodong Lan for their efforts in data collection. We thank Jingchao Qiao, Liqun Huang, Zhongren Cui, Jiawen Tian, Zhigang Han, Niu Hao, Liwei Zheng, and Zeyu Ren for their consistent maintenance of the hardware system. We thank Xiao Ma, Zhengbang Zhu, Zetian Li, Jinming Guo, Yage Zhu, Yanhui Wang, Peirong Zhang, Chengyuan Luo, Degong Yang, Yang Liu, and Wenquan Dong for their assistance of the project. 19 References 

[1] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. [2] Chilam Cheang, Sijin Chen, Zhongren Cui, Yingdong Hu, Liqun Huang, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Xiao Ma, et al. Gr-3 technical report. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2507.15493, 2025. [3] Xi Chen, Josip Djolonga, Piotr Padlewski, Basil Mustafa, Soravit Changpinyo, Jialin Wu, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Sebastian Goodman, Xiao Wang, Yi Tay, et al. Pali-x: On scaling up a multilingual vision and language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18565, 2023. [4] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 2024. [5] Danny Driess, Zhiao Huang, Yunzhu Li, Russ Tedrake, and Marc Toussaint. Learning multi-object dynamics with compositional neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1755–1768, 2023. [6] Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic skills with cross-domain datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13396, 2021. [7] Irving Fang, Juexiao Zhang, Shengbang Tong, and Chen Feng. From intention to execution: Probing the generalization boundaries of vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09930, 2025. [8] Senyu Fei, Siyin Wang, Junhao Shi, Zihao Dai, Jikun Cai, Pengfang Qian, Li Ji, Xinzhe He, Shiduo Zhang, Zhaoye Fei, et al. Libero-plus: In-depth robustness analysis of vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13626, 2025. [9] Jensen Gao, Annie Xie, Ted Xiao, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. Efficient data collection for robotic manipulation via compositional generalization. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2403.05110, 2024. [10] Jensen Gao, Suneel Belkhale, Sudeep Dasari, Ashwin Balakrishna, Dhruv Shah, and Dorsa Sadigh. A taxonomy for evaluating generalist robot manipulation policies. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2503.01238v3, 2026. [11] Pranav Guruprasad, Harshvardhan Sikka, Jaewoo Song, Yangyue Wang, and Paul Pu Liang. Benchmarking vision, language, & action models on robotic learning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05821, 2024. [12] Nicklas Hansen and Xiaolong Wang. Generalization in reinforcement learning by soft data augmentation. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2011.13389, 2021. [13] Yingdong Hu, Fanqi Lin, Pingyue Sheng, Chuan Wen, Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Data scaling laws in imitation learning for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18647, 2025. [14] Siyuan Huang, Yue Liao, Siyuan Feng, Shu Jiang, Si Liu, Hongsheng Li, Maoqing Yao, and Guanghui Ren. Adversarial data collection: Human-collaborative perturbations for efficient and robust robotic imitation learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2503.11646, 2025. [15] Takuya Ito, Tim Klinger, Douglas H. Schultz, John D. Murray, Michael W. Cole, and Mattia Rigotti. Composi-tional generalization through abstract representations in human and artificial neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07431, 2022. [16] Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–3026, 2020. [17] Bingyi Kang, Xiao Ma, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, and Shuicheng Yan. Efficient diffusion policies for offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:67195–67212, 2023. [18] Chuanhao Li, Chenchen Jing, Zhen Li, Mingliang Zhai, Yuwei Wu, and Yunde Jia. In-context compositional generalization for large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 17954–17966, 2024. 

20 [19] Fuhao Li, Wenxuan Song, Han Zhao, Jingbo Wang, Pengxiang Ding, Donglin Wang, Long Zeng, and Haoang Li. Spatial forcing: Implicit spatial representation alignment for vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2510.12276, 2025. [20] Tianle Li, Jihai Zhang, Yongming Rao, and Yu Cheng. Unveiling the compositional ability gap in vision-language reasoning model. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2505.19406, 2025. [21] Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang, Ya Jing, Weinan Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01378, 2023. [22] Yuanpeng Li. A theoretical analysis of compositional generalization in neural networks: A necessary and sufficient condition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02627, 2025. [23] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2306.03310, 2023. [24] Guanxing Lu, Wenkai Guo, Chubin Zhang, Yuheng Zhou, Haonan Jiang, Zifeng Gao, Yansong Tang, and Ziwei Wang. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2505.18719, 2025. [25] Fabrice Lécuyer, Louis Jachiet, Clémence Magnien, and Lionel Tabourier. Tailored vertex ordering for faster triangle listing in large graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04774, 2022. [26] Jorge A. Mendez, Marcel Hussing, Meghna Gummadi, and Eric Eaton. Composuite: A compositional reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2207.04136, 2022. [27] Mayank Mittal, Pascal Roth, James Tigue, Antoine Richard, Octi Zhang, Peter Du, Antonio Serrano-Muñoz, Xinjie Yao, René Zurbrügg, Nikita Rudin, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Milad Rakhsha, Alain Denzler, Eric Heiden, Ales Borovicka, Ossama Ahmed, Iretiayo Akinola, Abrar Anwar, et al. Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04831, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2511.04831 .[28] Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:1805.08296, 2018. [29] Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Yuanqi Yao, Xinyi Ye, Yan Ding, Zhigang Wang, JiaYuan Gu, Bin Zhao, Dong Wang, et al. Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15830, 2025. [30] Yu Ren, Yang Cong, Ronghan Chen, and Jiahao Long. Learning generalizable 3d manipulation with 10 demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10203, 2024. [31] Martin Sedlacek, Pavlo Yefanov, Georgy Ponimatkin, Jai Bardhan, Simon Pilc, Mederic Fourmy, Evangelos Kazakos, Cees G. M. Snoek, Josef Sivic, and Vladimir Petrik. Realm: A real-to-sim validated benchmark for generalization in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19562, 2025. [32] Jiawen Tian, Liqun Huang, Zhongren Cui, Jingchao Qiao, Jiafeng Xu, Xiao Ma, and Zeyu Ren. Bytewrist: A parallel robotic wrist enabling flexible and anthropomorphic motion for confined spaces. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2509.18084, 2025. [33] Prasanna Vijayaraghavan, Jeffrey Frederic Queisser, Sergio Verduzco Flores, and Jun Tani. Development of compositionality and generalization through interactive learning of language and action of robots. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2403.19995, 2024. [34] Lirui Wang, Jialiang Zhao, Yilun Du, Edward H. Adelson, and Russ Tedrake. Poco: Policy composition from and for heterogeneous robot learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2402.02511, 2024. [35] Renhao Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Joy Hsu, Hang Zhao, Jiajun Wu, and Yang Gao. Programmatically grounded, compositionally generalizable robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2304.13826, 2023. [36] Shengjie Wang, Jiacheng You, Yihang Hu, Jiongye Li, and Yang Gao. Skil: Semantic keypoint imitation learning for generalizable data-efficient manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14400, 2025. 

21 [37] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, Yaxin Peng, et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12514, 2024. [38] Zheng Wu, Yichen Xie, Wenzhao Lian, Changhao Wang, Yanjiang Guo, Jianyu Chen, Stefan Schaal, and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Zero-shot policy transfer with disentangled task representation of meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2210.00350, 2022. [39] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao Su. SAPIEN: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020. [40] Yiqing Xu, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Tomas Lozáno-Pérez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and David Hsu. "set it up!": Functional object arrangement with compositional generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11928, 2025. [41] Angen Ye, Zeyu Zhang, Boyuan Wang, Xiaofeng Wang, Dapeng Zhang, and Zheng Zhu. Vla-r1: Enhancing reasoning in vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2510.01623, 2025. [42] Borong Zhang, Jiahao Li, Jiachen Shen, Yishuai Cai, Yuhao Zhang, Yuanpei Chen, Juntao Dai, Jiaming Ji, and Yaodong Yang. Vla-arena: An open-source framework for benchmarking vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22539, 2025. [43] Tong Zhang, Yingdong Hu, Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Leveraging locality to boost sample efficiency in robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning, pages 3264–3284, 2025. [44] Yihao Zhang, Yuankai Qi, and Xi Zheng. Experiences from benchmarking vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.11298, 2025. [45] Haibo Zhao, Yu Qi, Boce Hu, Yizhe Zhu, Ziyan Chen, Heng Tian, Xupeng Zhu, Owen Howell, Haojie Huang, Robin Walters, et al. Generalizable hierarchical skill learning via object-centric representation. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2510.21121, 2025. [46] Allan Zhou, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Policy architectures for compositional generalization in control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05960, 2022. [47] Yifei Zhou, Xuchu Huang, Chenyu Ni, Min Zhou, Zheyu Yan, Xunzhao Yin, and Cheng Zhuo. Factorhd: A hyperdimensional computing model for multi-object multi-class representation and factorization. arXiv preprint at arXiv:2507.12366, 2025. 

22