Title: Emergent Neural Automaton Policies: Learning Symbolic Structure from Visuomotor Trajectories

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25903v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:13:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Emergent Neural Automaton Policies: Learning Symbolic Structure from Visuomotor Trajectories 

Yiyuan Pan ∗,1, Xusheng Luo ∗,1, Hanjiang Hu 1, Peiqi Yu 1, Changliu Liu 1

∗Equal contribution Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 

{yiyuanp, xushengl, hanjianh, peiqiy, cliu6 }@andrew.cmu.edu 

Fig. 1. Unsupervised Discovery of Task Structures. ENAP successfully recovers task-specific logic, including cyclic dependencies ( Top-Left ), logical branching for multi-modal goals ( Bottom ), and crucially, autonomous failure recovery (Top-Right , dashed line), where the automaton learns to transition back to a previous state ( q2 → q1) to retry insertion upon error. Semantic meanings (e.g., ‘ Hold ’) are generated by GPT based on cluster representatives. 

Abstract —Scaling robot learning to long-horizon tasks remains a formidable challenge. While end-to-end policies often lack the structural priors needed for effective long-term reason-ing, traditional neuro-symbolic methods rely heavily on hand-crafted symbolic priors. To address the issue, we introduce ENAP (Emergent Neural Automaton Policy), a framework that allows a bi-level neuro-symbolic policy adaptively emerge from visuomotor demonstrations. Specifically, we first employ adaptive clustering and an extension of the L∗ algorithm to infer aMealy state machine from visuomotor data, which serves as an interpretable high-level planner capturing latent task modes. Then, this discrete structure guides a low-level reactive residual network to learn precise continuous control via behavior cloning (BC). By explicitly modeling the task structure with discrete transitions and continuous residuals, ENAP achieves high sample efficiency and interpretability without requiring task-specific labels. Extensive experiments on complex manipulation and long-horizon tasks demonstrate that ENAP outperforms state-of-the-art (SoTA) end-to-end VLA policies by up to 27% in low-data regimes, while offering a structured representation of robotic intent (Fig. 1). 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Developing long-horizon execution capabilities is a crit-ical step toward generalist robotic agents [53]. Such tasks inherently demand a synergy between high-level discrete planning and low-level continuous control, a challenge tra-ditionally formulated within the realm of Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) [19, 66]. While recent end-to-end learning approaches, such as Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models, have demonstrated efficacy in short-horizon tasks, scaling these methods to multi-stage and long-horizon problems re-mains challenging [34, 21, 47]. This limitation stems from a fundamental misalignment with the cognitive structure of intelligent decision-making. 

> arXiv:2603.25903v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026

In psychology, decision-making processes in both humans and ideal robotic agents are naturally hierarchical: System 2 

governs symbolic reasoning and long-term planning, while 

System 1 handles intuitive reactivity and sensorimotor control [4, 35]. This hierarchical architecture not only facilitates learning by introducing structural priors but also improves in-terpretability compared to unstructured baselines. In contrast, end-to-end learning attempts to approximate the non-convex optimization landscape of long-horizon tasks using a single, monolithic network, resulting in a black-box policy that is semantically opaque and highly data-intensive [21, 46, 45]. Conversely, while existing neuro-symbolic TAMP frameworks successfully leverage bi-level planning for both performance and interpretability enhancement, they often rely on rigid, hand-crafted symbolic priors (e.g., temporal logic predicates) [58, 56], failing to adaptively reveal the intrinsic structural manifold from data. Therefore, this work seeks to answer a pivotal question: 

How can the logical structure of System 2 naturally emerge from the perceptual flow of System 1? 

Hybrid system theory offers a profound insight: complex dynamics can be decomposed into sequences of continuous local behaviors governed by discrete modes [31, 50]. Inspired by this, we argue that one appropriate policy representation for long-horizon tasks is neither monolithic network poli-cies nor rigid symbolic policies, but a “Neural Automaton Policies”. In this representation, a state machine encapsulates the global task phases (System 2), while continuous network functions model the local control within each phase (System 1). More importantly, this hybrid structure acts as a policy representation that is both kinematically feasible for robots and semantically interpretable for humans [41]. To this end, we introduce ENAP (Emergent Neural 

Automaton Policy), a framework that unsupervisedly recon-structs a task-level state machine planner from demonstrations (Fig. 2). ENAP seamlessly integrates this discrete topological planner with a downstream residual compensation network within a unified framework. This bi-level architecture unifies discrete reasoning (where humans excel) and continuous con-trol (where robots excel), aiming for both high interpretability and strong compositionality. Specifically, we first employ adaptive clustering and an extended L∗ algorithm to recon-struct the state machine from trajectory sets. Then, we com-bine this automaton-based planner with a residual network, learning the full policy via behavior cloning. Empirical results demonstrate that ENAP achieves at least an 8% absolute improvement over VLA models while using significantly 39% fewer parameters and offering superior interpretability. In summary, our contributions are threefold:  

> •

We propose ENAP , which learns a structured task ab-straction and low-level reactive network in an emergent manner, offering a viable path for evolving from end-to-end reasoning to hierarchical cognitive architectures.  

> •

We design a label-free neuro-symbolic framework that eliminates the reliance on expert priors. We incentivize structure discovery through an adaptive symbolic abstrac-tion, improving both interpretability and compositionality.  

> •

We demonstrate that ENAP consistently outperforms VLA models by at least 8% in low-data settings, and provide a rigorous Partially Observable Markov Decision Process-based theoretical justification for the framework. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Robotics 

Neuro-symbolic approaches in robotics aim to coordinate the generalization capabilities of symbolic reasoning with the perceptual flexibility of neural networks, particularly within the domain of Task and Motion Planning (TAMP). While foundational frameworks like PDDLStream [16] successfully integrated discrete search with continuous motion planning, they relied on manually specified symbolic models. To over-come this, recent research has pivoted toward learning abstrac-tions directly from data. In the realm of action abstraction, approaches have evolved from discovering temporal options via skill chaining [22] to learning deep parameterized skills [49, 12] that enable continuous control within symbolic plans. Complementary work in state abstraction seeks to ground con-tinuous sensorimotor data into discrete symbols [24], utilizing techniques ranging from deep generative models [3] to neuro-symbolic concept learners [36] to construct latent states com-patible with symbolic planners. Building upon these learned abstractions, model learning focuses on inferring the transi-tion dynamics that govern symbolic interactions. This area has progressed from learning probabilistic rules in stochastic domains [48] to employing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for modeling relational dynamics [9] and hybrid automata for stochastic transitions [50]. Finally, to enable execution across varying task configurations, Generalized planning methods train neural policies to approximate symbolic plans [18], often utilizing GNNs to reason about object importance in large-scale environments [57] or to select appropriate planners [33]. While prior neuro-symbolic methods successfully integrate learning and planning, they typically require pre-defined sym-bolic predicates. In contrast, ENAP introduces a label-free, self-supervised framework that autonomously discovers inter-pretable automata directly from raw visuomotor data, bridging the gap between low-level sensorimotor control and high-level symbolic reasoning without manual engineering. 

B. Symbolic Structure Discovery 

Discovering symbolic structures from continuous data is pivotal for enhancing interpretability and planning efficiency in robotics. A broad spectrum of methods has been proposed to infer such structures, ranging from learning PDDL operators and predicates for bilevel planning [28, 30] to discovering symbolic graphs and rules. Among these, “learning from demonstration” is a significant research topic [27, 54, 61], ranging from learning grounded symbolic representations for planning [23] to inferring temporal logic formulas via maxi-mum entropy [60], or joint learning of logical structure and atomic propositions [10]. While these approaches successfully capture high-level task logic, Finite State Machines (FSMs) offer a unique advantage: they provide a compact, topological representation of sequen-tial dynamics that supports formal verification and reactive control. Specifically, Mealy machines have been shown to offer richer structural representations than Moore machines, making them particularly effective for POMDP controllers [1]. Driven by these advantages, a prominent line of research focuses on automata extraction from data. Building on classi-cal approaches like the L∗ algorithm and the Myhill-Nerode theorem [14], recent works have successfully extracted Deter-ministic Finite Automata (DFA) from RNNs to verify formal properties [13, 25] and from Transformers to reveal their oper-ational mechanisms [65]. To address stochasticity, extensions such as Weighted Finite Automata (WFA) extraction have been proposed for natural language processing [62]. In the robotics domain, latent automata models like LATMOS [63] and serialized state machines [42] have been developed to fac-torize long-horizon tasks into executable subgoals. Similarly, learning probabilistic automata (PDFA) has proven effective for capturing temporal dependencies and expert preferences directly from demonstrations [5]. While existing methods excel in specific niches, they typi-cally require either discretized inputs or predefined knowledge like cluster counts. ENAP bridges these gaps by combining self-supervised continuous embedding with adaptive automata inference, enabling the emergent discovery of probabilistic, task-relevant structures without manual specification. III. B ACKGROUND 

A. Problem Setup 

We formulate the robotic task as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [7], defined by the tuple 

P = ( S, O, A, T , Ω, R, γ ). Here, S represents the state space of the environment, O denotes the high-dimensional observa-tion space (e.g., RGB-D images, proprioception), and A ⊆ Rd

is the continuous action space. The transition dynamics are given by T (s′|s, a ), and the observation model by Ω( o|s, a ).We operate in the Learning from Demonstration (LfD) setting. We assume access to a dataset of expert trajecto-ries D = {τi}Ni=1 , collected from expert demonstrations or rollouts of a policy. Each trajectory is a sequence τi =(o0, a 0, . . . , o Ti , a Ti ), where the observation at time t is ex-plicitly defined as a tuple ot := ( It, p t), comprising high-dimensional visual input It (e.g., RGB images) and proprio-ceptive state pt (e.g., joint pose). The objective is to learn a structured policy that mimics the expert’s behavior. 

B. Preliminaries 1) Mealy Machine : Finite State Machines (FSMs) are mathematical models of computation used to design logic for sequential systems. In the context of robotic planning and control [26, 32], FSMs’ nodes represent discrete operational                      

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF SYMBOLIC STRUCTURE DISCOVERY APPROACHES .
> Method Continuous Probabilistic Label-Free
> - PDDL / Rule-Based
> Bilevel Learning [6] ✓
> Neuro-Symbolic IL [10] ✓
> - Automata Extraction (NLP/Theory)
> RNN Extraction [2,3] ✓
> WFA Extraction [5] ✓✓
> Transformer Extr. [4] ✓
> - Robotic Automata Learning
> PDFA Learning [7] ✓✓
> LATMOS [8] ✓
> Serialized FSM [9] ✓
> ENAP (Ours) ✓✓✓

modes and edges define transitions triggered by perceptual events. The two primary machines are Moore machines [17], where outputs are determined solely by the current state, and 

Mealy machines , where outputs depend on both the current state and the current input [55]. In this work, we adopt the Probabilistic Mealy Machine 

(PMM) as our structural backbone. While Moore machines are intuitive, Mealy machines offer greater reactivity and compact-ness [29]. Moreover, this structure mirrors the fundamental dynamics of a POMDP, where the agent’s action and state evolution are jointly determined by the current latent state and observation [1]. Formally, a PMM is defined as follows: 

Definition 3.1 (Probabilistic Mealy Machine): The Proba-bilistic Mealy Machine is M = ( Q, Σ, Γ, δ, λ, q 0), where:  

> •

Q is a finite set of states.  

> •

Σ is a finite input alphabet.  

> •

Γ is a finite output alphabet.  

> •

δ(q′|q, σ ), the probabilistic transition function represent-ing the probability of moving to state q′ given current state q and input σ; 

> •

λ(γ|q, σ ), the probabilistic output function representing the probability of emitting output γ ∈ Γ given q and σ; 

> •

q0 ∈ Q is the initial state. To bridge this automata-based definition with the POMDP formulation ( P) in our paper, we establish the following con-ceptual mapping: alphabet Σ corresponds to a discretization of the continuous observation space O (see Fig. 1 for example); nodes Q serve as discrete phases inferred from the POMDP history; output alphabet Γ represents the action space A.Crucially, the transition function δ(q′|q, σ ) models the high-level task progression (transitioning between phases), while the output function λ(γ|q, σ ) acts as a state-conditioned policy. 

2) Automata learning and L ∗ algorithm : Automata learn-ing aims to infer an FSM that explains a given set of observed sequences. Traditional algorithm is Angluin’s L∗ Algorithm 

[2]. Its core principle rests on the Myhill-Nerode theorem [15], which provides a rigorous definition of “node” (state) in FSMs: two history sequences are equivalent (i.e., belong to the same node) if and only if they yield identical future behaviors for all possible subsequent inputs. L∗ leverages this to actively query the system to cluster history sequences into discrete states. Fig. 2. Overview of the ENAP Framework. Our approach unifies structure discovery and hierarchical control through a three-stage pipeline: (i) Symbol Abstraction: Continuous trajectories from demonstrations are encoded and clustered via HDBSCAN [37] to discover a discrete alphabet Σ, mapping sensorimotor streams to symbolic sequences. (ii) Structure Extraction via Extended L ∗: We introduce an extended L∗ algorithm that iteratively constructs a PMM by querying the dataset. The process maintains an observation table and enforces closedness ( expanding nodes ) and consistency ( refining edge )constraints using an RNN-based history encoder. (iii) Bi-level Control Pipeline: The learned PMM serves as a high-level planner, providing a coarse action prior at         

> base . This is combined with a learned residual term ∆at∼πψ(·| qt, o t)to synthesize the final precise action ˆat=at
> base + ∆ at.

Specifically, L∗ algorithm maintains an Observation Table 

(U, E, T ) to infer the automaton. Let Σ∗ := {σ1 · · · σk | k ∈

N, σ i ∈ Σ} denote the set of finite input sequences, and U · Σ = 

{u · σ | u ∈ U , σ ∈ Σ} denote concatenation operation. Then, 

U ⊂ Σ∗ is a set of Prefixes , which can be viewed as candidate history sequences leading to distinct states; E ⊂ Σ∗ is a set of 

Suffixes , representing future test sequences used to distinguish between two prefix sequences ui, u j ∈ U . The table entries 

T : U · E → Γ∗ record the queried system’s output (“what happens if we execute history u ∈ U followed by test e ∈ E ”) for a prefix followed by a suffix. The learning proceeds via interactions with a Minimally Adequate Teacher (MAT) [11]: 1) Membership Query (MQ) : the learner asks for the system output of a specific sequence u · e, filling the table entries in T .2) Equivalence Query (EQ) : The learner proposes a hy-pothesis automaton based on the current table. The teacher either confirms it or provides a counter-example 

trajectory that reveals an undiscovered behavior. With queries, the algorithm can ensure two key properties of the table: Closedness and Consistency . Closedness ensures that for every discovered state, its transition to any next state is also covered by the known set U. Consistency ensures that if two histories appear identical under current tests E, they must remain identical after any one-step extension. If either property is violated, L∗ expands U or E accordingly. We provide an illustrative example of L∗ Algorithm in Appendix A-A. However, applying classical L∗ directly to robotic learning presents a significant gap: standard L∗ assumes discrete sym-bolic inputs and access to an omniscient oracle. Moreover, it is originally designed for deterministic automata. Therefore, we extend the L∗ algorithm to enable learning of PMM. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

Method Overview. Given the demonstration dataset D,our objective is to learn a structured policy πENAP compris-ing a high-level PMM controller M and a low-level and compensatory residual network. Firstly , we perform symbol abstraction to discretize the continuous observation space O

into an alphabet Σ, and compress sequences of symbols into task phases (nodes) using a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). 

Second , we introduce an extension of the L∗ algorithm for continuous trajectory data. Finally , we train a residual policy network ψ via behavior cloning to ensure precise control, which takes the coarse action prior λ(·| q, σ ) from the learned PMM and predicts a continuous action. (Fig. 2). In what follows, we try to answer two questions: (i) How to unsupervisedly construct an interpretable state machine from noisy demonstrations? (Sections IV-A and IV-B) and (ii) How to leverage such learned structure to guide the learning of hierarchical control policy? (Sections IV-C and IV-D) A. Adaptive Symbol Abstraction 

In the ENAP framework, we follow Definition 3.1 and instantiate the PMM. Specifically, the node set Q represents the discrete latent task modes (e.g., Reach , Grasp , Align ), while the edges encode the transitions between these nodes. Given the continuous trajectory data, the first step of ENAP 

is to map observations ot := ( It, p t) to a semantic feature vector zt = ϕθ (ot) ∈ Rz via an encoder. Following this, we employ HDBSCAN [37], an adaptive clustering algorithm, to unsupervisedly discover the alphabet Σ within the feature space. Each cluster leads to one symbol. This step augments the trajectory data at each time step from (ot, a t) to a tuple 

(ot, a t, c t), where ct = HDBSCAN( zt) ∈ Σ is the assigned cluster label. The choice of encoder depends on whether the trajectory data are obtained from demonstrations or from rollouts of the learned policy. 1) Scenario 1 (Policy Enhancement) : The trajectory data are obtained from policy rollouts. In this setting, our objective is to extract a PMM to enhance interpretabil-ity or to construct a structured policy with improved performance. The encoder learned within the policy is directly reused. 2) Scenario 2 (Policy Discovery) : The trajectory data are obtained from demonstrations. Our objective is to learn a policy from scratch using the provided demonstrations (e.g., teleoperation data). In this setting, we fine-tune a raw visual encoder (e.g., DINO [44]) using our proposed algorithm (see Algorithm 2). Given the clustered symbols, standard L∗ algorithms rely on exact matching of sequences to distinguish nodes. In robotics, a sequence refers to a trajectory of historical actions and symbols (a0: t, c 0: t). To handle the variable-length nature of robotic trajectories where different temporal spans may map to the same task phase, we train an RNN to map the history 

(a0: t, c 0: t) to a fixed-size embedding ht ∈ H. Intuitively, 

ht serves as a continuous surrogate for discrete state nodes, summarizing variable-length past experiences into a consis-tent Markovian representation of the current task phase. (the number of h equals the total number of time steps across all trajectories). Specifically, we attach auxiliary prediction heads to the RNN during training and discard them afterward in order to optimize a multi-objective loss: 

LRNN := Lpred + λLcontrast = ( Lact + Lstate ) + λLcontrast (1) where the loss terms Lact (MSE) and Lstate (cross-entropy) are employed to predict the subsequent action at+1 and symbolic state ct+1 , respectively. Phase-aware contrastive loss Lcontrast 

to separate latent representations across different phases: it minimizes the cosine distance between ht and ht+1 during periods of constant cluster assignment (self-loops, ct = ct+1 )while maximizing it during phase transitions ( ct̸ = ct+1 ). This architectural choice of RNN is theoretically motivated: the trained RNN induces clustering of continuous hidden states around saturated centers, in which each component is driven toward ±1 under tanh activations. As a result, cosine similarity becomes a reliable metric for distinguishing automaton states (see Appendix B for the formal proposition). 

B. Structure Extraction via Extended L∗ Algorithm 

To bridge classical L∗ with continuous robot learning, we translate its discrete logical properties into spatial geo-metric constraints. Intuitively, closedness (traditionally requir-ing a new string to match a known state) now means any newly observed history embedding must fall within the τsim -neighborhood of an existing centroid. Similarly, consistency 

(requiring identical states to yield identical futures) is relaxed 

Algorithm 1 Extended L∗ Algorithm  

> 1:

Input: Demonstration D, RNN hκ, Thresholds τsim , ϵ err  

> 2:

Output: Probabilistic Mealy Machine Mfinal  

> 3:

Construct Database H. 

> 4:

Initialize prefix set U ← { h10}. 

> 5:

while Hypothesis doesn’t pass EQ do  

> 6:

Phase 1 : Self-Supervised MQ  

> 7:

repeat  

> 8:

Closed ← True  

> 9:

// Check if all transitions land in known states  

> 10:

Construct transition destinations {hnext } reachable from U via database H. 

> 11:

if max u′∈U sim (hnext , u ′) < τ sim then  

> 12:

U ← U ∪ { hnext }; Closed ← False  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

until Closed is True  

> 15:

Construct hypothesis M from H supported by U. 

> 16:

Phase 2 : Non-deterministic EQ  

> 17:

for all test trajectory τ ∈ D test do  

> 18:

Track all paths in M consistent with τ ’s symbols.  

> 19:

// Validity requires topology and action match  

> 20:

if no valid path survives at step t then  

> 21:

U ← U ∪ { h(τ [: j]) , ∀j ≤ t}; break // Add Counterexample  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

end while  

> 25:

Phase 3 : Stable Phase Pruning  

> 26:

Mfinal ← Prune (M) 

> 27:

return Mfinal 

to ensure that trajectories within the same current node, given the same input c, consistently transition into the same destination region. Leveraging the abstracted alphabet Σ and the phase em-beddings H, we propose an extension of the L∗ algorithm. Due to the absence of an oracle, our algorithm queries the static demonstration database D to infer system behavior. We formulate this as an iterative process, driven by two redefined query mechanisms: a Self-Supervised Membership Query (MQ) that is used to construct a hypothetical state machine, and a Non-deterministic Equivalence Query (EQ) that validates the hypothesis (Algorithm 1). 

1) Self-Supervised MQ (Phase 1 ): In our framework, the prefix set U serves as the collection of representative history embeddings, where each u ∈ U is a centroid summarizing a cluster of similar trajectory embeddings ht that correspond to a unique latent task node q. Two embeddings hit and hjt′

from i-th and j-th trajectories at different time steps may correspond to the same u ∈ U, that is, task phase. The core challenge is to identify the PMM from the non-Oracle dataset D. To this end, we define the Generalized MQ function MQ D (u), which retrieves the immediate action at and next-Algorithm 2 Iterative Residual Learning  

> 1:

Input: Dataset D, Initial Encoder ϕθ(0) , Iterations K 

> 2:

Output: Trained Policy πENAP = ( M, π ψ , ϕ θ ) 

> 3:

for k = 0 to K − 1 do  

> 4:

E-Step: Structure Extraction  

> 5:

Extract features ϕθ(k) (ot) for all τ ∈ D . 

> 6:

Discretize features to Σ(k) via HDBSCAN.  

> 7:

Train RNN on (Σ (k), D) to get hkκ. 

> 8:

M(k) ← Extended L∗(D, h kκ, . . . ) // See Algorithm 1  

> 9:

M-Step: Policy Optimization  

> 10:

Freeze PMM M(k), initialize Residual Net πψ(k) . 

> 11:

repeat  

> 12:

Sample batch (ot, a t, q t) from D. 

> 13:

Compute loss J ← Eq. (5).  

> 14:

Update θ(k), ψ (k) via gradient descent.  

> 15:

until Convergence  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

return (M(K), π ψ(K) , ϕ θ(K) )

step embeddings ht+1 from all trajectory segments in D that are τsim -cosine similar to the representative history u, thereby obtaining transitions for the candidate state, MQ D (u) = {(ait, h it+1 ) |∃ t s.t. cos  h(τi[: t]) , u  ≥ τsim }. (2) We initialize U using the initial state of the first trajectory at 

t = 0 , that is, U = {h10} and use MQ D (u) to expand U. The growth of U continues until the hypothesis PMM satisfies both 

closedness (every reachable next-step embedding is similar to some u ∈ U ), at which point the construction early-stops. Specifically, for every prefix u in current U, we query MQ D (u)

to obtain all reachable next-step embeddings {hnext }. If a reachable hnext satisfies max u′∈U cos( hnext , u ′) < τ sim , which means the hnext is dissimilar to every recorded history, we add the hnext into U as a new centroid, expanding the automaton’s nodes until closedness is satisfied. Once U is closed, each 

u ∈ U corresponds to a node q. To this end, we derive the finite set of states Q of the PMM. Given constructed closed Q, the next step is to construct the set of outgoing transitions that satisfy consistency . Specifically, in the sequel, we discuss how we build edge from node q

under input symbol c ∈ Σ, and associate them with two critical pieces of information: (1) An action prior distribution 

λ(·| q, c ), represented practically as the empirical mean abase 

of all continuous action vectors observed transitioning along this edge; and (2) A next-input set NIS( q) ⊂ Σ, which records all the valid input symbols accepted by node q.Specifically, for a discrete state q (represented by a centroid 

u) and an input symbol c, the generalized query scans the demonstration dataset to retrieve all continuous next-step em-beddings {ht+1 } from time steps t where the history is similar to u and the input is c. We then map each continuous hnext to a discrete destination state q′ by finding its nearest representative 

u′ ∈ U . Next, we estimate the discrete transition probability 

δ(q′|q, c ) based on the normalized frequency of reaching each 

q′. Finally, the continuous action prior λ(·| q, c ) is modeled as the empirical distribution (the mean value mentioned earlier) of all continuous actions at executed during these specific 

q c

−→ q′ transitions. In our cases, the consistency property is satisfied by default, as the different instances h within the same node will transit to the same next node under the same input symbol. In classical L∗, the algorithm constructs a complete transi-tion table by actively querying an oracle for the outcome of every state prefix u extended by every possible input symbol 

σ ∈ Σ. However, in our offline imitation learning setting, we lack an interactive oracle, and the static demonstration dataset naturally suffers from transition sparsity, meaning many (u, σ )

combinations are physically unobserved. To overcome this limitation, our Generalized MQ redefines the query process: instead of exhaustively testing all hypothetical extensions, it acts as a data-mining operation, retrieving only the empirically observed next-step embeddings hnext that actually follow the current state in the dataset. 

2) Non-deterministic EQ (Phase 2): For robotic tasks, we relax the deterministic verification to a non-deterministic path search. Given a test trajectory τ = (o0, a 0, . . . ), we track all possible transition sequences in the PMM induced by its cluster-index sequence. If there exists at least one valid transition sequence τ PMM = ( c0, a 0base , . . . ) (i.e., at every time step the test action at lies close to the action mean at 

> base

of the edge under a given tolerance threshold), then the EQ is passed. Otherwise, the shortest prefix of the trajectory τ that causes the failure is returned as a counterexample and added to U,forcing the learner to split states or introduce new transitions to resolve the ambiguity. 

3) Stable Phase Pruning (Phase 3 ): To recover a compact structure from the initial temporal expansion, we merge a destination node q′ into its source node q when the transition from q to q′ is triggered by c and q contains a self-loop on c,which mirrors a stable phase. 

C. PMM as a Reactive Controller 

After obtaining a PMM from data, the inference logic of this controller operates through a deterministic predict-act-update cycle. At time step t, with current state qt and grounded input 

ct, the PMM first generates a coarse action prior at

> base

. Then, given the global guidance at

> base

, the fine-grained control is realized by the residual policy πψ and the encoder ϕθ .

at 

> base

= E[λ(·| qt, c t)] , (3a) 

ct = HDBSCAN( ϕθ (ot)) , (3b) 

ˆat = at

> base

|{z} 

> Fixed

+πψ

 qt, ϕ θ (ot), a t

> base

 . (3c) Upon execution, the controller updates its internal state to 

qt+1 . In our formulation, the transition may remain ambiguous due to the probabilistic λ function. To alleviate, we exploit the observed next symbol ct+1 . Specifically, after executing the action, the controller observes ct+1 and selects the successor Fig. 3. Iterative Structure-Policy Co-Evolution. The training process alternates between augmenting dataset via clustering with learned encoder (Left ) and policy learning under the given dataset (Right ). A residual network refines the action prior from PMM and generate updated encoder for subsequent iterations. 

state whose outgoing edge signature contains this observation. Formally, the next state is determined as follows, where I(·)

prioritizes transitions whose next-input includes ct+1 , and 

P (q′ | qt, c t) is used to select the most probable transition when multiple nodes q′ are reachable from q under input ct+1 :

qt+1 = arg max 

> q′∈δ(·| qt,c t)

h

Ict+1 ∈NIS( q′) + ϵ · P (q′ | qt, c t)

i

, (4) 

D. Iterative Residual Learning and Refinement 

To identify an effective feature space that maximizes per-formance, we propose an iterative Expectation–Maximization (EM) training paradigm (see Algorithm 2 and Fig. 3) to jointly train the encoder ϕ(θ) and the residual network π(ψ).Intuitively, because discrete clustering operations block gradi-ent backpropagation, the encoder’s features and the resulting state machine structure cannot be optimized end-to-end. Thus, instead of a static one-shot pipeline, we use the EM-style algorithm to process alternates between refining the structural hypothesis (E-step) and optimizing the control policy (M-step), driven by the following joint objective: 

J (θ, ψ ) = Eτ ∼D 

h

at − ˆat 

> 2

+ λreg Lcenter 

i

. (5) where Lcenter is a regularization term pulling features towards cluster centers to maintain separability, formally defined as 

Lcenter = 12 ∥ft − μct ∥2, where ft is the encoded feature and 

μct is the centroid of its assigned cluster ct.

1) E-Step (Structure Extraction) : Given the current en-coder parameters θ(k), we freeze the feature space and perform the structure discovery pipeline. This yields updated cluster assignments Σ(k+1) and a refined PMM M(k+1) . Crucially, this step re-segments the task based on the feature space learned from the previous control iteration. 

2) M-Step (Policy Optimization) : Fixing M(k+1) , we op-timize the residual policy πψ and fine-tune the encoder ϕθ via behavior cloning. The gradient descent update is: 

θ(k+1) , ψ (k+1) ← Optimizer 



∇θ,ψ J (θ(k), ψ (k))



(6) This EM-style training procedure ensures that the encoder learns a task-relevant manifold where “states” are both struc-turally consistent (for PMM) and control-effective (for resid-uals), avoiding trivial solutions such as collapsing to a single node or overfitting to every time step. V. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we present extensive experimental results to address the following questions:  

> •

Q1 : Can ENAP achieve improved control efficacy with extracted System 2?  

> •

Q2 : Can ENAP extract semantically meaningful struc-tures from unlabeled demonstrations?  

> •

Q3 : Can ENAP exhibit the unique advantages of state machines over other symbolic structures? 

A. Experiment Setup 

We evaluate across three domains, as demonstrated in Fig. 4; detailed specifications are in the Appendix C. In the sequel, we denote our method as ENAP (·), where · specifies the policy from which the state machine is extracted. We use 

ENAP ∗ (DINO) to indicate we train DINO from scratch using Algorithm 2. All tasks are evaluated with a success rate metric. 

1) Complex Manipulation : PegInsert : focus on preci-sion insertion; DualStackCube : stack blocks (green, red) in variable orders; MultiGoalPushT : push a Tee to the either of diverse goals. In the settings, we compare with classic behavior cloning models [38, 59] and recent large-scale / generative policies [8, 21, 6]. Moreover, to approx-imate an ideal extracted state machine, we obtain an Oracle 

policy, which reliably captures the task structure, using reward-shaping training or motion planning. All models are trained on identical demonstration sets on Maniskill [43] simulator. 

2) Long-Horizon TAMP : CALVIN [40] is a widely used benchmark for long-horizon task and motion planning, requir-ing the robot to complete multi-stage manipulation sequences. We evaluate on two tasks with up to five stages. Sequential 

(Seq. ): rotate block → push block → move slider → toggle switch → light bulb, where skills follow a fixed linear order. 

Hierarchical (Hier. ): open drawer → lift block → place in drawer → lift second block → stack, where later actions depend on intermediate subgoals (e.g., robot must open the drawer before placing the cube into it). In the settings, we evaluate against multiple VLA baselines [39, 64, 51, 52], with their best-reported checkpoints. 

3) Real-World Manipulation : StackLego : Precise Lego block assembly; MultiPickPlace : color-matched object sorting; Hanger : hang the hanger on a rack. In the settings, we benchmark against the fine-tuned π0.5 model [20]. Fig. 4. Experiments in Both Simulation and Real-World. (Left ) Complex manipulation; ( Middle ) TAMP; ( Right ) Real-world scenarios. TABLE II COMPARISON ON COMPLEX MANIPULATION TASKS .

Method Param DualStack Peg 

(M) Cube (%) Insert (%) 

- Oracle 

Oracle 2.98 98 .3 ±0.4 86 .7 ±0.8

- Traditional Imitation Learning 

Transformer [59] 63 .81 38 .7 ±6.0 51 .8 ±5.5

GMM [38] 46 .11 73 .6 ±2.3 53 .1 ±2.6

- Generative & VLA Policies 

Diffusion Policy [8] 114 .39 41 .2 ±7.2 31 .1 ±6.8

OpenVLA [21] 7652 .10 69 .8 ±2.0 42 .3 ±2.8

π0 [6] 3288 .52 73 .4 ±1.2 51 .6 ±1.4

- State-Machine-Based 

ENAP (Oracle) 2.66 98 .8 ±0.3 85 .6 ±0.6

ENAP ∗ (DINO) 22.94 76 .0 ±2.0 63 .2 ±2.4    

> Fig. 5. Data-scaling comparison on DualStackCube .ENAP remains robust in low-data regimes, while other methods degrade significantly.

B. Control Efficacy & Efficiency ( Q1 )

The quantitative results (Table II) demonstrate ENAP ’s ability to efficiently distill expert behavior. When using Or-acle’s encoder ( ENAP (Oracle)), our method fully achieves comparable success rate while reducing the parameter count. This confirms that the extracted PMM serves as a compact, structured representation that captures the task’s essence with-out the overhead of massive monolithic networks. Crucially, even without access to a task-specific encoder, our framework remains effective (Table II, Table III). By employ-ing our proposed Algorithm 2 with the DINOv2 backbone, we achieve competitive success rates. This highlights ENAP ’s potential as a general-purpose algorithm capable of extracting effective policies without reliance on expert priors. To rule out the possibility that our advantage stems merely from model size suitability, we evaluate performance across varying data fractions on DualStackCube . As shown in Fig. 5, ENAP maintains high efficacy even in extremely low-data regimes (25% data). This efficiency validates that the extracted PMM captures the true underlying task topology, acting as a strong inductive bias that generalizes beyond the training distribution.                                                                         

> TABLE III REAL -W ORLD EVALUATION .
> Method Param Speed Stack Pick Hanger
> (M) (ms) Lego Place Task
> π0.5[20] 3403 6841 58 .82 76 .47 64 .71
> ENAP ∗(DINO) 23 281 88 .24 94 .12 94 .12
> TABLE IV COMPARISON ON LONG -H ORIZON TAMP T ASKS .
> Method/Param (M) Seq. (%) Hier. (%)
> 3/55/53/55/5
> HULC ( 47 ) [39] 3.0±0.33.0±0.287 .0±0.62.0±0.2
> LCD ( 68 ) [64] 11 .0±0.59.0±0.457 .2±0.75.0±0.3
> MDT ( 440 ) [51] 78 .4±0.953 .7±1.193 .8±0.821 .9±0.6
> FLOWER ( 947 ) [52] 91 .0±0.690 .6±0.590 .8±0.715 .9±0.4
> ENAP (FLOWER) ( 571 )97 .0±0.496 .8±0.395 .5±0.528 .2±0.6

For sequential reasoning tasks (Table IV; in the table, 3/5 and 5/5 denote completing the first 3 or 5 subtasks, respec-tively.), we evaluate ENAP by distilling structure directly from the latent space of a pre-trained VLA. We use FLOWER [52], an efficient flow-based vision–language–action policy that generates robot actions from multimodal observations and language goals. It demonstrates that our unsupervised structure discovery is applicable even to the token-level representations (i.e., the transformer token embeddings encoding visual and language observations), thus offering a general enhancement to the interpretability and performance of existing black-box policies. 

C. Emergent Structure Analysis ( Q2 )

For qualitative analysis, we refine the feature space by re-clustering with K-Means, using the cluster count inferred by HDBSCAN, to eliminate noise artifacts. To validate the interpretability of our learned representation, we visualize the execution of a simplified real-world task: stacking Lego blocks with blue brick at two starting locations (Fig. 6). The extracted PMM autonomously discovers a deci-sion point at node q2 (the “ Grasp ” phase), where multiple valid task branches exist due to the various task configurations (e.g., grasping the brick from multiple starting location). During inference, the specific path selection is implicitly guided by the residual network: given the visual input, the network predicts a precise action that leads to a next-step observation consistent with only one of the valid transition signatures. To move beyond qualitative inspection, we conduct a rigor-ous structural evaluation on the PegInsert task, comparing policies derived from Oracle, DINO, and GMM encoders (Fig. 7). We introduce six metrics: Fig. 6. Mechanism of Logical Branching at Decision Points. We visualize how ENAP handles multi-modal StackLego tasks. At the critical decision node ( q2), the extracted PMM identifies a branching structure based on distinct future outcomes ( q3 vs. q6). By conditioning on the current observation, the residual policy guides the transition into the correct logical mode. Here Iit and pit denote the image observation and pose at timestep t of trajectory i. The predicted action ˆat follows Eq. (3c). The feature vector ft is obtained by encoding the observation ot = [ It; pt] via the encoder ϕθ , i.e., ft = ϕθ (ot). For the state machine involving more Lego start poses, please refer to Section D-B.       

> Fig. 7. Comparison of Learned Policies from PegInsert .(Left) Radar chart of six structural metrics. (Right) Visualized PMMs for DINO and GMM variants. For the PMM from Oracle, see Fig. 1.

1) Success Rate (SR ↑);2) Success Rate weighted by Node Count (SRN ↑): 

SR/ |Q|, the efficiency of the state representation; 3) Action Prior Fidelity (APF): The MSE between the PMM’s coarse prior abase and the ground truth (ex-tremely low values may indicate overfitting to specific trajectories); 4) Loop-Transition Ratio (LVR): The ratio of self-loops to total edges; 5) Cluster Semantic Separability (CSS ↑): The ratio of intra-cluster to inter-cluster visual similarity. For each cluster, we select the representative image closest to the cluster center and compute its CLIP embedding; CSS is then computed from the pairwise embedding similarities between cluster representatives; higher values indicate semantically distinct task phases; 6) Action Separation Distance (ASD ↑): The average dis-tance between mean actions of different edges. Higher values confirm that the automaton effectively partitions the control space into distinct primitives. Among these metrics, SR , SRN , and ASD are performance-oriented measures where higher values indicate better policies, while APF , LVR , and CSS characterize structural properties of the learned automaton and serve primarily for qualitative structural analysis rather than direct optimization. The radar chart reveals an insight: the best-performing model does not simply maximize or minimize all structural metrics. Firstly, ENAP (Oracle)’s LVR and CSS strike a balance between phase stability and dynamic responsiveness, indicating an optimal task structure is a resilient abstraction that partitions the control space distinctly for the residual policy to handle. The high prior uncertainty ( APF ) suggests that the Oracle-derived PMM avoids overfitting to specific trajectory noise, learning a generalized “coarse intent”. 

D. State-Machine-Enabled Property ( Q3 )1) Recovery via Structural Loops : A unique advantage of the PMM controller is to perform autonomous failure recovery through structural loops. In the StackLego task (Fig. 8), where precise alignment is challenging without force feedback, we observe that the agent frequently exploits the self-loop on the “Align” node (Fig. 1). If the visual feedback does not match the “Insert” signature, the controller repeatedly re-attempts the adjustment. This behavior emerges naturally from the learned topology, enhancing robustness against uncertain-ties.   

> Fig. 8. Failure Recovery in StackLego .

2) Generalization via Policy Mixtures : We further investi-gate ENAP ’s capability to distill a generalist state machine TABLE V MULTI GOAL PUSH T P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON .                           

> Metric (%) DP [8] GMM [38] π0[6] ENAP (Oracle) Either 0.41 ±0.05 0.50 ±0.05 0.25 ±0.02 0.94 ±0.03
> Nearest 0.38 ±0.07 0.38 ±0.03 0.13 ±0.04 0.84 ±0.02
> Fig. 9. Ablation on Structure Discovery Parameters. Success rates across varying similarity thresholds τsim and RNN loss configurations. Black dots indicate measured data points, while the surface shows interpolated values.

from mixtures of heterogeneous policies. The fundamental advantage of policy mixture is skill transfer: by combin-ing scarce demonstrations from similar tasks into a unified, general dataset, the agent can leverage shared experiences (e.g., universal pushing mechanics) to improve overall pro-ficiency across all sub-tasks. To evaluate this, we employ the 

MultiGoalPushT task, where the agent must push a T-block to either a blue or green target. Instead of training a monolithic policy, which is notoriously difficult on multi-modal distributions due to divergent optimal trajectories av-eraging out conflicting gradients, we generate our training dataset by combining trajectories from two distinct specialist policies (one for each target, sharing a frozen vision encoder). As shown in Table V, ENAP outperforms all baselines in both the “Either” Goal metric (reaching any target, reflecting multi-modal competence) and the strict “Nearest” Goal metric (pushing toward the target closest to the initial configuration, requiring a higher spatial reasoning capability). This confirms that ENAP avoids collapsing to a single dominant behavior, successfully separating the conflicting data modes into distinct topological paths while retaining the shared pushing skills. 

E. Ablation Studies 

We investigate two critical components governing structure discovery: (1) the similarity threshold τsim , which determines the granularity of the automaton; and (2) the training of the RNN, which motivates state differentiation. As visualized in Fig. 9, performance with an intermediate τsim and all RNN training losses peaks, validating the efficacy of our design. Additional ablations are provided in Section D-A. VI. D ISCUSSION : A POMDP P ERSPECTIVE 

We formulate the justification for ENAP ’s bi-level archi-tecture by aligning it with the Bellman equation. Consider the true value function V (q, o, s ) of the underlying POMDP, conditioned on the latent task mode q, observation o, and environment state s. The Bellman equation decomposes as: 

V (q, o, s ) = X

> a,q ′

P (q′, a | q, o )

h

R(s, a )+ γ X

> s′,o ′

P (s′, o ′ | s, a ) V (q′, o ′, s ′)

i (7) where the joint transition-policy distribution P (q′, a |q, o ) rep-resents the coupled decision process: choosing an action a and transitioning to a new internal mode q′. In our framework, this distribution is explicitly factorized using the PMM structure: 

P (q′, a | q, o ) = δ(q′|q, c )

| {z }

> Topological Transition

· X

> at
> base

λ(at

> base

|q, c )

| {z }

> Action Prior

· πψ (a | q, o, a t

> base

)

| {z }

> Residual Correction

(8) The PMM captures the global dynamics ( δ) and coarse intent ( λ), leaving the neural network to focus solely on the local residual term πψ . This reduces the complexity of the function approximation task, explaining the framework’s high sample efficiency. Furthermore, by augmenting the state space to ˜s = ( q, o ),we enable planning over the belief space. The value function over this augmented state is given by: 

ˆV (˜ s) = max 

> a

"

ˆr(˜ s, a ) + γ X

> ˜s′

ˆP˜s(˜ s′|˜s, a ) ˆV (˜ s′)

#

(9) Assuming the learned PMM states Q effectively summarize the history h (i.e., q is a sufficient statistic), we have the approximation ˆV (˜ s) ≈ Es∼P (s|h)[V (q, o, s )] . Our explicit recording of next-input signatures on PMM edges serves to approximate the transition dynamics ˆP˜s, allowing the agent to deterministically track its state ˜s and execute optimal planning. VII. C ONCLUSION 

What is a good abstraction? Defining a “good” abstraction is ill-posed, as the appropriate granularity differs across contexts. In our paper, abstraction quality is performance-driven: the op-timal structure is the one that best minimizes the downstream policy objective, which is why different network backbones yield divergent abstractions (Fig. 7). 

Limitations. First, the quality of the emergent structure is sensitive hyperparameters. Furthermore, scaling to cross-task and cross-embodiment settings remains an open direction, for instance, by extracting abstractions over the semantic token spaces of generalist VLA models. In this work, we presented ENAP , a framework for learning emergent neural automaton policies from visuomotor trajec-tories. By unifying active automata inference with residual control, ENAP unsupervisedly discovers a bi-level structure where a discrete Mealy machine governs high-level planning and networks handle continuous execution. This representation not only enables sample-efficient learning in long-horizon tasks but also provides an explicit, interpretable map of the agent’s latent decision logic, thus offering a viable path toward generalizable and interpretable intelligence. REFERENCES 

[1] Christopher Amato, Blai Bonet, and Shlomo Zilberstein. Finite-state controllers based on mealy machines for cen-tralized and decentralized pomdps. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 24, pages 1052–1058, 2010. 3 [2] Dana Angluin. Learning regular sets from queries and counterexamples. Information and computation , 75(2): 87–106, 1987. 3 [3] Masataro Asai and Alex Fukunaga. Classical planning in deep latent space: Bridging the subsymbolic-symbolic boundary. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. 2 [4] Paul B Badcock, Karl J Friston, Maxwell JD Ramstead, Annemie Ploeger, and Jakob Hohwy. The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience , 19(6):1319–1351, 2019. 2 [5] Mattijs Baert, Sam Leroux, and Pieter Simoens. Learning task specifications from demonstrations as probabilistic automata. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 8267–8274. IEEE, 2025. 3 [6] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. 7, 8, 10 [7] Anthony R Cassandra. A survey of pomdp applica-tions. In Working notes of AAAI 1998 fall symposium on planning with partially observable Markov decision processes , volume 1724, 1998. 3 [8] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10-11):1684–1704, 2025. 7, 8, 10 [9] Rohan Chitnis, Tom Silver, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tomas Lozano-Perez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning neuro-symbolic relational transition models for bilevel planning. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 4166– 4173. IEEE, 2022. 2 [10] Glen Chou, Necmiye Ozay, and Dmitry Berenson. Ex-plaining multi-stage tasks by learning temporal logic formulas from suboptimal demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02411 , 2020. 3 [11] Alexander Clark. Distributional learning of some context-free languages with a minimally adequate teacher. In International Colloquium on Grammatical Inference , pages 24–37. Springer, 2010. 4 [12] Bruno Da Silva, George Konidaris, and Andrew Barto. Learning parameterized skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6398 , 2012. 2 [13] Mohamad H Danesh, Anurag Koul, Alan Fern, and Saeed Khorram. Re-understanding finite-state representations of recurrent policy networks, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2006 , 3745. 3 [14] Sahil Rajesh Dhayalkar. Neural networks as universal finite-state machines: A constructive deterministic finite automaton theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11694 ,2025. 3 [15] Michael R Fellows and Michael A Langston. An analogue of the myhill-nerode theorem and its use in computing finite-basis characterizations. In 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 520–525. IEEE, 1989. 3 [16] Caelan Reed Garrett, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of the international conference on automated planning and scheduling , volume 30, pages 440–448, 2020. 2 [17] Georgios Giantamidis, Stavros Tripakis, and Stylianos Basagiannis. Learning moore machines from input– output traces. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer , 23(1):1–29, 2021. 3 [18] Edward Groshev, Maxwell Goldstein, Aviv Tamar, Sid-dharth Srivastava, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning general-ized reactive policies using deep neural networks. In Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , volume 28, pages 408–416, 2018. 2 [19] Huihui Guo, Fan Wu, Yunchuan Qin, Ruihui Li, Keqin Li, and Kenli Li. Recent trends in task and motion plan-ning for robotics: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys ,55(13s):1–36, 2023. 1 [20] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. 

π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. 7, 8 [21] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 1, 2, 7, 8 [22] George Konidaris and Andrew Barto. Skill discovery in continuous reinforcement learning domains using skill chaining. Advances in neural information processing systems , 22, 2009. 2 [23] George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. From skills to symbols: Learning sym-bolic representations for abstract high-level planning. 

Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:215–289, 2018. 3 [24] George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. From skills to symbols: Learning sym-bolic representations for abstract high-level planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:215–289, 2018. 2 [25] Anurag Koul, Sam Greydanus, and Alan Fern. Learning finite state representations of recurrent policy networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12530 , 2018. 3 [26] Hadas Kress-Gazit, Morteza Lahijanian, and Vasumathi Raman. Synthesis for robots: Guarantees and feedback for robot behavior. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 1(1):211–236, 2018. 3 [27] Sanjay Krishnan, Animesh Garg, Sachin Patil, Colin Lea, Gregory Hager, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Tran-sition state clustering: Unsupervised surgical trajectory segmentation for robot learning. The International jour-nal of robotics research , 36(13-14):1595–1618, 2017. 2 [28] Bowen Li, Tom Silver, Sebastian Scherer, and Alexander Gray. Bilevel learning for bilevel planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08697 , 2025. 2 [29] Yongming Li and Witold Pedrycz. The equivalence between fuzzy mealy and fuzzy moore machines. Soft Computing , 10(10):953–959, 2006. 3 [30] Pierrick Lorang, Hong Lu, Johannes Huemer, Patrik Zips, and Matthias Scheutz. Few-shot neuro-symbolic imitation learning for long-horizon planning and acting. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21501 , 2025. 2 [31] Jan Lunze and Franc ¸oise Lamnabhi-Lagarrigue. Hand-book of hybrid systems control: theory, tools, applica-tions . Cambridge University Press, 2009. 2 [32] Xusheng Luo and Changliu Liu. Simultaneous task al-location and planning for multi-robots under hierarchical temporal logic specifications. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. 3 [33] Tengfei Ma, Patrick Ferber, Siyu Huo, Jie Chen, and Michael Katz. Online planner selection with graph neural networks and adaptive scheduling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 5077–5084, 2020. 2 [34] Yueen Ma, Zixing Song, Yuzheng Zhuang, Jianye Hao, and Irwin King. A survey on vision-language-action models for embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14093 , 2024. 1 [35] Steven Macenski, Tully Foote, Brian Gerkey, Chris Lalancette, and William Woodall. Robot operating sys-tem 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild. Science robotics , 7(66):eabm6074, 2022. 2 [36] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12584 ,2019. 2 [37] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and Steve Astels. Hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering. Journal of Open Source Software , 2(11):205, 2017. 4 [38] Geoffrey J McLachlan and Suren Rathnayake. On the number of components in a gaussian mixture model. Wi-ley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowl-edge Discovery , 4(5):341–355, 2014. 7, 8, 10 [39] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in language conditioned robotic imitation learning over unstructured data. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(4):11205–11212, 2022. 7, 8 [40] Oier Mees, Lukas Hermann, Erick Rosete-Beas, and Wolfram Burgard. Calvin: A benchmark for language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot ma-nipulation tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,7(3):7327–7334, 2022. 7 [41] Christoph Molnar, Giuseppe Casalicchio, and Bernd Bis-chl. Interpretable machine learning–a brief history, state-of-the-art and challenges. In Joint European confer-ence on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pages 417–431. Springer, 2020. 2 [42] Tong Mu, Yihao Liu, and Mehran Armand. Look before you leap: Using serialized state machine for lan-guage conditioned robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05114 , 2025. 3 [43] Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang, Zhiwei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill: Generalizable manipulation skill bench-mark with large-scale demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.14483 , 2021. 7 [44] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marcin Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaa El-Nouby, and Mahmoud Assran. Dinov2: Learning ro-bust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. 5 [45] Yiyuan Pan, Zhe Liu, and Hesheng Wang. Wonder wins ways: Curiosity-driven exploration through multi-agent contextual calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20648 ,2025. 2 [46] Yiyuan Pan, Yunzhe Xu, Zhe Liu, and Hesheng Wang. Planning from imagination: Episodic simulation and episodic memory for vision-and-language navigation. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence , volume 39, pages 6345–6353, 2025. 2 [47] Yiyuan Pan, Yunzhe Xu, Zhe Liu, and Hesheng Wang. Seeing through uncertainty: Robust task-oriented optimization in visual navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00441 , 2025. 1 [48] Hanna M Pasula, Luke S Zettlemoyer, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning symbolic models of stochastic domains. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 29: 309–352, 2007. 2 [49] Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph Lim. Accel-erating reinforcement learning with learned skill priors. In Conference on robot learning , pages 188–204. PMLR, 2021. 2 [50] Michael Poli, Stefano Massaroli, Luca Scimeca, Sanghyuk Chun, Seong Joon Oh, Atsushi Yamashita, Hajime Asama, Jinkyoo Park, and Animesh Garg. Neural hybrid automata: Learning dynamics with multiple modes and stochastic transitions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:9977–9989, 2021. 2 [51] Moritz Reuss, ¨Omer Erdinc ¸ Ya˘ gmurlu, Fabian Wenzel, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Multimodal diffusion transformer: Learning versatile behavior from multimodal goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05996 , 2024. 7, 8 [52] Moritz Reuss, Hongyi Zhou, Marcel R¨ uhle, ¨ Omer Erdinc ¸Ya˘ gmurlu, Fabian Otto, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Flower: Democratizing generalist robot policies with efficient vision-language-action flow policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04996 , 2025. 7, 8 [53] Pierre Sermanet, Tianli Ding, Jeffrey Zhao, Fei Xia, Debidatta Dwibedi, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Chris-tine Chan, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Sharath Maddineni, Nikhil J Joshi, et al. Robovqa: Multimodal long-horizon reasoning for robotics. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 645–652. IEEE, 2024. 1 [54] Ankit Shah, Pritish Kamath, Shen Li, Patrick Craven, Kevin Landers, Kevin Oden, and Julie Shah. Supervised bayesian specification inference from demonstrations. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , 42(14): 1245–1264, 2023. 2 [55] Muzammil Shahbaz and Roland Groz. Inferring mealy machines. In International Symposium on Formal Meth-ods , pages 207–222. Springer, 2009. 3 [56] Tom Silver. Neuro-Symbolic Learning for Bilevel Robot Planning . PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology, 2024. 2 [57] Tom Silver, Rohan Chitnis, Aidan Curtis, Joshua BTenenbaum, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, and Leslie Pack Kael-bling. Planning with learned object importance in large problem instances using graph neural networks. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 35, pages 11962–11971, 2021. 2 [58] Tom Silver, Ashay Athalye, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning neuro-symbolic skills for bilevel planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10680 , 2022. 2 [59] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 7, 8 [60] Marcell Vazquez-Chanlatte, Susmit Jha, Ashish Tiwari, Mark K Ho, and Sanjit Seshia. Learning task spec-ifications from demonstrations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. 3 [61] Yanwei Wang, Nadia Figueroa, Shen Li, Ankit Shah, and Julie Shah. Temporal logic imitation: Learning plan-satisficing motion policies from demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04632 , 2022. 2 [62] Zeming Wei, Xiyue Zhang, and Meng Sun. Extracting weighted finite automata from recurrent neural networks for natural languages. In International Conference on Formal Engineering Methods , pages 370–385. Springer, 2022. 3 [63] Weixiao Zhan, Qiyue Dong, Eduardo Sebasti´ an, and Nikolay Atanasov. Latmos: Latent automaton task model from observation sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08090 , 2025. 3 [64] Edwin Zhang, Yujie Lu, William Wang, and Amy Zhang. Language control diffusion: Efficiently scaling through space, time, and tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.15629 ,2022. 7, 8 [65] Yihao Zhang, Zeming Wei, and Meng Sun. Au-tomata extraction from transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05564 , 2024. 3 [66] Zhigen Zhao, Shuo Cheng, Yan Ding, Ziyi Zhou, Shiqi Zhang, Danfei Xu, and Ye Zhao. A survey of optimization-based task and motion planning: From clas-sical to learning approaches. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , 2024. 1 APPENDIX A

L∗ ALGORITHM WALKTHROUGH : C LASSICAL VS . O URS 

A. L∗ Algorithm 

To provide intuition for the L∗ algorithm, we present a concrete example of learning a target FSM that accepts strings with an even number of a’s and b’s. We initialize the observation table with prefixes U = {ϵ}

(candidate states, top portion) and test suffixes E = {ϵ}

(distinguishing experiments, columns); see Tab. VI. The lower portion consists of one-step extensions U · Σ obtained via Membership Queries (MQs). Let row (u) denote the output vector associated with a prefix u over all tests in E. The table is closed if every transition signature in the lower portion is represented in the upper portion. Since the signature of prefix a (row (a) = [0] ) differs from that of the initial state (row (ϵ) = [1] ), the table is not closed. We then move a into 

U (adding it to the upper portion) to introduce a new state, and automatically generate its one-step extensions ( a · Σ) to populate the lower portion. This results in Tab. VII, where 

· denotes a one-step extension. The table is now both closed and consistent (i.e., equivalent states do not lead to conflicting future transitions), yielding the hypothesis M1 as in Fig.10. 

> TABLE VI INITIAL
> HYPOTHESIS

T1 ϵϵ 1

a 0

b 0

> TABLE VII UPDATED
> HYPOTHESIS

T1 ϵϵ 1

a 0

b 0

a · a 1

a · b 0  

> Fig. 10. Hypothesis M1

However, M1 fails to accept the counterexample bb . To address this, we incorporate bb along with all its prefixes (in this case, only b) into the state set U, forming the upper portion of Tab. VIII. As a result, the lower portion is automatically extended by issuing Membership Queries (MQs) for all one-step extensions ( u · c for u ∈ U , c ∈ Σ). Initially, this addition makes the table inconsistent . Specif-ically, under the single test ϵ, states a and b appear indis-tinguishable (row (a) = row (b) = [0] ). However, extending them with symbol a exposes a behavioral discrepancy, since row (a · a) = [1] ̸ = row (b · a) = [0] . To resolve this structural ambiguity, we must introduce the distinguishing suffix a as an additional test column in E. The resulting table, shown as Tab. VIII, successfully separates the previously confounded states a and b, and yields the updated hypothesis M2.Although Tab. VIII resolves the immediate inconsistency, subsequent equivalence queries and closure checks reveal fur-ther structural deficits (e.g., distinguishing the states reached via b and ab ). The L∗ algorithm naturally iterates through alternating phases of state promotion (to restore closedness) and suffix addition (to restore consistency). After adding the suffix b and promoting the necessary intermediate prefixes (such as ab ), the algorithm converges to Tab. IX. This final  

> TABLE VIII CLOSED BUT INCONSISTENT

T2 ϵ aϵ 1 0

a 0 1

b 0 0

bb 1 0

aa 1 0

ab 0 0

b · a 0 0

bb · a 0 1

bb · b 0 0 Fig. 11. Hypothesis M2 

> TABLE IX FINAL HYPOTHESIS

T3 ϵ a bϵ 1 0 0

a 0 1 0

b 0 0 1

bb 1 0 0

ab 0 0 0

abb 0 1 0

aa 1 0 0

ba 0 0 0

bba 0 1 0

bbb 0 0 1

ab · a 0 0 1

abb · a 1 0 0

abb · b 0 0 0 Fig. 12. Final M3

table is strictly closed and consistent, successfully identifying the four distinct states isomorphic to the target language. 

B. Extended L∗ Algorithm (Algorithm 1) 1) Experiment Setup : To provide a transparent walk-through of the structure extraction process, we utilize the discrete 4 × 4 FrozenLake environment, where the agent can choose actions {Up( U), Down( D), Right( R), Left( L)} to reach the goal; see Fig. 13. We use RNNs with random initialization. Since the state space is inherently discrete, we bypass the clustering phase and map the grid position directly to the input alphabet Σ, such that the symbol ct corresponds to the grid index (e.g., c14 represents position 14). We collect two successful trajectories from Start ( c0) to Goal ( c15 ) that share a common history but diverge at a decision point c9. 

> •

τ1: c0

> D

−→ c4

> D

−→ c8

> R

−→ c9

> D

−→ c13 

> R

−→ c14 

> R

−→ c15  

> •

τ2: c0

> D

−→ c4

> D

−→ c8

> R

−→ c9

> R

−→ c10 

> D

−→ c14 

> R

−→ c15 

2) Iteration : This setup is specifically chosen to demon-strate how the algorithm iteratively discovers the topological branching at state c9 and the subsequent state convergence at c14 . In the following figures, edges are annotated with the tuple: input symbol, action list, probability, and NIS( ·).The algorithm initializes with the start state q0 (history ϵ)and expands via Self-Supervised MQ to find reachable states. It identifies q1 (history 0) via the transition enabled by c0;see Fig. 14. However, due to limited exploration, the initial hypothesis only loops at q1. Running the NFA-style EQ on trajectory τ1 reveals a failure: the sequence c0

> D

−→ c4

> D

−→ c8

cannot be explained. The prefix (c0, c 4, c 8) is returned as a counterexample.  

> Fig. 13. FrozenLake Map .

Adding the counterexample to the prefix set U triggers Closed-ness checks, expanding the state space to cover the history c0 →

c4 → c8. The new hypothesis (Fig. 15) successfully models the linear path up to c9. However, it fails to validly explain the diver-gence into c13 or c10 . The prefix 

(c0, c 4, c 8, c 9, c 13 ) is returned as a counterexample. Incorporating the new counterexample, the algorithm dis-covers the critical branching state q4 in Fig. 16. The MQ reveals two distinct transitions from q4: one leading to q5

and another leading to q4 itself via self-loop c10 . The hy-pothesis now captures the “lower” path ( τ1) correctly but still misinterprets the “upper” path ( τ2) convergence, failing at 

(c0, c 4, c 8, c 9, c 10 , c 14 ).The final counterexample forces the expansion of the “lower” path state q6 (history c0 → · · · → c10 ). Crucially, the MQ discovers that both q5 (from τ1) and q6 (from τ2)transition to the same next-step region under input c14 , which maps to a unified state q7. The resulting hypothesis ( Stable Phase Pruning applied; see Fig. 17) correctly models the full topology: common past → branching → convergence. The EQ finds no further counterexamples, and the hypothesis stabilizes. APPENDIX BTHEORETICAL MOTIVATION FOR RNN E NCODER 

Our framework relies on the premise that the continuous hidden states of a trained RNN can represent the discrete states of an FSM. This architectural choice is theoretically motivated by the saturation (the hidden states ht ∈ Rh tend to cluster around the vertices of the hypercube {± 1}d as training pro-gresses) dynamics of RNNs with tanh activations. This allows us to treat the continuous vector space as an approximation of a discrete state space. The following proposition formalizes the conditions under which cosine similarity serves as a reliable metric for distinguishing these discrete states. 

Proposition B.1 (Identifiability via ϵ-Saturated RNNs): Let 

h1, h 2 ∈ Rh be two normalized hidden state vectors. Let 

˜h1, ˜h2 ∈ {± 1}d be their corresponding saturated discrete versions. Assume the RNN operates in an ϵ-saturated regime, such that ∥hi − ˜hi∥2 ≤ ϵ for i ∈ { 1, 2}. Then, if the cosine similarity satisfies: 

cos( h1, h 2) ≥ 1 − κ with √κ < √2

 1

√d − ϵ



,

The two vectors correspond to the same discrete automaton state (i.e., ˜h1 = ˜h2). 

Proof: By the triangle inequality, the distance between the discrete states is bounded by: 

∥˜h1 − ˜h2∥2 = ∥˜h1 − h1 + h1 − h2 + h2 − ˜h2∥2

≤ ∥ ˜h1 − h1∥2 + ∥h1 − h2∥2 + ∥h2 − ˜h2∥2

≤ 2ϵ + ∥h1 − h2∥2.

Since saturated RNN states take discrete values in {± 1}d,the minimum non-zero Euclidean distance between any two distinct vertices is 2. Then, using the relationship between Euclidean distance and cosine similarity for normalized vec-tors: ∥h1 − h2∥2 = p2(1 − cos( h1, h 2)) . Given the condition 

cos( h1, h 2) ≥ 1−κ, we have ∥h1 −h2∥2 ≤ √2κ. Substituting this into the inequality: 

∥˜h1 − ˜h2∥2 ≤ 2ϵ + √2κ. 

For ˜h1 and ˜h2 to be the same state, the error bound must be strictly less than the minimum distance between distinct discrete states. The condition √κ < √2(1 /√d − ϵ) ensures that the vectors fall within the same decision boundary of the discrete state, implying ˜h1 = ˜h2.This result confirms that by enforcing saturation and using a strict cosine threshold, we can rigorously recover the under-lying discrete phases from the continuous RNN embeddings. APPENDIX CEXPERIMENTS : I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

A. Task Specifications 

We evaluate ENAP across three domains, each with dis-tinct robotic platforms and observation spaces. For Complex Manipulation , we utilize the ManiSkill benchmark (Franka Emika Panda arm), providing the agent with RGB images and proprioceptive states. For Long-Horizon TAMP , we adopt the CALVIN environment (Franka Panda arm), where observa-tions include base and wrist camera feeds alongside language task descriptions. Finally, our Real-World Manipulation ex-periments employ a Kinova Gen3 arm, accessing base/wrist camera streams and end-effector pose. We collected ∼400 and 

∼25 trajectories for each task in the simulated and real-world experiments, respectively. Specific task definitions and success criteria are detailed below. 

1) PegInsertionSide (Sim) : This task requires picking up a bi-colored peg and inserting either the orange or white end into a horizontal box hole. The environment features significant variability: peg lengths are sampled from U [0 .15 , 0.20] m and radii from U [0 .015 , 0.025] m, with initial poses randomized in position and rotation. Success is defined as inserting either end at least 0.03 m into the hole (radius rpeg + 0 .02 m). 

2) DualStackCube (Sim) : The agent must stack two col-ored cubes (Red/Green) in any valid vertical configuration. Cube positions are initialized uniformly within a 0.2m × 0.4mregion. A trial is considered successful only if the top cube aligns within half-width of the bottom cube, remains static, and is fully released by the gripper. Fig. 14. Iteration 1 : Initial hypothesis. Fig. 15. Iteration 2 : Linear chain extension. 

Fig. 16. Iteration 3 : Discovery of the decision point. 

Fig. 17. Iteration 4 : Stabilized hypothesis capturing the full topology. 

3) MultiGoalPushT (Sim) : A multi-modal variant of the Push-T task where the agent must maneuver a T-shaped block to one of two potential target poses, with success defined either by reaching any valid target or the nearest one depending on the evaluation setting. The T-block’s initial pose is fully randomized. Success is achieved when the intersection-over-union (IoU) between the block and the designated target silhouette exceeds 0.90 .

4) Sequential (Sim) : The task enforces a strict causal chain: (1) rotate the red block right ( > 60 ◦ yaw); (2) push the blue block left ( x-displacement < −0.1m); (3) move the slider right (joint ∆ < −0.15 ); (4) toggle the LED switch; and (5) turn on the light bulb. 

5) Hierarchical (Sim) : The task combines articulated ob-ject manipulation and imposes temporal logic (e.g., a drawer must be opened before placing the block inside it): (1) open the drawer (joint ∆ ≥ 0.12 ); (2) lift the red block from the table ( z > 0.05 m); (3) place it inside the drawer; (4) lift the pink block from the slider ( z > 0.03 m); and (5) stack it onto another object (static stability required). 

6) Hanger (Real) : The task requires unhooking a clothes hanger from one end of a rack and transferring it to the opposite side. An obstacle in the middle prevents direct lateral movement, forcing a complex lift-over trajectory. Success is defined as the hanger being stably hooked on the target side. 

7) MultiPickPlace (Real) : It involves sorting three colored cans (red, green, blue) into corresponding bowls (red, green, blue) fixed on the table. The cans are initialized randomly on the same side, requiring the agent to identify and match object-container pairs. 

8) StackLego (Real) : The task demands high-precision as-sembly without force feedback. A blue Lego brick is initialized at discrete locations on a green base plate and must be stacked onto a fixed red brick. We adopt a graded success metric: 1.0 for a full insertion (studs interlocked) and 0.5 for a stable stack (brick resting on top) without interlocking. 

TABLE X NETWORK ARCHITECTURES FOR COMPLEX MANIPULATION .Component ENAP (Oracle) ENAP ∗ (DINO)                                 

> - Encoder Architecture
> Visual Backbone NatureCNN (3-layer Conv) DINOv2 ViT-S/14 (Frozen) Visual Head Linear →256 Spatial Softmax →MLP →256 Proprioception Linear →256 Fourier (7-freq) →SpecNorm →128
> - Feature Dimensions (Vis + Pos [+ Delta Pos])
> StackCube 512 (256+256) 384 (256+128)
> Peg /PushT 512 (256+256+0) 512 (256+128+128)
> - Residual Policy Network (Hidden Units)
> StackCube 512 512
> Peg /PushT 256 256
> - PMM Structure Discovery
> RNN Encoder Hidden Dim 64 State Embed Learnable Embedding (Dim 16)

TABLE XI NETWORK ARCHITECTURES FOR LONG -H ORIZON TAMP.                           

> Component ENAP (FLOWER)
> - Encoder Architecture
> Visual Backbone Florence-2 DaVit (Frozen) Language Encoder Florence-2 Text Encoder Fusion Concat →Florence-2 Encoder →Mean Pool Feature Dim 1024
> - Residual Policy Network
> Architecture Linear (2118 →256) →ReLU →Linear (256 →70) Hidden Units 256 Output 70-dim Action Sequence ( 10 ×7)
> - PMM Structure Discovery
> RNN Encoder Hidden Dim 64 State Embed Learnable Embedding (Dim 16) Input Dim Action (70) + State Embed (16)

B. Network Architecture 

To ensure reproducibility, we detail the specific architectures for the encoders, RNNs, and residual networks, along with the hyperparameters used for training and structure discovery. We provide detailed network specifications for the complex Fig. 18. Impact of Phase-Aware Contrastive Loss. Without phase-aware contrastive loss, the automaton is fragmented with ambiguous transitions.      

> Fig. 19. Generalization of Structural Branching. Instead of overfitting to six distinct branches, the model discovers three logical pathways ( q2, q 4, q 5), grouping visually and kinetically similar poses (e.g., along the line of sight) into shared phases. TABLE XII NETWORK ARCHITECTURES FOR REAL -W ORLD MANIPULATION .

Component ENAP ∗ (DINO) 

- Encoder Architecture 

Visual Backbone DINOv2 ViT-S/14 (Frozen) Visual Head Spatial Softmax → MLP (768 →128) Proprioception Fourier (7-freq) → SpecNorm → 128 Fusion Base (128) + Wrist (128) + Prop (128) = 384 

- Policy Network 

Residual MLP Linear (771 → 256) → ReLU → Output (3) Gripper Head MLP (Feat + Center → 128 → 2) Controller Cartesian PID ( Kp=5.0, Kd=0.4) 

- PMM Structure Discovery 

RNN Encoder Hidden Dim 64 State Embed Learnable Embedding 

manipulation tasks, the long-horizon TAMP tasks, and the real-world task in Table X, Table XI and Table XII, respectively. APPENDIX DEXPERIMENTS : F URTHER ANALYSIS 

A. Impact of Contrastive Loss on PMM 

To further validate our design, we visualize the impact of the phase-aware contrastive loss Lcontrast on the extracted PMM structure in Fig. 18. We apply K-means clustering with the number of effective clusters inferred by HDBSCAN to filter out noise points. When training the RNN without this loss (Top), the resulting automaton is fragmented and highly stochastic, with numerous spurious transitions. This indicates that the latent states fail to effectively summarize history. This confirms that explicitly shaping the latent geometry is crucial for discovering interpretable and control-relevant structures. 

B. Adaptive Abstraction in Complex Multi-Modal Tasks 

We further investigate the scaling of structure discovery by extending the StackLego task to six initial positions. We assign points from the noise cluster obtained by HDBSCAN to the nearest valid cluster. As shown in Fig. 19, the extracted PMM does not naively spawn six separate branches; instead, it adaptively groups kinetically similar poses (e.g., those aligned along the camera’s optical axis) into three shared latent modes. This demonstrates that ENAP is not merely memorizing task instances but is optimizing for a compact policy representa-tion that minimizes the residual learning burden, effectively discovering the “minimal sufficient structure” for control.