Title: Bilevel Planning with Learned Symbolic Abstractions from Interaction Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08599v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:43:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Bilevel Planning with Learned Symbolic Abstractions from Interaction Data 

Fatih Dogangun 1, Burcu Kilic 1, Serdar Bahar 1, Emre Ugur 1

Abstract —Intelligent agents must reason over both continuous dynamics and discrete representations to generate effective plans in complex environments. Previous studies have shown that symbolic abstractions can emerge from neural effect predictors trained with a robot’s unsupervised exploration. However, these methods rely on deterministic symbolic domains, lack mecha-nisms to verify the generated symbolic plans, and operate only at the abstract level, often failing to capture the continuous dynam-ics of the environment. To overcome these limitations, we propose a bilevel neuro-symbolic framework in which learned probabilis-tic symbolic rules generate candidate plans rapidly at the high level, and learned continuous effect models verify these plans and perform forward search when necessary at the low level. Our experiments on multi-object manipulation tasks demonstrate that the proposed bilevel method outperforms symbolic-only approaches, reliably identifying failing plans through verification, and achieves planning performance statistically comparable to continuous forward search while resolving most problems via efficient symbolic reasoning. 

Index Terms —Deep Learning Methods, Learning Categories and Concepts, Bilevel Planning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Building robotic agents that can sense, plan, and act in continuous environments requires reasoning about the possi-ble future states and effects of actions. However, reasoning directly in high-dimensional state space quickly becomes computationally intractable, since even simple tasks may have a large number of possible (or even an infinite number of) solu-tions in the continuous sensorimotor space of the robots. This motivates the need to learn high-level concepts that abstract task-related structures in the environment, thus reducing the complexity and enabling the use of efficient AI planners [1]. Beyond efficiency, such abstractions provide a mechanism for generalization, as once an environment is represented in an abstract model, high-level reasoning about transitions can be applied to different problem settings within that environment. In this regard, a key challenge is automatically acquiring abstractions that are both tractable to learn and expressive enough for planning. There have been methods that rely on manually constructed state representations for planning; however, symbols defined this way are limited in their scope and scalability [2]. To obtain generalizable state abstractions, relational representations that capture object-object interactions (e.g., “x on y”) are crucial. Early relational symbol learning approaches, such as [3], proposed a robot-teaching scheme where the robot actively   

> This work has been supported by the INVERSE project (no. 101136067), funded by the EU.
> 1Bogazici University

generates different situations to learn grounded relational sym-bols from human labeling. In a more recent approach [4], inter-object representations were invented by capturing frequent relative states from raw demonstrations. However, these works required either human labeling or human demonstrations, which limit their scalability and autonomy. [5] discusses that symbols can emerge from the robot’s exploration within the environment. In this context, [6] utilized symbols that emerged from a bottleneck layer of an encoder-decoder-based effect predictor neural network. These studies have demonstrated success in high-level relational symbol emergence through the robot’s random exploration of the state space, and planning with the learned symbolic transitions in an end-to-end fashion. Although symbolic state abstractions enable efficient high-level reasoning in robotics, they are inevitably lossy [7], and often fail to account for intricate geometric or dynamic constraints, leading to failed executions. In this regard, a verification method to confirm generated symbolic plans, and the use of a more accurate model that specializes in environ-ment dynamics, enhancing the expressivity of the planning domain, can help mitigate the shortcomings of abstracting complex environments. This motivation suggests the use of a bilevel planning framework, which would combine the efficiency of symbolic planning at the high level with the precision of continuous search at the low level [8], [9]. Within such a framework, continuous search through multi-step effect predictions can facilitate the verification of symbolic plans while providing a basis for low-level planning when symbolic reasoning alone is insufficient. In this work, inspired by [6], we employ an encoder-decoder-based neural network architecture to learn state ab-stractions by predicting effects and to extract symbolic opera-tors from interaction data to perform symbolic planning using off-the-shelf AI models [10]. While this approach enables learning predicates for efficient planning, it relies on determin-istic symbolic domains, lacks a mechanism to assess whether the generated symbolic plan will succeed in the continuous domain, and provides no fallback when the symbolic plan fails to capture the true dynamics. To address these limitations, our contributions are as follows:  

> •

We propose a bilevel planning framework that encom-passes planning at both symbolic and continuous levels, where continuous search serves as a fallback for problems that remain unsolved at the abstract level.  

> •

We introduce a dual-model approach in which a symbolic model learns symbolic representations and probabilistic operators for high-level planning, while a forward dy-namics model provides accurate effect predictions for plan verification and continuous forward search when no 

> arXiv:2603.08599v1 [cs.RO] 9 Mar 2026 2

verified symbolic plan is available.  

> •

We introduce a verification mechanism that utilizes the continuous effect predictions to predict outcomes of can-didate symbolic plans before execution, bridging the sym-bolic and continuous levels of the proposed framework. We evaluate the proposed bilevel planning framework on multi-object manipulation tasks. Our results demonstrate that the proposed framework outperforms the prior approach, which relies solely on deterministic domains, and achieves planning performance comparable to that of continuous for-ward search (with no statistically significant difference) while solving the majority of problems through symbolic reasoning and resorting to more expensive search in the continuous state space only when required. We further show that employing a probabilistic planning domain [11] captures a richer set of environmental behaviours compared to deterministic op-erators by including stochastic outcomes, thereby improving the planning performance. Moreover, we validate the dual-model scheme by analyzing the planning performance across both symbolic and continuous domains, and we also assess the classification performance of the verification mechanism to demonstrate its reliability. II. R ELATED WORK 

There is a large body of work that focuses on state ab-straction for planning [2]. A key requirement for constructing a symbolic domain is learning the preconditions and effects associated with actions, as these enable the reasoning behind state transitions [12]–[14]. For this, [15]–[17] compressed the continuous state space in an autoencoder module via unsuper-vised learning, then encoded the symbolic transitions to enable high-level planning. More recently, arguing that the symbols to be formed should take into account their subsequent prediction performance, effect-predictor deep neural networks were used to discover symbolic state representations in [18], and the symbolic transitions were utilized for probabilistic high-level planning. In follow-up work, [19] added self-attention layers to enable multi-object representations and learned relational symbols, while [6] utilized these abstractions to generate symbolic transitions, thereby acquiring planning capability in multi-object manipulation tasks. Once symbolic representations are obtained, off-the-shelf planning frameworks can be leveraged for efficient search. Many studies used frameworks such as PDDL [20], and its probabilistic extension PPDDL1.0 [11], classical planners like Fast-Downward [10] and Fast-Forward [21] as off-the-shelf models for symbolic planning in both deterministic and stochastic domains. [8] proposed a bottom-up method for probabilistic operator learning and used these for task and motion planning (TAMP) systems. In [9], relational transition models were learned in order to perform hierarchical planning consisting of symbolic and continuous levels. [7], [22], [23] learned predicates and proposed a framework to use these symbolic operators for bilevel planning; however, they have used oracle demonstrators with manually defined abstractions to collect transition data. [24] proposed a high-level planning with probabilistic effects by using a PPDDL domain [11], and [25] extended the probabilistic planning with symbolic representation learning by using parameterized skills. In a recent work [26], a vector-quantization method was employed to cluster demonstrations into discrete skill representations, which were then utilized in a bilevel planning pipeline where an LLM performs high-level planning. In this study, instead of providing demonstrations or foundational model input, we use the robot’s own unsupervised interaction experience in a bilevel planning framework that leverages the efficiency of probabilistic symbolic planning and the accuracy of grounded continuous state planning. Since symbolic abstractions often discard geometric and dy-namic information, several studies have focused on verifying symbolic plans or predicting their feasibility before execution. [27] proposed an active learning approach to acquire an abstract plan feasibility predictor through exploration on a robot. [28] learned a feasibility classifier for TAMP in tabletop environments. In a more recent work [29], transformers were leveraged for sequence-based prediction of feasibility in task and motion planning. In work similar to ours, [30] trained skill-effect models and used them for continuous search via weighted A* search. In our work, we train a forward dynamics model for accurate effect predictions and utilize it for both plan verification and continuous forward search, the latter being invoked when symbolic plans are deemed unverified. III. M ETHOD 

In this section, we present the proposed bilevel planning framework. We first outline the problem definition. We then provide background on unsupervised symbol discovery and symbolic rule learning, which form the basis for our method. Finally, we detail the proposed bilevel framework, including the dual model scheme, the probabilistic symbolic planning, the continuous verification mechanism, and the continuous forward-search planner. 

A. Problem Definition 

This study addresses the problem of efficient and accurate planning from discovered symbols and operators for robotic manipulation. While our bilevel approach entails different means to generate a successful plan, the main objective is to find a sequence of actions that brings a given initial configuration of objects into the desired goal configuration. In this subsection, we introduce the basic definitions needed to formulate our framework. The environment’s continuous state space is denoted by 

X . A specific state X ∈ X is represented as a set of feature vectors {x1, ..., x n}, where each xi ∈ R5 contains information (3D position and one-hot encoding of its type) about an object in the scene. The agent can interact with the environment through a discrete set of high-level, parameterized skills, which constitute the action space A. An action a ∈ A corresponds to a pick-place skill, defined by a tuple ( oi, δ i, o j , δ j ) where 

oi and oj indicate the picked and target objects, respectively, and δi and δj describe the relative positional offset for grasping and releasing, respectively. 3

A plan is defined as a sequence of actions, π ≜

(a1, a 2, . . . , a k), where each at ∈ A. Given a problem 

P = ( X , A, X init , G ), where Xinit is the initial state and 

G is the goal condition, the task is to find a plan π that results in a final state Xf inal that satisfies the goal condition G. In this study, the goal condition is defined using a target state 

Xgoal , and a plan is considered successful if the final state is within a minor tolerance, ϵ, of this target. 

∥Xf inal − Xgoal ∥2 < ϵ (1) 

B. Background 

Our framework builds upon the prior approach [6], which utilizes a deep learning model to discover both unary object and relational symbols from a dataset of interaction samples 

(X, a, X ′), as illustrated on the left of the Figure 1. The primary objective during training is to predict the effect ei on each object xi by minimizing the mean square error (MSE), where the effect represents the change in position of objects subtracted by the lateral movement of the arm. After training, the model yields meaningful symbolic representations in its bottleneck layers. The model network contains two encoders: The object encoder, σp, is used to map the feature vector of each object 

xi to a unary symbol σp(xi) ∈ { 0, 1}dz , and the relational encoder, σr , is used to compute binary relational symbols between each pair of objects. The relational encoder is an adaptation of the standard self-attention mechanism [31], uti-lizing the Gumbel-Sigmoid function, which allows the learning of discrete symbols in a differentiable manner. The relational symbol is computed as described in Equation 2, and this technique allows the model to represent the relationships between a varying number of objects. 

σr (xi, x j ) = GumbelSigmoid (qi · kj ) (2) The model then aggregates information using discovered symbols to predict the effect e of an action a. The unary symbol σp for each object’s feature vector xi is combined with the action a and becomes input to an MLP to produce an intermediate representation zi. For each of the K relation types (number of attention heads), the following aggregation function, Equation 3, is used: 

hki =

> n

X

> j=1

σrk (xi, x j )zj ∀k ∈ { 1, ..., K } (3) Then the resulting vectors are concatenated to form acomplete representation for each object hi, which is input to a decoder network that predicts the resulting effect ˆei.Once trained, the model is used to extract symbolic rules, represented as a set of operators Φ = {ϕ1, . . . , ϕ m}. To this end, the continuous transition dataset is first converted into a symbolic dataset consisting of pre-action states Σ = (Σ p, Σr )

and post-action states Σ′ = (Σ ′

> p

, Σ′ 

> r

). Transitions are then grouped by their symbolic pre-action states and action argu-ments, and the most frequent post-action state within each group is assigned as the resulting state of the operator. Fol-lowing the PDDL action schema ϕ = ( pre (ϕ), eff (ϕ)) , where pre (ϕ) denotes the precondition and eff (ϕ) the symbolic effect, the operators are defined as ϕa = (Σ , ∆Σ) for each group with action arguments a. Here, Σ is the group’s pre-action state, corresponding to the preconditions, and ∆Σ = ( E+, E−)

encodes the set differences between the pre-action state of the group and its most frequent post-action state, corresponding to the symbolic effect. Operators are constructed for all such groups, yielding the complete set Φ.

C. Bilevel Planning with Continuous Verification 1) Overview: To solve the planning problem defined in Section III-A, we introduce a bilevel planning algorithm, which is described in Algorithm 1. The proposed algorithm is designed to improve the success and robustness of planning for manipulation tasks and operates at two levels. Level 1 comprises a probabilistic planning framework that captures a richer set of action outcomes compared to deterministic operators, bridging the gap between symbolic and continuous domains. Level 1 also includes a verification process to assess the plausibility of each candidate symbolic plan, thereby miti-gating the need for trial-and-error and reducing the number of failed plan executions. If high-level reasoning fails to produce a verified plan, Level 2 utilizes a more deliberate continuous forward search. The individual components of the proposed algorithm are described in detail in the following subsections. Overall, our bilevel approach improves planning performance compared to purely symbolic planners by incorporating contin-uous planning when necessary, while maintaining performance comparable to full continuous planning but at a reduced computational expense. 

Algorithm 1 Bilevel Planning Algorithm  

> 1:

Input: Initial state Xinit , Goal state Xgoal , Symbolic Model Msym , Dynamics Model Mdyn , Symbolic Domain 

Φ 

> 2:

Output: A plan π 

> 3:

Level 1:  

> 4:

— Probabilistic Symbolic Planning  

> 5:

Σinit , Σgoal ← SymbolicProblem (Xinit , X goal , M sym ) 

> 6:

D ← GenerateSampledDomains (Φ , N ) 

> 7:

Πsym ← ProbabilisticSymbolicPlanner (Σ init , Σgoal , D) 

> 8:

— Verification  

> 9:

for πsym ∈ Πsym in decreasing order of probability do  

> 10:

ˆXf inal ← ContinuousPlanVerifier (πsym , X init , M dyn ) 

> 11:

if ∥ ˆXf inal − Xgoal ∥2 < τ verif y then  

> 12:

return π = πsym  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Level 2:  

> 16:

— Continuous Search Fallback  

> 17:

πcts ← ContinuousForwardSearch (Xinit , X goal , M dyn ) 

> 18:

return π = πcts 4

2) Dual-Model Scheme: A single model struggles to bal-ance the discretization required for symbolic reasoning with the precision for planning in continuous state space. There-fore, our framework utilizes two variants of the architecture described in Section III-B, as illustrated in Figure 1.  

> •

Symbolic Model : The model uses Gumbel-Sigmoid as an activation function, and its main purpose is to discover symbolic state representations required for generating symbolic planning operators.  

> •

Dynamics Model : The model has the identical archi-tecture but utilizes Sigmoid activation in the bottleneck layers. This configuration enhances the capability for continuous effect prediction, positioning it as an optimal option for tasks necessitating a forward dynamics model. Section IV provides empirical validation of this perfor-mance difference. 

3) Probabilistic Symbolic Planning: To improve planning success, we explicitly address the stochasticity of the learned operators, which is captured by the PPDDL domain. The operators that only consider the most probable outcome of an action might be brittle since less likely but possibly significant effects might be ignored and prove crucial for a successful plan. Therefore, as illustrated in the center of Figure 1, we define a probabilistic operator, ϕ, where the effect is a probability distribution over a finite set of possible symbolic effects, E = {∆Σ 1, ∆Σ 2, . . . , ∆Σ m}, based on their empirical frequency: eff (ϕ) = {(∆Σ j , p j )}mj=1 (4) where pj = P (∆Σ j |pre (ϕ), a ) is the empirical frequency of the effect ∆Σ j , and Pmj=1 pj = 1 .To perform probabilistic planning with a classical planner, we employ a sampling-based projection strategy. We construct an ensemble of N PDDL domains, D = {D1, D 2, . . . , D N },where each domain Dk is created by sampling a single effect                      

> Fig. 1. Learning pipeline of the proposed bilevel planning framework. The system learns both a Symbolic Model (Msym ) and a Dynamics Model (Mdyn )from a transition dataset consisting of interaction samples. The Symbolic Model is used to generate symbols and then find rules to form a symbolic domain Φ, containing probabilistic operators. The Dynamics Model is used for accurate effect prediction, which is then utilized to verify symbolic plans, and explore plans in continuous state space when no verified symbolic plan is present.
> Fig. 2. Probabilistic symbolic planning and verification. The PDDL domains, D, are initially sampled from the symbolic domain Φ, and then given to an AI planner alongside a symbolic problem. Then, candidate symbolic plans are passed into the verification step accordingly to their occurrences, and each action is verified in the continuous domain using the Dynamics Model . If the plan passes verification within a tolerance threshold τverify , the bilevel algorithm returns that symbolic plan; otherwise, the system invokes a continuous forward search.

for each probabilistic operator according to the corresponding learned probability distribution. Upon generating N domains, we invoke the classical AI planner [10] to search for a plan in each generated domain, allowing the system to explore a wider range of potential paths, and thereby increasing the robustness and success rate of symbolic planning. Then, we record each unique plan along with its occurrence among the generated plans, and use the normalized occurrence counts to define the probability distribution over the candidate plans. Consequently, as shown in the upper row of Figure 2, we pri-oritize the most frequently discovered symbolic plans during the subsequent verification step, since they have the highest likelihood of success. 

4) Continuous Plan Verification: To increase the success rate of execution of symbolic plans, we propose a verification mechanism that leverages the continuous effect prediction ca-pability of the Dynamics Model . Here, we define a verifier as a mapping ν : Π × P → { Verified , Unverified }, where 

Π is the set of possible plans, and P is the set of possible problems. In our setting, a perfect verifier would evaluate a plan as Verified whenever || Xf inal − Xgoal || 2 < ϵ .Given a candidate symbolic plan, πsym = ( a1, . . . , a k),we use the trained Dynamics Model as a forward dynamics model. As illustrated in Figure 2, starting from the initial continuous state Xinit , we simulate the plan by iteratively predicting the continuous effect of each action, and computing the new state by adding the predicted effect to the current state until we reach the predicted final continuous state ˆXf inal . We approximate the verifier by considering a symbolic plan as verified if the predicted final state is within the goal tolerance: 

|| ˆXf inal − Xgoal || 2 < τ verif y . As shown with the decision diagram in Figure 2, the verification proceeds until a plan is found that satisfies the verification threshold or all plans are exhausted. In general, the described verification process plays 5

a critical role in increasing the reliability and robustness of a system by eliminating inconsistent symbolic plans before execution. 

5) Continuous Forward Search: To find a plan for prob-lems where symbolic planning is insufficient, we introduce a continuous forward search method as a fallback mechanism. We implement the search as a weighted A∗ algorithm that operates directly in the continuous state space X . A node s

in the search tree is defined by a tuple (Xs, g (s), π s), and the evaluation function is expressed as follows: 

f (s) = g(s) + w ∗ h(Xs) (5) where g(s) is the cost of the plan, h(Xs) is the heuristic function, and w is the heuristic weight, which is chosen as 1.5 in our experiments. The heuristic is defined as the sum of Euclidean distances between the positions of the objects in the current and goal states for all n objects in the scene: 

h(Xs) = 

> n

X

> i=1

∥pos i(Xs) − pos i(Xgoal )∥2 (6) The predicted successor state, ˆX′, for an expansion is gen-erated using the Dynamics Model as the transition function, 

ˆX′ = X + ˆ e, where ˆe is the predicted effect. We also introduce heuristic action pruning to enhance the tractability of the continuous search mechanism. We generate a finite set of goal-oriented actions in each state, A(Xs),instead of exploring the entire action space, which contains 

9n2 high-level parametrized actions for n objects. First, we compute the 2D position displacement of objects between the current state Xs and the goal state Xgoal . We then identify the misplaced objects, Omisplaced , and generate two types of candidate actions for each oi ∈ Omisplaced as follows:  

> •

We find the target object oj that is currently closest to the position of oi in the goal state Xgoal . Then, generate actions from oi to oj with the full range of grasp and release offsets, which yield 9n actions in the worst case.  

> •

We generate actions from oi to itself with all combina-tions of offsets that produce 9n actions in the worst case. This pruning strategy reduces the complexity of the branch-ing factor of the search tree with respect to the number of objects, allowing the A∗ search to be computationally feasible and effective. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Environment: We conducted experiments in a simulated tabletop environment, as shown in Figure 1. The environment contains a varying number ( n ∈ { 2, 3, 4}) of large and small blocks and a UR10e manipulator. To generate planning problems, we first created an initial scene Xinit , where the types and positions of objects were randomly chosen. Then, we executed a sequence of k, where 

k ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, random high-level actions to generate a goal state Xgoal .             

> TABLE I MEAN EFFECT PREDICTION ERROR OVER TWO RUNS
> Model Configuration Error (cm)
> Symbolic Model (Gumbel-Sigmoid) 3.334 ±0.109
> Dynamics Model (Sigmoid) 1.961 ±0.179

2) Training: We trained both models for 4000 epochs on a dataset including 140 k interaction samples. We used Adam optimizer [32] with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a batch size of 128. We followed the network architecture described in Section III-B for both models with a key difference in activation functions: the Symbolic Model uses a Gumbel-Sigmoid with a temperature of T = 1 .0, while the Dynamics Model uses standard Sigmoid. 

3) Planning Methods: We evaluate the performance of the following methods to analyze the contributions of our proposed framework:  

> •

Deterministic Symbolic Planner (Baseline): The plan-ner uses the PDDL domain, representing the baseline approach from [6].  

> •

Probabilistic Symbolic Planner: The proposed proba-bilistic planner approach that searches through an ensem-ble of N PDDL domains from the PPDDL domain.  

> •

Continuous Forward Search: The weighted A∗ search, finding plans in continuous state space.  

> •

Bilevel Planner (Proposed): Our proposed bilevel algo-rithm that attempts to find a plan with the Probabilistic Symbolic Planner with verification, and then invokes Continuous Forward Search if the first level fails. We used the Fast Downward planning system [10] to find symbolic plans. Throughout the evaluation of planning methods, 100 unique problems were employed for each com-bination of object and action counts, and our primary metric is the planning success rate. A trial is considered successful if the executed plan yields a final state, where the Euclidean distance for all objects from their goal positions is below a tolerance threshold ϵ = 5 cm. All reported significance values are obtained from paired t-tests. 

B. Results & Discussion 1) Validation of the Dual-Model Design: We use two spe-cialized models: a Symbolic Model for discovering symbolic representations and rules, and a Dynamics Model for tasks that involve continuous prediction. To validate the proposed dual-model approach, we assess the performance of both models in predicting effects on a test set consisting of 20,000 transitions. The Dynamics Model shows a superior predictive capacity for effects, as shown in Table I, which demonstrates its suitability as a forward model for reasoning in the contin-uous state space. Additionally, we compared the planning performance in both the symbolic domain and the continuous state space of models to demonstrate how each model’s strengths impact its planning performance. Figure 3 shows the performance trade-off between models. While planning with learned operators in the symbolic domain, the Symbolic Model , employing 6              

> Fig. 3. Planning success rate comparison of Symbolic Model and Dynamics Model across both planning levels: Symbolic planning and Continuous Forward Search. Results are averaged over two runs and the number of objects (n∈ { 2,3,4}).

the Gumbel-Sigmoid bottleneck, significantly outperforms the 

Dynamics Model (p < 0.0001 ). On the other hand, the 

Dynamics Model performs significantly ( p < 0.0001 ) better at planning in continuous state space, leveraging its superior predictive performance. Employing the Symbolic Model for all tasks, a single-model scheme, in our proposed bilevel planning approach, is feasible, but incurring a decrease in continuous planning per-formance. Consequently, we adopted the dual-model scheme that utilizes the best-performing underlying model for each task. 

2) Planning Performance Comparison of Deterministic and Probabilistic Planning: To evaluate the effectiveness of the probabilistic planning approach, which utilizes the full distri-bution of effects, we compared it to baseline deterministic planning that uses only the most probable effect. In this experiment, we used N = 100 sampled domains, and the results, demonstrated in Table II, show that the ability to explore plans with less frequent outcomes in addition to the most frequent effect leads to a significantly ( p < 0.0001 )higher success rate. The construction of deterministic operators is inherently limited, as it considers only the most frequent symbolic effect for a given set of preconditions while discarding all other observed outcomes, which leads to reduced expressivity and the potential loss of solutions in some cases. Object relations are not learned perfectly, and consequently, they do not transfer flawlessly into the symbolic domain, resulting in imperfect operators. Moreover, randomly collected training data include an unequal distribution of transitions, which can bias learned operators toward specific scenarios. Probabilistic planning                                              

> TABLE II PLANNING SUCCESS RATE (%) COMPARISON OF DETERMINISTIC AND PROBABILISTIC PLANNING . T HE RESULTS ARE AVERAGED OVER TWO RUNS AND THE NUMBER OF OBJECTS (n∈ { 2,3,4}).
> Actions Deterministic Planner Probabilistic Planner k=1 64.67 ±2.25 73.0 ±5.18 k=2 46.5 ±4.09 55.33 ±4.89 k=3 36.67 ±8.26 45.83 ±7.6 k=4 30.0 ±5.97 37.17 ±6.59 k=5 23.0 ±6.36 30.0 ±4.73
> Fig. 4. The top row shows the states while generating the problem, including the initial and goal states. In the following rows, the sequence of plan verifier predicted states (transparent objects illustrate the predicted positions) and their executions are demonstrated. The middle row presents the most probable plan, which also corresponds to the only symbolic plan if a probabilistic planner is not employed. The Dynamics Model accurately predicted the misalignment of the pink block’s placement and classified the plan as an unverified . The bottom row shows the predictions of the verifier and the execution of the next symbolic plan, which has been verified and deemed successful.

helps address these challenges by leveraging the full distri-bution of outcomes, allowing the system to solve problems where the most probable plan fails, as illustrated in Figure 4, ultimately leading to improved planning performance. 

3) Effectiveness of the Plan Verification Mechanism: To evaluate the verification mechanism, we analyzed the impact of verification threshold τverif y on the classification performance of the verifier on symbolic plans. As illustrated in Figure 5, the choice of threshold strongly affects the classification perfor-mance. For larger thresholds, problem cases that include a low number of objects were excessively considered as successful, since these simpler problems were already predicted well. On the other hand, low threshold values cause the verifier to perform poorly on tasks with a larger number of objects since the problems were more challenging and needed a tol-erable margin of error. Therefore, we selected the verification threshold of 7 cm , leading to the most consistent performance across varying numbers of objects. An illustrative example of the verification mechanism employed for two symbolic plans is shown in Figure 4. Figure 6 provides a detailed analysis of the classification           

> Fig. 5. The F1 and Accuracy scores of the verifier for symbolic plans across varying thresholds ( τverif y ). Results are averaged over 50 problems, and the high-level actions ( k∈1,2,3,4,5) for each number of objects. 7
> Fig. 6. Performance of the Continuous Plan Verifier relative to varying quantities of objects and actions, given that ( τverif y = 7cm ). The plans are classified as: True Positive (TP): verified and successful, False Positive (FP): verified and failed, True Negative (TN): unverified and failed, False Negative (FN): unverified and successful.

performance of the Continuous Plan Verifier with the chosen threshold. Across all test scenarios, the symbolic plans that passed the verification step achieved a success rate of 94.5%, while symbolic plans that were identified as unverified had a failure rate of 87.3%, and the verifier achieved a mean accuracy of 0.91 and a mean F1 score of 0.90 , confirming that the Dynamics Model serves as an effective mechanism to simulate plans and anticipate outcomes. Consequently, the Continuous Plan Verifier substantially enhances the overall reliability by ensuring that the symbolic planner’s output is grounded in the learned continuous dynamics. 

4) Planning Performance of the Bilevel Framework: We compared the planning performance of four planning methods. Figure 7 demonstrates the results, which report success rates across different numbers of objects (n ∈ {2, 3, 4}) and action sequence lengths ( k ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}). As discussed in earlier sections, the Probabilistic Symbolic Planner enhanced performance relative to the Deterministic Symbolic Planner. Additionally, Continuous Forward Search performs better than both symbolic planning methods across all conditions, serving as the most powerful, albeit expensive, approach. The difference in planning performance between the pro-posed Bilevel Planner and Continuous Forward Search was not statistically significant ( p = 0 .71 ), indicating that the bilevel planning approach performs comparably to the most capable method while also benefiting from symbolic reasoning and plan verification. Therefore, our proposed approach preserves the efficiency of symbolic reasoning, ensures the robustness of the candidate plans through verification, and employs continuous forward search solely for challenging problems. Operating in an abstract and computationally tractable search space allows the symbolic planner to efficiently dis-cover plans. Conversely, the Continuous Forward Search car-ries out a heuristic-driven search, which is restricted by a predefined maximum number of node expansions. The Con-tinuous Forward Search is prone to exhausting its search capacity before finding a solution. Moreover, we used the strategy of returning the first plan that satisfies the heuristic threshold ( h(Xs) < 5cm ), which could constrain its ability to discover solutions located deeper within the search tree. The performance of Continuous Forward Search could be enhanced by eliminating action pruning along with extending the search constraints; however, this would lead to higher computational expenses. The verified and successful plans found by the Probabilistic Symbolic Planner (hatched orange bar) form a substantial part of the overall success of the Bilevel Planner. As shown in Figure 7, these verified plans achieve a higher success rate than the Deterministic Planner. While the probabilistic approach explores a broader range of possible outcomes to enhance success, the verification process contributes to having more reliable plans. Although the verification process may potentially discard a valid plan, it still provides higher success when using a Probabilistic Planner compared to deterministic planning, and additionally enhances the robustness of the system. In this evaluation, we adopted a threshold that yielded high precision to reduce the execution of failed plans. However, one may choose a higher threshold, allowing the bilevel planner to solve a larger number of problems via symbolic reasoning, at the cost of tolerating a higher rate of execution failures. This flexibility allows the verification step to be tailored to diverse application needs. Ultimately, the Bilevel Planner successfully combines the broad exploratory capability of abstract planning with the precision provided by a learned Dynamics Model , resulting in enhanced planning performance. V. L IMITATIONS 

Despite its strong performance, our framework has limi-tations that highlight several promising directions for future research. The performance of both planning stages fundamen-tally depends on the quality of the learned models. Currently, the transition dataset collected via random exploration does not efficiently cover the rare but critical state transitions required for long-horizon planning, thereby impeding the quality of operator learning from the Symbolic Model and accurate effect prediction from the Dynamics Model . This limitation could be addressed by incorporating active, model-guided exploration or a curriculum learning approach, which would allow skills to be learned progressively according to the number of actions and/or objects involved. In addition, our existing probabilistic planner relies on empirical frequencies, and utilizing a sampling-based approximation may be en-hanced by incorporating native PPDDL planners that directly reason about the probability of a plan’s success. Moreover, our verification process currently employs a fixed verification threshold, which can be enhanced by developing an adaptive threshold that is adjusted accordingly to the problem’s features, such as the number of objects. Additionally, the transition between planning levels can be enhanced by using the verifier to provide a high-quality starting point for the continuous forward search, rather than starting from scratch. 8

Fig. 7. Planning success rates of the evaluated planning methods across problems with varying numbers of objects ( n) and high-level actions ( k) over two runs. The hatched orange and blue bars show the contributions from its verified plans from Probabilistic Planner (Level 1), and its Continuous Forward Search fallback (Level 2), respectively. 

VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this study, we introduced a bilevel planning framework that successfully combines the efficiency of symbolic reason-ing and the accuracy of continuous search. We adopted a dual-model scheme that uses a Symbolic Model to discover symbols and learn probabilistic operators for symbolic plan-ning, alongside a distinct Dynamics Model for accurate effect prediction during plan verification and continuous forward search. In the experiments, we first validated the dual-model design. We then showed that the probabilistic planner achieves significantly higher success rates than its deterministic counter-part and presented the classification performance of the verifi-cation mechanism, demonstrating its ability to reliably validate symbolic plans. Finally, we demonstrated that the proposed bilevel framework performed statistically comparable to a full continuous forward search while retaining the computational benefits of symbolic reasoning, engaging the more expensive search only when required. REFERENCES [1] G. Konidaris, “On the necessity of abstraction,” Current opinion in behavioral sciences , vol. 29, pp. 1–7, 2019. [2] E. Ugur, A. Ahmetoglu, Y. Nagai, T. Taniguchi, M. Saveriano, and E. Oztop, “Neuro-symbolic robotics,” 2025, http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/ RG.2.2.25854.09283. [3] J. Kulick, M. Toussaint, T. Lang, and M. Lopes, “Active learning for teaching a robot grounded relational symbols.” in IJCAI , 2013, pp. 1451– 1457. [4] N. Shah, J. Nagpal, P. Verma, and S. Srivastava, “From reals to logic and back: Inventing symbolic vocabularies, actions, and models for planning from raw data,” CoRR , vol. abs/2402.11871, 2024. [5] T. Taniguchi, E. Ugur, M. Hoffmann, L. Jamone, T. Nagai, B. Rosman, T. Matsuka, N. Iwahashi, E. Oztop, J. Piater et al. , “Symbol emergence in cognitive developmental systems: a survey,” IEEE TCDS , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 494–516, 2018. [6] A. Ahmetoglu, E. Oztop, and E. Ugur, “Symbolic manipulation planning with discovered object and relational predicates,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1968–1975, 2025. [7] T. Silver, A. Athalye, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. Lozano-P´ erez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Learning neuro-symbolic skills for bilevel planning,” in 

Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2022. [8] T. Silver, R. Chitnis, J. Tenenbaum, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-P´ erez, “Learning symbolic operators for task and motion planning,” in 

IEEE/RSJ IROS , 2021, pp. 3182–3189. [9] R. Chitnis, T. Silver, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. Lozano-Perez, and L. P. Kaelbling, “Learning neuro-symbolic relational transition models for bilevel planning,” in IEEE/RSJ IROS . IEEE, 2022, pp. 4166–4173. [10] M. Helmert, “The fast downward planning system,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 26, pp. 191–246, 2006. [11] H. L. Younes and M. L. Littman, “Ppddl1. 0: An extension to pddl for expressing planning domains with probabilistic effects,” Techn. Rep. CMU-CS-04-162 , vol. 2, p. 99, 2004. [12] G. Konidaris, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-Perez, “From skills to symbols: Learning symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 61, pp. 215– 289, 2018. [13] S. James, B. Rosman, and G. Konidaris, “Learning portable representa-tions for high-level planning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020, pp. 4682–4691. [14] ——, “Autonomous learning of object-centric abstractions for high-level planning,” in Proceedings of the The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [15] M. Asai and A. Fukunaga, “Classical planning in deep latent space: Bridging the subsymbolic-symbolic boundary,” in AAAI , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [16] M. Asai and C. Muise, “Learning neural-symbolic descriptive planning models via cube-space priors: the voyage home (to strips),” in Proceed-ings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , ser. IJCAI’20, 2021. [17] M. Asai, H. Kajino, A. Fukunaga, and C. Muise, “Classical planning in deep latent space,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 74, pp. 1599–1686, 2022. [18] A. Ahmetoglu, M. Y. Seker, J. Piater, E. Oztop, and E. Ugur, “Deepsym: Deep symbol generation and rule learning for planning from unsu-pervised robot interaction,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research ,vol. 75, pp. 709–745, 2022. [19] A. Ahmetoglu, B. Celik, E. Oztop, and E. Ugur, “Discovering predictive relational object symbols with symbolic attentive layers,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1977–1984, 2024. [20] C. Aeronautiques, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, I. D. McDermott, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld, D. W. Sri, A. Barrett, D. Christianson et al. , “Pddl— the planning domain definition language,” Technical Report , 1998. [21] J. Hoffmann, “Ff: The fast-forward planning system,” AI magazine ,vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 57–57, 2001. [22] T. Silver, R. Chitnis, N. Kumar, W. McClinton, T. Lozano-P´ erez, L. Kaelbling, and J. B. Tenenbaum, “Predicate invention for bilevel planning,” in AAAI , 2023, pp. 12 120–12 129. [23] B. Li, T. Silver, S. Scherer, and A. G. Gray, “Bilevel learning for bilevel planning,” in RSS , 2025. [24] G. Konidaris, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-Perez, “Symbol acquisition for probabilistic high-level planning,” in IJCAI , 2015, pp. 3619–3627. [25] B. Ames, A. Thackston, and G. Konidaris, “Learning symbolic repre-sentations for planning with parameterized skills,” in IEEE/RSJ IROS ,2018, pp. 526–533. [26] H. Aktas and E. Ugur, “VQ-CNMP: Neuro-symbolic skill learning for bi-level planning,” in 2nd CoRL Workshop on Learning Effective Abstractions for Planning , 2024. [27] M. Noseworthy, C. Moses, I. Brand, S. Castro, L. P. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-P´ erez, and N. Roy, “Active learning of abstract plan fea-sibility,” in RSS , 2021. [28] A. M. Wells, N. T. Dantam, A. Shrivastava, and L. E. Kavraki, “Learning feasibility for task and motion planning in tabletop environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1255–1262, 2019. 9

[29] Z. Yang, C. R. Garrett, T. Lozano-P´ erez, L. P. Kaelbling, and D. Fox, “Sequence-based plan feasibility prediction for efficient task and motion planning,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [30] J. Liang, M. Sharma, A. LaGrassa, S. Vats, S. Saxena, and O. Kroemer, “Search-based task planning with learned skill effect models for lifelong robotic manipulation,” in IEEE ICRA , 2022, pp. 6351–6357. [31] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [32] D. P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.