Title: DyGeoVLN: Infusing Dynamic Geometry Foundation Model into Vision-Language Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21269v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:28:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# DyGeoVLN: Infusing Dynamic Geometry Foundation Model into Vision-Language Navigation 

Xiangchen Liu 1*, Hanghan Zheng 2*, Jeil Jeong 1, Minsung Yoon 1, Lin Zhao 3,Zhide Zhong 2, Haoang Li 2†, and Sung-Eui Yoon 1†

> 1

KAIST 2HKUST(GZ) 3JD Explore Academy 

Abstract. Vision-language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent to un-derstand visual observations and language instructions to navigate in unseen environments. Most existing approaches rely on static scene as-sumptions and struggle to generalize in dynamic, real-world scenarios. To address this challenge, we propose DyGeoVLN, a dynamic geometry-aware VLN framework. Our method infuses a dynamic geometry foun-dation model into the VLN framework through cross-branch feature fusion to enable explicit 3D spatial representation and visual-semantic reasoning. To efficiently compress historical token information in long-horizon, dynamic navigation, we further introduce a novel pose-free and adaptive-resolution token-pruning strategy. This strategy can remove spatio-temporal redundant tokens to reduce inference cost. Extensive ex-periments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art per-formance on multiple benchmarks and exhibits strong robustness in real-world environments. 

Keywords: Vision-Language Navigation · Dynamic Geometry Founda-tion Model · Multimodal Large Language Models 

## 1 Introduction 

In Embodied AI, Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) [11,12] studies agents that rely on egocentric visual observations and language instructions to navigate un-seen environments. Recently, advances in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [19,22,32] with strong visual perception and semantic reasoning abili-ties have given rise to a new line of VLN research. Using large-scale pretraining, these models are adapted into vision-language-action architectures that jointly learn visual perception, instruction understanding, and action generation within a unified end-to-end paradigm [6, 35–37], representing a promising research di-rection for VLN. Despite these advances, existing VLN methods face a fundamental prob-lem: navigation is inherently an interaction within a 3D physical world, yet the visual foundations of current systems are primarily built on 2D image-text 

> *

Equal Contribution, †Corresponding Authors  

> arXiv:2603.21269v1 [cs.RO] 22 Mar 2026 2X. Liu et al.

pre-training [15, 20]. Although these 2D foundations provide strong semantic understanding, they severely lack globally consistent 3D spatial reasoning over long-horizon trajectories. To overcome this limitation, recent studies [34,39] have attempted to incorporate explicit 3D information into MLLMs. However, these approaches typically rely on direct incorporation of features from off-the-shelf 3D foundation models, such as VGGT [21], which struggle to effectively handle dynamic environments. Specifically, while these foundation models provide ac-curate geometric representations for static scenes, their performance degrades substantially in the presence of pronounced scene dynamics. Beyond the challenge of dynamic 3D spatial reasoning, managing historical token information during navigation is also challenging due to the rapid accu-mulation of visual data, especially in long-horizon tasks. Some methods alleviate this by down-sampling a fixed number of frames [6], thereby reducing the token volume but also discarding fine-grained temporal cues essential for accurate en-vironmental understanding. Other approaches maintain compact memories by pooling or merging visual tokens [36, 37]. Although such strategies are effective at mitigating token explosion, they either fail to fully exploit temporal cues or incur significant computational overhead from continuous reprocessing of histor-ical frames, limiting their scalability for real-world deployment. To address the above challenges of dynamic 3D spatial reasoning and histori-cal token information management, this paper presents DyGeoVLN, a framework that infuses a Dynamic Geometry Foundation Model into VLN. As illustrated in Fig. 1, DyGeoVLN constructs a dynamic geometry-aware VLN framework by tightly coupling spatial and semantic information within a unified token space. For solving dynamic spatial reasoning, on the geometry side, we propose a dy-namic geometry foundation model that combines a feed-forward geometry foun-dation model with monocular depth estimation [33]. The explicit injection of these 3D spatial cues into the decoder empowers the model to achieve fine-grained 3D reconstruction and comprehensive dynamic scene representation, ul-timately producing robust and aligned geometric representations. To facilitate the training of this geometry model, we further introduce DyHM3D, a dynamic human-centric 3D dataset. On the language side, instruction tokens and fused vi-sual–geometric tokens are jointly processed by the MLLM through cross-branch interaction, enabling explicit 3D global spatial reasoning while preserving rich semantic priors from large-scale pretraining. For efficiently compressing historical token information and removing spatial redundant information, we introduce a spatial-aware token-pruning strategy, en-abling pose-free and adaptive-resolution redundancy elimination to effectively constrain token growth during long-horizon navigation. Unlike previous voxel-based strategies [30] that rely on simulator-provided poses and depth [17], our pruning module utilizes the self-inferred poses and point clouds from the geom-etry model, significantly simplifying the system setup for real-world hardware. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 

– We propose DyGeoVLN, a dynamic geometry-aware vision-language navi-gation framework that infuses the dynamic geometry foundation model into DyGeoVLN 3... ... 

> Sequential
> Images
> Sliding Window
> Vision Encoder
> Multi-Modal Projector
> Instruction : Go to the doorway and go straight down
> the doorway and stop right in the middle of the bed.
> DGFM (Our Proposed)
> Feature Alignment
> Cross-branch Feature Fusion
> Large Language
> Model
> Tokenizer
> Our DGFM Decoder
> Camera
> Head
> Local Point
> Head
> Camera
> Pose
> Local Point
> Clouds
> Our Spatial Token Pruning Strategy
> Actions
> Pruned Token
> Fused Token

Fig. 1: The system overview of our DyGeoVLN. Given instruction and sequential im-ages, the vision encoder and our proposed dynamic geometry foundation model (DGFM) respectively produce visual tokens and geometry tokens in a stream manner. Then these tokens are fused via cross-branch feature fusion to obtain spatial-semantic fused tokens. Finally, the LLM integrates the fused tokens and instruction tokens, fol-lowed by de-tokenizing the predicted sequence directly into robot actions. To efficiently compress the historical token, we build a spatial token pruning strategy on top of our DGFM , yielding a compact set of pruned spatial-semantic tokens. 

VLN through cross-branch feature fusion, enabling explicit geometry-aware spatial reasoning while preserving strong visual–semantic alignment. 

– We develop a dynamic geometry foundation model that enhances a feed-forward geometry encoder with monocular depth estimation and explicitly injects 3D spatial cues into the decoder, enabling fine-grained 3D reconstruc-tion and dynamic scene representation. For foundation model training, we establish DyHM3D, a novel dynamic human-centric 3D dataset. 

– We further propose a novel occupancy-aware spatial token pruning strategy that leverages dynamic geometry foundation model information, enabling pose-free and adaptive-resolution historical token redundancy reduction. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our approach, with the system achieving state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks and demon-strating strong robustness and generalization in dynamic real-world scenarios. 

## 2 Related Works 

2.1 Multimodal Large Language Models for VLN 

The rapid progress of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [13, 19, 22] has sparked a new line of research that treats VLN as a vision-language-action 4 X. Liu et al. 

problem. Recent approaches adapt MLLMs to navigation by jointly modeling visual perception, instruction understanding, and action token generation within a unified framework [6, 36, 37]. A central challenge in these models is managing the rapidly growing number of visual tokens that arise when processing long egocentric video streams. Existing methods take several different strategies to manage historical to-ken information. Frame-subsampling approaches [6] feed only a fixed number of sparsely sampled frames into the MLLM, which reduces memory usage but in-evitably discards fine-grained temporal cues that are important for low-level con-trol and dynamic-scene understanding. Memory-based methods [36, 37] pool or merge past tokens into compact summaries, while instruction-centric approaches convert historical observations into textual prompts [40]. Although these de-signs help limit token growth, they either under-utilize temporal information or introduce substantial redundant computation because past frames must be repeatedly reprocessed. Some work [30] reduces token load via voxel-based prun-ing, but relies on simulator-provided ground-truth poses and depth maps, which are hard to obtain in real-world deployments without additional sensors and lo-calization systems. In contrast, we propose a pose-free, occupancy-aware token pruning strategy that constructs geometry-informed voxel grids from the foun-dation model itself, enabling direct estimation of pose and point clouds without relying on externally provided pose or depth information, while maintaining a stable token budget during long-horizon navigation. This enables deployment of our model with a minimal sensor setup (a single monocular camera) in both simulation and the real world. 

2.2 Spatial Reasoning with Visual Geometry Foundation Models 

Most current VLN models [6,30] use vision encoders [15,20] that are pre-trained on large-scale 2D image–text pairs. Although these encoders provide strong se-mantic understanding for visual observations, they inherently lack geometric priors and struggle to reason about spatial information across continuous trajec-tories. As a result, maintaining globally consistent spatial awareness in complex indoor layouts remains difficult, limiting their effectiveness on challenging VLN tasks. Recently, several works [34,39] have attempted to incorporate explicit 3D cues into MLLM-based navigation systems. However, such approaches typically reuse off-the-shelf geometry foundation models and do not fundamentally optimize geometric representations for the spatio-temporal dynamics inherent in naviga-tion. Moreover, static geometric representations produced by existing founda-tion models [21,23] can degrade substantially under pronounced scene dynamics (e.g., highly dynamic human activities), which is particularly problematic for real-world VLN. In contrast to previous works that treat geometry as a plug-and-play module, our approach develops a dynamic geometry foundation model and infuses it into the VLN framework. This framework achieves more robust spatial reasoning and strong navigation performance in dynamic real-world en-vironments. DyGeoVLN 5

## 3 Method 

We focus on vision-language navigation in continuous environments [11] with monocular RGB observations. At each timestep t, the embodied agent is given an instruction W and an ego-centric RGB stream Ot = {x0, . . . , x t}, where each frame xτ denotes the observation at timestamp τ . The agent’s goal is to learn a policy π(Ot, W) that maps the instruction and the history of visual observations to a low-level action at+1 ∈ A for the next step. The agent operates in an atomic-level action space A composed of four actions: { Move Forward , Turn Left , Turn Right , Stop }. After executing at+1 , the agent observes a new RGB frame xt+1 

and repeats this perception–action cycle until it gets the Stop .The overall framework of our DyGeoVLN is illustrated in Fig 1. We first introduce our dynamic geometry foundation model (Section 3.1), followed by the cross-branch feature fusion VLN architecture (Section 3.2), and the adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning strategy (Section 3.3). 

3.1 Dynamic Geometry Foundation Model 

Recent visual geometry foundation models [21, 23] primarily learn a direct map-ping from 2D images to explicit 3D scene representations using large-scale multi-view supervision. Although such models achieve strong performance, they im-plicitly learn appearance and structure in the latent space and have to infer cross-frame consistency solely from RGB cues. This makes it difficult for the model to align the 3D structures of observations captured at different time steps, often leading to temporally inconsistent reconstructions and imperfect localization of dynamic objects. To address these issues, we propose a dynamic geometry foundation model that explicitly injects fine-grained depth-guided 3D infor-mation into the backbone, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Compared with [21, 23], our main technical novelty lies in multi-level 3D embeddings, dynamic-aware fusion with visual geometry backbone and hierarchical latent decoding, which are tai-lored to dynamic environments. 

Depth-guided local point maps. Given a sequence of monocular images 

{It}Tt=1 , we first predict a dense depth map Dt for each frame using an off-the-shelf depth estimator (Depth Anything [33]). For every valid pixel location 

u = ( u, v ) in It, we project it into 3D coordinates using the intrinsic matrix K:

pt(u) = Dt(u) K−1 ˜u, where ˜u = ( u, v, 1) ⊤ is the homogeneous pixel coordinate. The Pt = {pt(u)} forms a local point map anchored at the current camera. 

Point-map Transformer and multi-level 3D embeddings. The point map 

Pt is discretized into a regular grid and fed to a point-map Transformer encoder. Specifically, we first partition Pt into non-overlapping patches and embed each patch into a token Z(0)  

> t

= ϕpatch (Pt). A stack of self-attention blocks with coarse-to-fine increasing receptive fields is then applied to obtain a hierarchical 3D representations 

G(1)  

> t

, G(2)  

> t

, . . . , G(S) 

> t

= ftransformer (Z(0)  

> t

), (1) 6 X. Liu et al. Ground Truth Ours  

> π3VGGT

(a) (b)   

> Frame-wise ViT  Depth Anything
> …
> Depth Sequences
> …
> …
> Project to 3D
> ViT Patch Encoder
> Feature
> Aggregation
> Self-
> Attention
> Zero-mean
> Conv
> Multi-level embeddings
> Decoder
> ×Human Distortion ×Incorrect Position & Scale
> √ Well-Aligned Human

Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed DGFM. (a) The architecture of our dynamic geometry foundation model: 3D latent representations and 2D visual semantic features are fused and subsequently aligned along the temporal axis to achieve globally consistent and fine-grained reconstruction. (b) Qualitative reconstruction results compared against Ground Truth, π3 [23], and VGGT [21]. The red bounding boxes highlight regions where both π3 and VGGT suffer from poor human reconstruction. In contrast, our method preserves precise human positioning and maintains stable geometric structures. 

where G(s) 

> t

captures 3D context at the s-th granularity level. These multi-level 3D embeddings serve as explicit geometric representations that complement the structural features of the visual backbone. 

Dynamic-aware fusion with visual geometry backbone. In parallel to the 3D branch, we reuse a frame-wise ViT encoder [21] to extract 2D visual tokens [14] from each RGB frame, followed by the original feature aggregation module of the geometric foundation model [23] to obtain per-layer visual fea-ture maps {E(s) 

> t

}Ss=1 . To inject our 3D embeddings into the backbone without destroying its pre-trained parameter distribution, we adopt a zero-mean convo-lutional module. For each layer s, we first align the channel shape of G(s) 

> t

and then fuse it with E(s) 

> t

through 

˜E(s) 

> t

= gzm 

 G(s)

> t

 + E(s) 

> t

, s = 1 , . . . , S,  (2) where gzm (·) is a convolution layer whose weights and bias are initialized to zero. During fine-tuning, the module learns to gradually inject depth-guided geometric cues as a residual term, enabling the model to benefit from explicit 3D representation information while preserving the internal prior weights encoded in the original foundation model. 

Decoder and dynamic 3D reconstruction. The fused features { ˜E(s) 

> t

}Ss=1 are fed into the pre-trained geometric decoder, which produces dense 3D scene pre-dictions such as camera poses, global point clouds, or local point maps, depending on the underlying attention head types. We first concatenate the multi-level fused features of each frame as ˜Et = [ ˜E(1)  

> t

, . . . , ˜E(S) 

> t

] and pass the sequence { ˜Et}Tt=1 

through the decoder D to get the decoded geometric token map {Ht}Tt=1 =

D { ˜Et}Tt=1 

, To explicitly structure the latent geometry at different scales, we further perform a hierarchical latent decoding on top of the shared tokens Ht.DyGeoVLN 7

We first employ two dedicated decoders to obtain geometry embeddings for cam-era and local points: {Hcam  

> t

}Tt=1 = Dcam 

 {Ht}Tt=1 

, {Hloc  

> t

}Tt=1 = Dloc 

 {Ht}Tt=1 

,

where Hcam  

> t

and Hloc  

> t

are latent geometry representations specialized for camera motion and local point-wise structure. We then aggregate these latent embed-dings as the conditioning signal for the global point decoder. Denoting a learn-able aggregation operator by A(·), we form Ut = A



Hcam  

> t

, Hloc 

> t



and decode global-scale latent representations via 

{Hglo  

> t

}Tt=1 = Dglo 

 {Ut}Tt=1 

, (3) where Hglo  

> t

captures global-scale latent geometry that is explicitly conditioned on the latent camera and local point information. Finally, task-specific prediction heads project the corresponding hidden states to explicit 3D quantities. Because the shared decoder receives embeddings that jointly encode visual appearance, local point-wise geometry, and multi-scale 3D context, and the global branch is further conditioned on the latent camera and local representations, the model is encouraged to produce geometry tokens and dense reconstructions that are metrically consistent across time and aligned between different timestamps. This dynamic geometry foundation model serves as the 3D encoder in DyGeoVLN, providing reliable geometric tokens for navigation tasks. 

Construction of dynamic 3D geometry dataset. Training geometry foun-dation models for dynamic perception in support of VLN requires 3D datasets with dynamic scenes. However, existing 3D geometry datasets used for VLN mainly focus on static environments. To address this limitation, we propose DyHM3D, a dynamic human-centric 3D dataset built on the Habitat-Matterport 3D Dataset (HM3D). Since humans are the most common dynamic entities in indoor VLN scenarios, we focus on simulating human movements. In theory, our dataset construction pipeline can also be extended to other types of dynamic objects. Specifically, we first sample human motion waypoints within navigable regions on the navigation mesh provided by Habitat Simulator. We then employ skeletal-driven 3D human models with motion controllers to generate natural walking motions along these paths. Meanwhile, we adopt a camera-following strategy based on linear interpolation between adjacent waypoints, constraining the camera to the navigation mesh to ensure smooth and physically consistent motion. Data are collected from a first-person perspective under diverse observa-tion settings, including multiple camera heights and horizontal fields of view. For each trajectory, RGB images, depth maps, camera poses, and camera intrinsics are recorded synchronously. In total, DyHM3D contains approximately 50,000 trajectories, as shown in Fig. 3. 

3.2 Cross-branch Feature Fusion VLN architecture 

To enable the agent with both semantic understanding and spatial reasoning, we design a cross-branch fusion architecture that processes each observation frame with a 2D semantic branch and a 3D spatial-geometric branch, and then fuses them into unified visual–spatial tokens, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The 2D 8 X. Liu et al.  

> Fig. 3: Example case of our DyHM3D dataset.

branch inherits from the vision encoder in Qwen2-VL [22], while the 3D branch is instantiated by our dynamic geometry foundation model introduced in Sec. 3.1. 

2D semantic tokenization. Given an RGB frame xt, the Qwen-VL visual encoder divides the image into non-overlapping pv × pv patches and maps each patch to a visual token Vt = fencode (xt), Vt ∈ RLv ×Cv , Lv = Hpv × Wpv . To interface with the language backbone, we use a multi-modal projector fmulti-modal 

to map the visual tokens Vt into the embedding space Xt.

3D spatial-geometric tokenization. In parallel, the dynamic geometry foun-dation model takes the same frame xt and its depth-guided local point map as input, and outputs multi-level 3D embeddings (Sec. 3.1). We aggregate these embeddings into a sequence of 3D tokens Hglo  

> t

= f3D (xt), Hglo  

> t

∈ RLg ×Cg . We then use a feature alignment falign to project Hglo  

> t

into ˜Hglo  

> t

, which has the same dimensionality as the visual tokens. 

Cross-branch 2D–3D fusion. After obtaining visual semantic tokens Xt and spatial tokens Gt, we fuse them using a multi-head cross-attention module: 

Ft = Cross-Atten  Q = Xt, K = ˜Hglo  

> t

, V = ˜Hglo  

> t

), (4) where Cross-Atten (·) denotes a multi-head cross-attention layer and Ft is the fused visual–spatial token sequence fed into the LLM module. In this way, each 2D patch token in Xt incorporates global spatial latent representation in ˜Hglo  

> t

,producing fused tokens Ft that preserve the spatial structure. 

Sliding-window KV cache for active frames. During navigation, we use an active sliding window to select the most recent N frames. For each step i, we define the active frame index set Ωi and compute fused tokens {Ft}t∈Ωi for all frames in the window. These tokens, together with instruction tokens and pruned memory tokens from inactive windows, are fed into the decoder to predict the following timestamp action ai:

ai = Decoder  I, {Mk}, {Ft}t∈Ωi ; KV window 

> i

, (5) where I denotes the instruction tokens, Mk are spatially pruned memory tokens from historical frames, and KV window  

> i

denotes the Key/Value cache associated with the current sliding window. At each step we append the KV states of the newest frame and remove the KV states of the oldest frame once it falls outside the N frame window. This sliding-window KV cache reuses attention projections for recent observations while keeping the effective context length, thereby making memory and runtime bounded throughout navigation process. DyGeoVLN 9

3.3 Adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning 

Long-horizon navigation inevitably accumulates a large number of tokens. If all tokens are fed into the LLM, the context window is quickly saturated, causing inference to become progressively slower. To address this problem, we design an adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning module that eliminates spatio-temporal redundancy. To preserve geometrically informative tokens and enhance the token temporal consistency, we propose an importance-aware token completion strategy and a temporal smoothing method. Different from previous voxel-based pruning methods [30] that rely on perfect depth im-ages and externally estimated camera poses captured from Habitat [17], our approach is pose-free and depth-free from the sensor perspective: the dynamic geometry foundation model directly outputs a local point map and the corre-sponding camera-to-world pose for each frame. For detailed algorithm working flow, please see our supplementary material. 

Adaptive-resolution voxel grouping. We design an adaptive-resolution strat-egy when assigning tokens to voxels. During projection, we estimate the depth information of valid points in each frame and adjust the base voxel size accord-ingly. In addition, each token is further modulated by a depth-dependent scale factor: tokens with small depth are grouped with a smaller scale, mid-range tokens with a moderate scale, and far-range tokens with a larger scale. This two-level adaptation allows us to retain more tokens around nearby geometry while aggressively merging and pruning redundant tokens in distant regions. 

Occupancy-aware spatial token pruning. After voxelization, multiple to-kens from different frames may occupy the same voxel cell. For each voxel, our module supports several selection rules: (i) a latest rule that keeps the token from the most recent frame; (ii) a priority rule that ranks tokens by a weighted combination of recency and proximity (closer and newer observations are pre-ferred); and (iii) a multi-token rule that preserves the top-K tokens in each voxel to balance redundancy reduction and diversity. In all cases, only the se-lected tokens are kept as occupancy representatives of that voxel; all other tokens mapped to the same cell are masked out. This occupancy-aware pruning ensures that each voxel contributes an informative set of tokens describing the visible surfaces within it. 

Importance-aware token completion. In sparse regions, voxel pruning yields too few tokens, thus harming the model’s robustness. To address this, we monitor the number of preserved tokens per frame and enforce a minimum keep ratio ρ.If the number of selected tokens is lower than ρ, we compute an importance score for each discarded token and re-calculate the top-scoring ones until the ratio is satisfied. The importance score is a weighted sum of four factors: feature magnitude, range information, spatial distribution, and temporal recency. This strategy ensures that even aggressively pruned frames can still retain a sufficient number of semantically and geometrically salient tokens. 

Temporal smoothing of pruning masks. To enhance temporal consistency, we apply temporal smoothing to the binary pruning masks. For each frame, we collect masks from a short temporal window (e.g., the current frame and 10 X. Liu et al. 

its two neighbors) and perform a majority vote at each token index. Tokens that are consistently preserved across the window remain active, while isolated fluctuations are marked as inactive. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Simulation Benchmark and Evaluation Metrics. We simultaneously eval-uate our method on both dynamic and static benchmarks. For the dynamic benchmark, we use the most dominant dynamic benchmark HA-VLN [7], which contains multi-human interactions, fine-grained language-motion alignment, and explicit social modeling. The evaluation metrics used for the dynamic HA-VLN benchmark are Total Collision Rate (TCR): quantifies how often collisions occur in human-occupied zones; Collision Rate per step (CR): the fraction of naviga-tion instances incurring at least one collision; Navigation Error (NE): the mean distance between agent’s final position and intended target; Success Rate (SR): measures the ratio of successful completed episodes. For the static benchmark, we evaluate our model on R2R-CE [11] benchmark using the Habitat simulator [17]. For R2R-CE evaluation metrics, we adopt widely-used metrics [3, 4, 10], consist-ing of navigation error (NE): average geometric distance in meters between the final and ground-truth location; success rate (SR): the ratio of navigation paths with NE less than 3 meters; oracle SR (OSR): SR based on the stop policy; SR penalized by path length (SPL). 

Real-world Setup and Evaluation Metric. Our model is evaluated in vari-ous real-world settings, including corridors, lobbies, indoor rooms, and crowded environments. We compare our DyGeoVLN with NaVid [37], Uni-NaVid [36], NaVILA [6], and StreamVLN [30]. For each scenario, we evaluated 20 episodes per model, using Success Rate (SR) as the primary evaluation metric. For the real-world experiments, we build our DyGeoVLN model with diffusion action head following [29]. The high-level system is our DyGeoVLN model, which per-forms geometry and dynamic-aware spatial reasoning over streaming RGB obser-vations and instructions, and outputs an image-pixel goal indicating the target location in the current image view. The low-level system is a diffusion action module that takes the predicted pixel goal and RGB images as input and gen-erates continuous trajectories toward the goal. The resulting trajectories are converted into control inputs by an MPC controller and sent to the Unitree Go1. 

Implementation Details. We train our DGFM on our proposed DyHM3D dataset. The model weights are initialized using a two-part strategy: the frame-wise ViT encoder, camera decoder, and local point decoder inherit their initial weights from π3 [23], whereas our multi-level 3D embeddings, dynamic-aware fusion, and global-scale latent representations are trained from scratch. During the training of DyGeoVLN, the vision encoder and the large language model are initialized with pre-trained weights from [22] and subsequently updated, whereas the DGFM remains frozen. For training dataset, we use R2R-CE [11], DyGeoVLN 11 

RxR-CE [12], EnvDrop [18], HA-VLN [7], and ScaleVLN [28]. We then use the DAgger [16] algorithm to enhance the model’s generalization and adaptation to novel scenes and imperfect trajectories. 

4.2 Experiment Result Results on Dynamic VLN Benchmark. Table 1 reports the navigation per-formance of our method on the dynamic HA-VLN benchmark. We also provide a qualitative comparison in Fig. 4. Compared with the stationary VLN benchmark, this benchmark is more dynamic and crowded. Compared with g3D-LF [24], which is trained with panorama RGB-D observations and large-scale additional 3D structural data, our method achieves consistent gains on both splits: on “Val-Seen”, we obtain a 12% improvement in SR and a 10% reduction in CR; on “Val-Unseen”, we achieve an 13% improvement in SR and a 11% reduction in CR. Compared with VLM-based methods [6, 30], we achieve an average 10% gain in SR and a 8% reduction in CR. This improvement comes from the strong dynamic scene representation of our geometry foundation model. By integrating geomet-ric and semantic tokens, the model achieves stronger spatial understanding and more reliable navigation in dynamic environments. We provide additional exam-ples in the supplementary material to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our dynamic geometry foundation model. 

Results on Static VLN Benchmark. Table 2 shows the navigation per-formance of our method on the R2R-CE benchmark in terms of “Val-Unseen” split. We also provide a qualitative comparison in Fig. 5. Our DyGeoVLN model achieves state-of-the-art performance compared with both Monocular RGB-only methods and Panoramic RGB-D/Odometry-based methods. Our method achieves 4.41 NE, 70 .1% OSR, 60 .8% SR, and 55 .8% SPL, setting a new best performance among monocular RGB-only methods. Moreover, despite relying solely on monocular RGB observations, our method surpasses state-of-the-art 

Table 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on dynamic HA-VLN [7] bench-mark. ∗ indicates methods using the pretrained waypoint predictor from [9]. Complex Data indicates the method simultaneously uses panorama RGB-D images and/or odom-etry. Simple Data indicates the method only uses Monocular RGB images.                                                                                                     

> Methods Observation Data Val Seen Val Unseen
> Complex Data Simple Data NE ↓TCR ↓CR ↓SR ↑NE ↓TCR ↓CR ↓SR ↑
> VLN-CMA [11] ✓7.63 63.09 0.75 0.04 7.34 47.06 0.77 0.07 HA-VLN-VL [7] ✓5.02 4.44 0.52 0.20 5.25 6.63 0.59 0.14 BEVBert ∗[1] ✓5.53 3.64 0.46 0.27 5.51 4.71 0.55 0.21 ETPNav ∗[2] ✓5.17 4.07 0.43 0.24 5.43 6.94 0.58 0.17 g3D-LF ∗[24] ✓5.12 3.58 0.41 0.32 5.30 4.54 0.49 0.27 NaVid [37] ✓6.62 6.26 0.51 0.36 7.49 6.17 0.49 0.34 Uni-NaVid [36] ✓6.27 5.96 0.50 0.37 7.74 6.45 0.55 0.32 NaVILA [6] ✓5.95 3.86 0.42 0.33 6.39 4.42 0.45 0.32 StreamVLN [30] ✓5.52 3.72 0.41 0.34 5.59 4.03 0.42 0.33
> DyGeoVLN (ours) ✓4.78 3.11 0.31 0.44 5.12 3.69 0.38 0.40

12 X. Liu et al. Instruction : Begin  your  journey  in  the  hallway,  where  you  will  observe  a couple  engaged  in  a quiet,  intimate  conversation .                                                                  

> Move forward into the kitchen, passing by countertops and appliances .As you continue, you will enter the dining room,
> where agroup of friends is gathered around the table, laughing and exchanging stories over their meal .Proceed slightly to
> the right, heading towards the room directly ahead .Upon entering, position yourself near the bed and wait there, ensuring
> you have aclear view of the surroundings .
> (a) StreamVLN
> (b) Ours Reference Path Predicted Path Success Failure

Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison between state-of-the-art method StreamVLN [30] and our DyGeoVLN on the dynamic HA-VLN [7] benchmark. StreamVLN loses track of the path and fails to handle dynamic human context, while DyGeoVLN better understands human behaviors and accurately reaches the target destination. 

panoramic RGB-D/odometry-based models, such as g3D-LF [24] and ETP-Nav [2], across all four metrics, further demonstrating strong generalization and robust performance on static VLN benchmark. 

Real-world Results. As shown in the quantitative results in Fig. 6, our Dy-GeoVLN achieves robust performance at all difficulty levels. Fig. 7 provides qual-itative demonstrations, showing that our model can perform tasks effectively in 

Table 2: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on R2R-CE [11] dataset. ∗ in-dicates methods using the waypoint predictor from [9]. Complex Data indicates the method simultaneously uses panorama RGB-D images and/or odometry. Simple Data indicates the method only uses Monocular RGB images. 

Methods Observation Data R2R-CE Val-Unseen 

Complex Data Simple Data NE ↓ OSR ↑ SR ↑ SPL ↑

GridMM ∗ [26] ✓ 5.11 61.0 49.0 41.0 ETPNav ∗ [2] ✓ 4.71 65.0 57.0 49.0 ScaleVLN ∗ [28] ✓ 4.80 64.0 55.0 51.0 g3D-LF ∗ [24] ✓ 4.53 68.0 61.0 52.0 CM2 [8] ✓ 7.02 41.5 34.3 27.6 WS-MGMap [5] ✓ 6.28 47.6 38.9 34.3 Sim2Real-3DFF ∗ [27] ✓ 5.95 55.8 44.9 30.4 NavMorph [31] ✓ 5.75 56.9 47.9 33.2 MapNav [38] ✓ 4.93 53.0 39.7 37.2 Dynam3D [25] ✓ 5.34 62.1 52.9 45.7 NaVid [37] ✓ 5.47 49.1 37.4 35.9 Uni-NaVid [36] ✓ 5.58 53.3 47.0 42.7 NaVILA [6] ✓ 5.22 62.5 54.0 49.0 StreamVLN [30] ✓ 5.10 64.0 55.7 50.9 NavFoM [35] ✓ 5.01 64.9 56.2 51.2 

DyGeoVLN (ours) ✓ 4.41 70.1 60.8 55.8 DyGeoVLN 13 (a) StreamVLN 

Reference Path Predicted Path Success Failure (b) Ours 

Instruction : Exit the room. Turn right and go straight until you get to three vases. Continue straight and go up four steps 

of the stairs on the right. 

Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison between state-of-the-art method StreamVLN [30] and our DyGeoVLN on the R2R-CE [11] benchmark. DyGeoVLN demonstrates improved trajectory consistency, whereas StreamVLN stops midway and fails to reach the desti-nation. 75 70               

> 50
> 0
> 100 95 80
> 55
> 95 85
> 65
> 20
> 100 90
> 70
> 50
> 100 100 90 75
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Corridor (Easy) Building Lobby (Medium) Room-to-Room (Difficult) Room-to-Room Crowded (Difficult)
> Success Rate (%)
> NaVid Uni-NaVid NaVILA StreamVLN DyGeoVLN (ours)

Fig. 6: Quantitative comparison of success rates (%) across varying real-world scenar-ios. Our proposed DyGeoVLN consistently outperforms other baseline models, demon-strating particular robustness across diverse environments. Instruction : Go straight forward along the corridor, notice the moving person and make sure not have collision with the 

pedestrian, when you see a black chair on your left, turn left slightly and continue to move forward to the black chair. 

Stop near the black chair. 

Instruction : Go out of current room, then go straightforward and keep going uphill. Be careful not to bump into 

pedestrians moving around you, and stop near the brown bushes. 

Fig. 7: Qualitative results of our DyGeoVLN model. The robot successfully follows instructions to reach the goal while avoiding collisions with moving pedestrians. 

dynamic environments with moving pedestrians. Additional results are detailed in the supplementary material. 14 X. Liu et al. 

Table 3: Ablation Study of each component in our proposed DyGeoVLN.                         

> Methods NE ↓TCR ↓CR ↓SR ↑
> DyGeoVLN (Full) 5.12 3.69 0.38 0.40
> w/o Visual Semantic 6.82 4.96 0.51 0.30 w/o Spatial Geometry 5.54 4.03 0.43 0.34 w/o Dynamic Spatial Injection 5.37 4.10 0.43 0.36 w/o Spatial Token Pruning 5.33 3.94 0.39 0.37

4.3 Ablation Study 

We conducted the ablation study on the dynamic HA-VLN [7] benchmark to val-idate the effect of our proposed DyGeoVLN. We report navigation performance on the “Val-Unseen” split of the HA-VLN benchmark, as shown in Table 3. 

Cross-Branch Fusion Strategy. We first investigate the ablation study of our dual-branch architecture design. Using only the 2D vision encoder or the 3D geometry encoder resulted in a significant decrease in the model’s navigation performance, suggesting that only coupling 2D visual semantic features and 3D spatial geometric features together can produce the best result. 

Explicit Dynamic-aware 3D Spatial Injection. We further examine the effect of our explicit 3D spatial information injection in our dynamic geometry foundation model. The success rate of our method improves 4% , and the collision rate reduces 5% with the help of an explicit injection of 3D information. This shows that our dynamic geometry foundation model can improve navigation performance. 

Token Pruning. We also evaluate the impact of our adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning strategy. With token reduction, the suc-cess rate of the model increases by 3% , while the collision rate and navigation error decrease, validating that the removal of redundant temporal and spatial tokens helps our model focus more on the critical region and improves navigation performance. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented DyGeoVLN, a dynamic geometry-aware VLN frame-work that infuses a dynamic geometry foundation model into VLN to achieve explicit dynamic spatial representation alongside strong visual–semantic rea-soning. We also proposed an occupancy-aware spatial token pruning strategy to control token growth for efficient long-horizon navigation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DyGeoVLN achieves state-of-the-art performance on both dy-namic and static benchmarks and can be effectively deployed in real-world envi-ronments. Ultimately, this work advances the VLN research from static semantic reliance to dynamic, geometry-aware embodied navigation. DyGeoVLN 15 

## References 

1. An, D., Qi, Y., Li, Y., Huang, Y., Wang, L., Tan, T., Shao, J.: Bevbert: Multimodal map pre-training for language-guided navigation. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (2023) 2. An, D., Wang, H., Wang, W., Wang, Z., Huang, Y., He, K., Wang, L.: Etpnav: Evolving topological planning for vision-language navigation in continuous envi-ronments. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2024) 3. Anderson, P., Chang, A., Chaplot, D.S., Dosovitskiy, A., Gupta, S., Koltun, V., Kosecka, J., Malik, J., Mottaghi, R., Savva, M., et al.: On evaluation of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757 (2018) 4. Anderson, P., Wu, Q., Teney, D., Bruce, J., Johnson, M., Sünderhauf, N., Reid, I., Gould, S., van den Hengel, A.: Vision-and-Language Navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2018) 5. Chen, P., Ji, D., Lin, K., Zeng, R., Li, T., Tan, M., Gan, C.: Weakly-supervised multi-granularity map learning for vision-and-language navigation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 , 38149–38161 (2022) 6. Cheng, A.C., Ji, Y., Yang, Z., Gongye, Z., Zou, X., Kautz, J., Bıyık, E., Yin, H., Liu, S., Wang, X.: Navila: Legged robot vision-language-action model for navigation. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (2025) 7. Dong, Y., Wu, F., He, Q., Li, H., Li, M., Cheng, Z., Zhou, Y., Sun, J., Dai, Q., Cheng, Z.Q., et al.: Ha-vln: A benchmark for human-aware navigation in discrete-continuous environments with dynamic multi-human interactions, real-world vali-dation, and an open leaderboard. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14229 (2025) 8. Georgakis, G., Schmeckpeper, K., Wanchoo, K., Dan, S., Miltsakaki, E., Roth, D., Daniilidis, K.: Cross-modal map learning for vision and language navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 15460–15470 (2022) 9. Hong, Y., Wang, Z., Wu, Q., Gould, S.: Bridging the gap between learning in dis-crete and continuous environments for vision-and-language navigation. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 15439–15449 (2022) 10. Ilharco, G., Jain, V., Ku, A., Ie, E., Baldridge, J.: General evaluation for in-struction conditioned navigation using dynamic time warping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05446 (2019) 11. Krantz, J., Wijmans, E., Majumdar, A., Batra, D., Lee, S.: Beyond the nav-graph: Vision-and-language navigation in continuous environments. In: proceeedings of European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 104–120 (2020) 12. Ku, A., Anderson, P., Patel, R., Ie, E., Baldridge, J.: Room-across-room: Multi-lingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 4392–4412 (2020) 13. Lin, B., Ye, Y., Zhu, B., Cui, J., Ning, M., Jin, P., Yuan, L.: Video-llava: Learning united visual representation by alignment before projection. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 5971–5984 (2024) 14. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., et al.: Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 (2023) 16 X. Liu et al. 15. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 8748–8763 (2021) 16. Ross, S., Gordon, G., Bagnell, D.: A reduction of imitation learning and struc-tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In: Proceedings of the fourteenth in-ternational conference on artificial intelligence and statistics. pp. 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings (2011) 17. Savva, M., Kadian, A., Maksymets, O., Zhao, Y., Wijmans, E., Jain, B., Straub, J., Liu, J., Koltun, V., Malik, J., et al.: Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 9339–9347 (2019) 18. Tan, H., Yu, L., Bansal, M.: Learning to navigate unseen environments: Back translation with environmental dropout. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). pp. 2610–2621 (2019) 19. Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.: Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023) 20. Tschannen, M., Gritsenko, A., Wang, X., Naeem, M.F., Alabdulmohsin, I., Parthasarathy, N., Evans, T., Beyer, L., Xia, Y., Mustafa, B., et al.: Siglip 2: Multilingual vision-language encoders with improved semantic understanding, lo-calization, and dense features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14786 (2025) 21. Wang, J., Chen, M., Karaev, N., Vedaldi, A., Rupprecht, C., Novotny, D.: Vggt: Visual geometry grounded transformer. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 5294–5306 (2025) 22. Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., et al.: Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 (2024) 23. Wang, Y., Zhou, J., Zhu, H., Chang, W., Zhou, Y., Li, Z., Chen, J., Pang, J., Shen, C., He, T.: π3: Permutation-equivariant visual geometry learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13347 (2025) 24. Wang, Z., Lee, G.H.: g3d-lf: Generalizable 3d-language feature fields for embodied tasks. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 14191–14202 (2025) 25. Wang, Z., Lee, S., Lee, G.H.: Dynam3d: Dynamic layered 3d tokens empower vlm for vision-and-language navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11383 (2025) 26. Wang, Z., Li, X., Yang, J., Liu, Y., Jiang, S.: Gridmm: Grid memory map for vision-and-language navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 15625–15636 (2023) 27. Wang, Z., Li, X., Yang, J., Liu, Y., Jiang, S.: Sim-to-real transfer via 3d feature fields for vision-and-language navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09798 (2024) 28. Wang, Z., Li, J., Hong, Y., Wang, Y., Wu, Q., Bansal, M., Gould, S., Tan, H., Qiao, Y.: Scaling data generation in vision-and-language navigation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 12009–12020 (2023) 29. Wei, M., Wan, C., Peng, J., Yu, X., Yang, Y., Feng, D., Cai, W., Zhu, C., Wang, T., Pang, J., et al.: Ground slow, move fast: A dual-system foundation model for generalizable vision-and-language navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.08186 (2025) DyGeoVLN 17 30. Wei, M., Wan, C., Yu, X., Wang, T., Yang, Y., Mao, X., Zhu, C., Cai, W., Wang, H., Chen, Y., et al.: Streamvln: Streaming vision-and-language navigation via slowfast context modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05240 (2025) 31. Xuan Yao, J.G., Xu, C.: Navmorph: A self-evolving world model for vision-and-language navigation in continuous environments. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 5536–5546 (2025) 32. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al.: Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025) 33. Yang, L., Kang, B., Huang, Z., Zhao, Z., Xu, X., Feng, J., Zhao, H.: Depth anything v2. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 21875–21911 (2024) 34. Zeng, S., Qi, D., Chang, X., Xiong, F., Xie, S., Wu, X., Liang, S., Xu, M., Wei, X.: Janusvln: Decoupling semantics and spatiality with dual implicit memory for vision-language navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22548 (2025) 35. Zhang, J., Li, A., Qi, Y., Li, M., Liu, J., Wang, S., Liu, H., Zhou, G., Wu, Y., Li, X., et al.: Embodied navigation foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12129 (2025) 36. Zhang, J., Wang, K., Wang, S., Li, M., Liu, H., Wei, S., Wang, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, H.: Uni-navid: A video-based vision-language-action model for unifying embodied navigation tasks. Robotics: Science and Systems (2025) 37. Zhang, J., Wang, K., Xu, R., Zhou, G., Hong, Y., Fang, X., Wu, Q., Zhang, Z., Wang, H.: Navid: Video-based vlm plans the next step for vision-and-language navigation. Robotics: Science and Systems (2024) 38. Zhang, L., Hao, X., Xu, Q., Zhang, Q., Zhang, X., Wang, P., Zhang, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, S., Xu, R.: Mapnav: A novel memory representation via annotated semantic maps for vlm-based vision-and-language navigation. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 13032–13056 (2025) 39. Zheng, D., Huang, S., Li, Y., Wang, L.: Efficient-vln: A training-efficient vision-language navigation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10310 (2025) 40. Zhou, G., Hong, Y., Wu, Q.: Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language navigation with large language models. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 38, pp. 7641–7649 (2024) 18 X. Liu et al. 

# Appendix 

Section A makes a detailed explanation about the workflow of our adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning strategy. Section B presents further insight into our dynamic geometry foundation model and the DyHM3D dataset. Section C illustrates qualitative navigation performance on both dy-namic and static VLN benchmarks. Section D details our real-world deployment and experimental results. 

## A Work Flow of Our Spatial Token Pruning Strategy 

The Algorithm 1 describes the workflow of our token pruning strategy, which corresponds to our section “3.3 Adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware spatial token pruning” in the manuscript. 

Algorithm 1: Adaptive-resolution and occupancy-aware token pruning 

Require: Local points {Pt}, poses {Tt}, fused tokens {Ft}, voxel size ∆, ratio ρ,selection rule Sel (·)

Ensure: Pruned token sets {Fpruned  

> t

}

1: for each historical frame t do 

2: Project points to world coordinates: Xt ← TtPt

3: Quantize Xt into adaptive voxel indices vt using ∆t

4: end for 

5: Group all tokens {Ft} by shared voxel index 6: for each voxel u with token set Tu do 

7: Select representative tokens Su ← Sel (Tu)

8: end for 

9: Mark all tokens in S 

> u

Su as initially preserved 10: for each frame t do 

11: If token ratio < ρ , compute importance scores for discarded tokens 12: Add highest-scoring discarded tokens until reaching the ratio ρ

13: Smooth the binary mask over a temporal window 14: Collect final preserved tokens Fpruned 

> t

15: end for 

16: return {Fpruned  

> t

}DyGeoVLN 19 

## B Dynamic Geometry Foundation Model 

B.1 Visualization of the DyHM3D Dataset 

We provide additional qualitative examples of the proposed DyHM3D dataset. As shown in Fig. 8, the dataset contains diverse indoor scenes with simulated human motions following navigable trajectories.  

> Fig. 8: Example cases of our DyHM3D dataset.

B.2 Extended Comparison of Reconstruction Performance 

To further evaluate the reconstruction quality, Figure 9 illustrates an extended qualitative comparison among π3 [23], VGGT [21], and our proposed DGFM. As observed, our model outperforms π3 and VGGT in dynamic human perception while maintaining competitive geometric completeness. In dynamic scenes, π3

and VGGT often exhibit spatial localization inaccuracies, and the reconstructed human figures frequently suffer from noticeable geometric distortions. In con-trast, our DGFM demonstrates strong robustness, consistently producing clear 20 X. Liu et al. 

and structurally coherent human geometries that closely align with the ground truth. In addition, our model yields a more uniform point cloud distribution in textureless regions and distant areas. Input Images Ground Truth Ours π3 VGGT 

Fig. 9: Qualitative comparison of reconstruction performance on dynamic scenes. DyGeoVLN 21 

## C Qualitative Results on Simulation Benchmarks 

C.1 Visualizations on Dynamic HA-VLN Benchmark 

Figure 10 illustrates the navigation results of our proposed DyGeoVLN model within the dynamic HA-VLN [7] benchmark. Instruction : Starting in the dining room, you will notice a couple engaged in a casual conversation. As you move, navigate 

to the left side of the dining table and chairs, ensuring you do not disturb their interaction. Continue your path toward the 

bookshelf, which stands as a prominent feature in the room. As you approach the bookshelf, locate the entryway to its right. 

Proceed through this entryway, maintaining a smooth and steady movement. Upon entering the family room, you will 

observe another couple having a intimate conversation. Stop at this point, taking care not to intrude on their personal space. Instruction : Proceed through the doorway, heading in the direction of the tub. As you move, notice an individual engaged 

in meditation or deep breathing exercises, possibly seated or in a relaxed posture. Upon reaching the tub, make a left turn 

and continue toward the bar area. Just before arriving at the bar, turn left again. Ascend the stairs, taking care to maintain 

balance and watch for any obstacles. As you reach the top, enter the first door on your right. Inside, stop just before 

reaching the table. During your journey, you may observe a group of friends in the lounge area, raising their glasses in a 

toast and enjoying cocktails, indicating a social gathering. 

Fig. 10: Qualitative results of our DyGeoVLN model on dynamic HA-VLN [7] bench-mark. (Cases 1-2) 22 X. Liu et al. Instruction : Starting in the living room, observe children engaged in playing video games, their attention focused on the 

screen as they manipulate controllers. As you move through the room, be careful not to disrupt their activity. Head towards 

the staircase and descend carefully, noting the steps as you go. Upon reaching the bottom, turn towards the room on the 

right. As you pass by, you might notice a child on the balcony, joyfully interacting with a pet, perhaps waving or calling out 

to it. Continue into the designated room and position yourself at the doorway of the bathroom, ensuring you are stationed 

without blocking the entrance. Instruction : Commence your path in the dining room, where a group of friends is gathered around the table, engaged in 

lively conversation and laughter as they share stories over dinner. Move through this space, observing the camaraderie and 

the arrangement of dishes and cutlery on the table. Transition into the kitchen, where you notice someone diligently setting 

the table for on upcoming meal. This person might be placing plates, arranging utensils, or positioning glasses. Continue 

your journey by waking through the kitchen, making your way to the right of the bathroom. As you proceed, take note of 

any fixtures or decor that might be present in the hallway. Finaly, enter the bedroom through the door on the right and 

come to a stop. In this room, you might see a bed, a dresser, and other typical bedroom furnishings, providing a sense of 

the space's purpose and layout. Instruction : Proceed along the red carpet, moving away from the painting. As you walk, keep the chairs aligned on your 

right side. Continue following the poth of the red carpet as it turns a corner. In the lounge area, observe an individual 

engaged in phone conversation while pacing back and forth. Nearby, another person is capturing photographs of the view, 

possibly using a camera or smartphone. Maintain your course along the carpet until you reach a point just before the 

double doors, positioned at the opposite corner from where you started. At this location, you might notice someone 

exploring the room with curiosity, examining various elements of the space. Ensure your movements are smooth and 

unobtrusive, allowing the activities around you to proceed without disruption. 

Fig. 10: Qualitative results of our DyGeoVLN model on dynamic HA-VLN [7] bench-mark. (Cases 3-5 continued). DyGeoVLN 23 

C.2 Visualizations on Static VLN Benchmark 

Figure 11 illustrates the results of our proposed DyGeoVLN model within the static R2R-CE [11] VLN benchmark. Instruction : Face sink and turn right. Exit the room through the door. Turn right and walk between chairs and couch. Stop 

near round table. Instruction : Turn around with your back facing the bath tub. Walk forwards through the rounded entry way towards the 

two tan colored picture frames. Turn right in front of the frames. Walk past the piano. Continue walking towards the table 

with the clay vase and plants. Stop right in front of the table in front of the clay vase. Instruction : Walk straight past TV, past fridge, up 5 stairs and stop at the top. Instruction : Go down the path on the left towards the large dining room. Enter and go down the red carpet on the right 

side of the room, stopping at the door leading into another room. 

Fig. 11: Qualitative results of our DyGeoVLN model on R2R-CE [11] benchmark. 24 X. Liu et al. 

## D Real-world Experiments 

D.1 Real-world Experiment Setup 

Our real-world experiments are conducted using a Unitree Go1 quadruped robot. As shown in Figure 12, the legged platform is equipped with a forward-facing Intel RealSense D435i camera and an onboard NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano. The D435i continuously provides video streams, which are received by the Jetson Orin Nano. The Jetson packages the streams into sequences of monocular RGB frames and transmits them via Wi-Fi to a local server, where our DyGeoVLN policy is deployed and runs in real time. For each incoming frame sequence and language instruction, the workstation runs DyGeoVLN and sends back the predicted continuous trajectories to the robot. Onboard the robot, the Orin Nano serves as the interface between planning and control: it receives waypoints, fuses them with the robot’s ego state, and generates corresponding low-level control commands, which are transmitted through the SDK interface to drive the robot. Realsense D435i    

> Jetson Orin Nano
> (a) (b)
> Unitree Go1 Robot
> Robot Onboard Computing Unit
> MPC controller
> Local Server
> Our DyGeoVLN Model
> RGB image
> sequences Velocity/Joints
> Compressed
> & Upload Trajectory

Fig. 12: Setup of real-world experiments: (a) Hardware configuration of the quadruped robot; (b) Schematic of the real-world deployment pipeline. DyGeoVLN 25 

D.2 Real-world Qualitative Results 

We evaluate our model in several challenging settings, including cluttered rooms and corridors with moving people, as shown in Figure 13. Instruction : Walk around and go out of current room, turn left and walk along the corridor, find a green skateboard at the 

end of corridor. Stop near the green skateboard. 

Instruction : Walk around and go out of current room, turn left and walk along the corridor, find a green skateboard at the 

end of corridor. Be careful not hit the people during your move. Stop near the green skateboard. 

Instruction : Move forward along the hallway, when you see the intersection with a black chair in front of you, turn right 

and keep moving straightforward, stop near the trash bin on the slightly left of you. 

Instruction : Go straight forward along the corridor, walk pass the mirror on your right side, keep going forward when 

reaching the intersection until you reach the end of corridor. Then turn right and enter into the lecture, stop near the chair in 

front of you. 

Instruction : Move forward along the corridor until you reach the main hall, be careful not to collide with moving 

pedestrians while you are walking, then move forward to find the red fire extinguisher in front of you, stop near the fire 

extinguisher. 

Instruction : Walk forward past the glass doors to enter the building. Continue straight ahead until you see a gray door. 

Turn slightly left and keep moving forward. Stop next to the silver elevator doors. Ensure you avoid moving pedestrians 

along the way. 

Fig. 13: Qualitative results of our DyGeoVLN model on real-world experiments: in-cluding dynamic and static scenarios.