Title: Can a Robot Walk the Robotic Dog: Triple-Zero Collaborative Navigation for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21723v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:49:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Can a Robot Walk the Robotic Dog: Triple-Zero Collaborative Navigation for Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems 

Yaxuan Wang †1, Yifan Xiang †2 Ke Li 3, Xun Zhang 2, Bowen Ye 2, Zhuochen Fan 4,2, Fei Wei 5

and Tong Yang ∗2

Abstract — We present Triple Zero Path Plan-ning (TZPP), a collaborative framework for het-erogeneous multi-robot systems that requires zero training, zero prior knowledge, and zero simulation. TZPP employs a coordinator –explorer architecture: a humanoid robot handles task coordination, while a quadruped robot explores and identifies feasible paths using guidance from a multimodal large lan-guage model. We implement TZPP on Unitree G1 and Go2 robots and evaluate it across diverse indoor and outdoor environments, including obstacle-rich and landmark-sparse settings. Experiments show that TZPP achieves robust, human-comparable efficiency and strong adaptability to unseen scenarios. By elim-inating reliance on training and simulation, TZPP offers a practical path toward real-world deploy-ment of heterogeneous robot cooperation. Our code and video are provided at: https://github.com/triple-zeropp/Triple-zero-robot-agent 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Multi-robot systems (MRS) have shown signifi-cant potential in applications ranging from logistics to disaster response. In particular, heterogeneous MRS        

> 1Yuanpei College, Peking University
> 2School of Computer Science, Peking University
> 3School of Computer Science ，Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
> 4Pengcheng Laboratory
> 5Beijing Jinruyi Large Model Technology Co., Ltd.
> ∗Corresponding author: Tong Yang. Email: yangtong@pku.edu.cn.
> †These authors contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Key Research and De-velopment Program of China under Grant No. 2024YFB2906603, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 62372009). The authors would like to thank Beijing Jinruyi Large Model Technology Co., Ltd. for their strong support and close collabo-ration.The authors also thank Yuanpei College, Peking University, for its support.

can leverage the complementary strengths of different platforms (e.g., the mobility of quadrupeds and the manipulation capabilities of humanoids) to perform complex tasks. Among these tasks, path planning is a key challenge for such collaboration. Currently, an emerging direction to address this problem is multi-robot collaboration and path planning based on large language models (LLMs)[1][2][3][4][5]. Existing studies on multi-agent collaborative path planning mainly fall into three categories: (1) learning-based approaches that rely on large-scale training or fine-tuning (e.g., Graph-Based[2], TaskExp[6]), which can tackle novel problems in unfamiliar environments to some extent but incur high training and deployment costs; (2) methods dependent on prior maps or scene modeling (e.g., ZeroCAP[7], COHERENT[8]), which perform well in known environments but tend to generalize poorly and fail in real, dynamic settings; and (3) simulation-driven approaches (e.g., SIGMA[9], Graph-Based[2]), which train and validate mainly in virtual environ-ments and thus heavily depend on the quality of the simulation —if there is a large gap or poor fidelity between simulation and reality, the real-world perfor-mance can be severely affected. A summary of how representative prior works align with the three criteria is provided in Table I. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a novel paradigm for multi-robot path planning— Triple Zero Path Planning (TZPP)—designed to sup-port heterogeneous agents in autonomously exploring                         

> arXiv:2603.21723v1 [cs.RO] 23 Mar 2026 TABLE I
> Comparison Against the Triple Zero Criteria
> Method No Training No Prior Knowledge No Simulation Ours √√√
> ZeroCAP [7] √××
> TaskExp [6] ×√×
> SIGMA [9] ×××
> Hybrid [10] √×√
> COHERENT [8] √×√
> Graph-Based [2] ×××
> MIM [11] √×√

and reaching targets in unknown, complex environ-ments. Taking the collaboration between a humanoid agent and a quadruped agent as an example, we construct a coordinator –explorer architecture: the hu-manoid handles high-level task coordination and nav-igation, while the quadruped undertakes environment exploration and feasible path identification. We de-ploy this framework in real-world environments, where the G1 –Go2 multi-agent system achieves human-level collaborative efficiency across multiple tasks, stably accomplishing complex navigation missions and ef-fectively emulating human exploration and decision-making behaviors. These results validate the sound-ness and innovation of the paradigm ’s architecture and mechanisms. Overall, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:  

> •

We propose the first heterogeneous agent path plan-ning paradigm satisfying the “Triple Zero” con-straints —zero training, zero prior knowledge, and zero simulation dependency. Without additional training or prior conditions, the approach enables multi-robot systems to autonomously explore and plan paths in real, dynamic, and human-free envi-ronments, reducing application costs and enhancing system robustness.  

> •

We design and validate a heterogeneous robot col-laboration mechanism in the real-world. We test the path planning paradigm in various settings, including open spaces, obstacle-rich environments, and both indoor and outdoor scenarios. The result demonstrate human-level performance, confirming the method ’s practicality and scalability. TZPP lays the groundwork for future LLM-based multi-robot systems in real-world applications. It not only accelerates the transition of multi-robot path planning from simulation to reality but also offers new insights and tools for heterogeneous robot collabora-tion. We have released part of our data and experi-mental benchmarks to facilitate further research. 

II. RELATED WORKS 

A. Exploration and Navigation in Unknown Environ-ments 

For tasks that involve exploration and navigation in unknown environments, a common approach is to enhance the generalization capability of the model in unfamiliar settings through pretraining[1][6][12][13], including the TaskExp method[6], diffusion-based approaches[12]. These methods demonstrate better adaptability compared to traditional map-dependent approaches[14][15][16][17] but rely heavily on large amounts of high-quality data for pre-training. Fur-thermore, due to the scarcity of real-world scene data, most research uses simulated environments[1][3][6]. However, studies trained and tested in simulated en-vironments often struggle to translate into practical applications due to the gap between realistic and idealized settings. 

B. Collaboration of Heterogeneous Agents 

Homogeneous multiagent collaboration architec-tures[7][18][19][20][21] are relatively simple in struc-tural design and control logic, making them easy to implement and scale. However, a lack of appropri-ate labor management can lead to problems such as planning confusion and resource wastage. In contrast, heterogeneous multi-agent collaboration systems con-sist of robots with different functionalities or mor-phologies. They improve execution efficiency through task allocation and specialized design, enabling more rational management over tasks such as navigation and transportation. Representative work includes the GATAR model and perception sharing among hetero-geneous robots[1][2][3], which facilitate collaborative decision making among multiple agents and demon-strate favorable scalability and environmental adapt-ability. 

C. Integration of VLMs and Robotics 

Traditional robotic systems depend on prede-fined rules and specialized perception modules[22][23]. While these methods perform reliably in structured environments, their generalization capability is lim-ited when faced with open-ended instructions and dynamic environments. Robotic systems incorporat-ing Vision-Language Models (VLMs) significantly en-hance the comprehension of natural language instruc-tions and environmental adaptability through multi-modal fusion and semantic reasoning. This enables zero-shot generalization to unseen instructions[24], thereby supporting more intelligent decision-making. 

III. Our TZPP System 

A. Overview 

This study focuses on the path planning problem of heterogeneous multi-agent systems, aiming to lever-age the complementary strengths of different agents through division of labor and collaboration to achieve efficient exploration of complex real-world environ-ments. The research covers a variety of representative scenarios (including both indoor and outdoor settings) and diverse terrains (such as slopes and staircases).  

> Fig. 1. The System Pipeline of TZPP 11Robot icons created by Good Ware, robot dog icons created by Izwar Muis - Flaticon

In this work, we take a humanoid agent and a quadruped agent as a typical interaction pair: the hu-manoid serves as a valuable but relatively less mobile ”core” agent, while the quadruped acts as a lower-value but more mobile auxiliary agent. The objective is to guide the core agent, with the collaborative support of the auxiliary agent, to explore unknown environments and reach designated target locations 

LT .It’s noteworthy that complex real-world environ-ments pose significant challenges for path planning and task recognition in agent systems. In scenarios lacking salient landmarks, agents struggle to obtain effective localization information, leading to unreliable position estimates, reducing the accuracy of action decisions. What’s more, in environments where direct access to the target is not possible, agents often need to detour for the goal. To address these challenges, this study adopts a coordinator –explorer architecture design. Specifically, the humanoid, as the representative of the core agent, is responsible for task coordination and reaching the designated location, while the quadruped, as the aux-iliary agent, undertakes environment exploration and the identification of feasible paths or intermediate waypoints. A typical pipeline of the design is shown in Fig. 1. TABLE II           

> Description of Variables
> Variable Description
> LTHigh-level task target location (natural language)
> LWQuadruped waypoint location (natural language)
> CInter-agent interaction context
> IBHumanoid’s forward perceptual data
> IDQuadruped’s forward perceptual data
> ddt Euclidean distance to target
> XLandmark-sparse mode
> YObstacle-rich mode
> Rscan Search half-angle

B. Humanoid Pipeline 

The humanoid manages high-level coordination through an iterative cycle of path evaluation–pilot exploration–task execution as shown in Fig. 2. In the path-evaluation stage, it assesses the feasibility of reaching the global target LT based on perceived Fig. 2. Iteration logic of the humanoid 

environmental information IB . If conditions are favor-able, it proceeds directly to task execution; otherwise, it initiates pilot exploration by assigning intermediate waypoints to the quadruped. During exploration, the humanoid continuously incorporates perceptual feedback and selectively inte-grates beneficial waypoints into its navigation plan. In the task-execution stage, it autonomously updates its motion strategy based on the latest environmental ob-servations, progressively approaching and ultimately reaching the target location. 

C. Quadruped Pipeline 

The quadruped agent is responsible for envi-ronmental exploration and feasible path identifica-tion. We designed two different exploration strategies, 

Mode X and Mode Y, to help the quadruped to better accommodate landmark-sparse and obstacle-rich envi-ronments respectively. Its logical workflow, as shown in Algorithm 1, proceeds as follows. First, the agent performs pattern matching based on environmental information to determine whether the current situ-ation corresponds to a obstacle-rich environment. It then enters a cyclic process consisting of four phases: ”environment detection -task execution - target detec-tion –environment exploration.” In the environment-detection phase, the quadruped performs omnidirectional rotational scanning to assess the visibility of the assigned waypoint. If the waypoint is not visible, it immediately terminates the task and reports infeasibility to the humanoid agent. If the waypoint is visible, it proceeds to the task-execution phase, moves to the waypoint, returns environmental perception information to the humanoid, and enters the target-detection phase. 

Algorithm 1: Quadruped Robot Pipeline                                                                             

> Input: Humanoid’s target location LT, Quadruped’s waypoint location LW
> Output: Reach waypoint successful/failed
> 1if EnvAllReachable (ID)then 2mode ←X
> 3else 4mode ←Y
> 5end 6for 360 degrees rotation do 7if InspectFor (LW, I D)= false then 8return false
> 9end 10 end 11 while true do 12 MoveTo (LW, I D);
> 13 for 360 degrees rotation do 14 if InspectFor (LT, I D)= true and
> PathIdeal (LT, I D)= true then 15 return true
> 16 end 17 end 18 if mode is Ythen 19 for -Rscan to + Rscan degrees rotation do 20 if InspectFor (‘passage’ , I D)= true then 21 return true
> 22 end 23 end 24 end 25 return false
> 26 end

In the target-detection phase, the quadruped per-forms full-range scanning to detect the visibility of the high-level task target and assess path feasibility. If the target is visible and a feasible path exists, it sends a exploration successful signal and current environmental information to the humanoid. If the target is not in sight, or is visible but unreachable from the current position while the system is oper-ating under a landmark-sparse mode, the quadruped terminates the task and reports current environmental information. In a non –globally accessible mode, the agent additionally performs a locally bounded, angle-restricted scan to probe for the existence of potential passages or corridors. 

D. Adaptive Mode X/Y Strategy 

To ensure robust navigation across heterogeneous environments, the robot employs an adaptive switch-ing mechanism between two operational modes: Mode X (landmark-sparse) and Mode Y (obstacle-dense). Mode selection is governed by an environmental ac-cessibility assessment derived from the current per-ceptual observation ID .Mode X is activated in regions characterized by high global reachability but a dearth of salient features. In this state, the system prioritizes exten-sive repositioning and 360 ◦ panoramic scanning. This strategy maximizes target visibility and mitigates re-dundant exploration resulting from perceptual alias-ing in feature-poor environments. Mode Y is triggered when topographical con-straints or high obstacle density impede direct global navigation. Beyond standard waypoint execution, the robot performs constrained scanning within a local-ized search half-angle Rscan to identify traversable corridors or detours. This allows for calculated de-viations from the goal-directed path to circumvent obstacles in complex spaces. This dual-mode framework enables the system to autonomously adapt its exploration behavior to the environmental structure, eliminating the need for environment-specific parameter tuning. 

IV. EXPERIMENT 

This experiment aims to address the following questions:  

> •

To what extent can our TZPP paradigm solve the problem of collaborative exploration in complex en-vironments by heterogeneous multi-agent systems?  

> •

How capable are our TZPP and its two integrated versions (X and Y) when handling scenes with miss-ing landmarks and indirectly navigable scenarios?  

> •

What is the application prospect of our hetero-geneous multi-agent combination in path planning problems? 

A. Experimental Setup 

The proposed TZPP method is evaluated across multiple structurally complex, previously unseen physical environments to assess navigation perfor-mance in scenarios where the target is non-line-of-sight (NLOS) from the agent ’s initial position. The experimental framework utilizes the Unitree G1 Edu humanoid and Unitree Go2 Edu quadruped plat-forms. The perception and decision-making archi-tecture is powered by the Doubao-vision-3.6 large vision-language model. All trials were conducted in real-world settings without prior simulation or environment-specific fine-tuning to ensure the validity of the system’s zero-shot generalization capabilities. We evaluate the interaction paradigm across six dimensions using 16 metrics. Global Task Effi-ciency (Dimension 1) is quantified by the total completion time T IM E , the humanoid ’s cumulative travel distance D, and its total rotation angle R. Path Planning Fidelity (Dimension 2) is assessed via the task completion rate CR ; the path score P S ,defined as 100 × (Loptimal /Lactual ), where Loptimal and 

Lactual represent the optimal and actual path lengths, respectively; and the root mean square error ( RM SE )of the humanoid ’s vertical path deviation: 

RM SE =

√√√√ 1

n

> n

∑

> j=1

min  

> i

∥Pj − p(Pj , L i)∥2 (1) 

Autonomous Exploration (Dimension 3) 

and Multi-Agent Coordination (Dimension 4) 

evaluate the quadruped ’s utility. These include the key point discovery count NK ; the effective explo-ration rate EER ; the scouting frequency NE , which is the total number of instances where the quadruped performs reconnaissance for the humanoid agent; the humanoid movement count ( Nmove ); and the guid-ance efficiency coefficient VGE = Dh/Dq , where Dh

and Dq represent the cumulative distances traveled by the humanoid and quadruped, respectively. A

VGE value approaching unity from the left signifies optimal coordination. Environmental Robustness (Dimension 5) evaluates adaptability in feature-poor scenes via the quadruped’s command compliance rate CCR q , revisit counts for both agents N h

> rev

, N q

> rev

,and the quadruped ’s redundant rotation count N q

> rot

.For Constrained Navigation (Dimension 6) ,we introduce the obstacle avoidance coefficient Vavoid .Let P (t) be a point on the trajectory and Q(t) = 

argmin X∈O ∥P (t) − X∥ be its projection onto the ob-stacle surface O. The avoidance magnitude is defined by the arc length Lavoid of the trajectory formed by 

Q(t):

Lavoid = ArcLength 

(

{Q(t) | t ∈ [0 , 1] }

)

(2) 

Vavoid = L(actual )

> avoid

L(optimal )

> avoid

(3) The evaluation encompasses five distinct real-world scenarios: an L-turn sofa search (Scene 1); a unilateral-access narrow pillar (Scene 2); a bilateral-passable pillar (Scene 3); a Z-turn fire extinguisher localization (Scene 4); and a ramp-mediated detour to bypass structural steps (Scene 5). Unless otherwise specified, the following default parameter settings are employed across all experi-mental trials: maximum displacement and rotation of agents per turn: dmax = 2 m and Rmax = π/2 rad respectively; target achievement threshold dachieve =0.5 m; localized search half-angle Rscan = π/2 rad. 

B. Comparative Evaluation of TZPP and Human Op-erators in Collaborative Path Planning 

In this section, we conduct a comparative evalua-tion between TZPP and human operators on the same navigation tasks. To ensure fairness, two naive partici-pants were provided with the same information as the robotic system: real-time first-person visual streams from both the humanoid and quadruped sensors, with-out access to any global or third-person view. The control interface and action constraints were identical to those used by the autonomous system.                                           

> TABLE III
> Task finish comparison of TZPP vs. human baseline
> TZPP System Human baseline
> T IM E ↓(s) D↓(m) R↓(rad) T IM E ↓(s) D↓(m) R↓(rad) scene 1 64.00 4.00 1.57 53.30 3.80 1.57 scene 2 18.22 2.60 1.05 17.47 2.57 0.79 scene 3 28.58 4.55 2.83 28.01 4.53 2.09 scene 4 120.58 6.80 4.71 80.00 6.47 4.71 scene 5 154.89 14.60 11.78 94.21 13.83 4.29

Tables III to VI present the results. The G1 –Go2 system achieves performance comparable to human operators across most metrics. In particular, for the humanoid movement distance ( D), the autonomous 

> TABLE IV
> Task planning comparison of G1-Go2 system vs. human baseline

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

P S ↑ RM SE ↓ P S ↑ RM SE ↓

scene 1 68.18 85.99 82.19 56.05 scene 2 98.08 14.42 99.23 6.24 scene 3 96.74 40.75 97.13 21.21 scene 4 92.35 120.91 97.06 58.52 scene 5 88.18 56.54 93.13 33.22 

> TABLE V
> Quadrupedal Agent exploration comparison of G1-Go2 system vs. human baseline

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

NK ↑ EER ↑ NK ↑ EER ↑

scene 1 2 100% 2 100% scene 2 2 100% 2 100% scene 3 2 100% 2 100% scene 4 4 80% 2 100% scene 5 6 100% 6 100% 

> TABLE VI
> Collaboration comparison of G1-Go2 system vs. human baseline

G1-Go2 System Human baseline 

NE VGE ↓ Nmove ↓ NE VGE ↓ Nmove ↓

scene 1 2 0.98 5 2 0.98 2scene 2 1 0.86 2 1 0.91 2scene 3 2 0.76 5 1 0.91 2scene 4 5 0.72 6 4 0.88 5scene 5 6 0.96 9 5 1.03 6

system reaches over 95 % of human performance. While performance gaps remain in certain scenar-ios, the results indicate that the proposed system can achieve competitive collaborative efficiency under equivalent information and control conditions. These findings suggest that TZPP provides a viable coor-dination mechanism with promising robustness and generalization capability in unseen environments. 

C. Ablation Study on Mode X/Y Mechanism 

To evaluate the contribution of the adaptive exploration strategy, we compare the full G1 –Go2 system with two degraded variants: one with Mode X disabled (G1 –Go2(-X)) and one with Mode Y disabled (G1 –Go2(-Y)), under identical task settings. Human operators are included as a reference baseline under the same perceptual and control constraints. TABLE VII 

> Comparative Ablation Study on Heterogeneous Agents

G1-Go2 G1-only TIME ↓ PS ↑ CR ↑ RSME ↓ TIME ↓ PS ↑ CR ↑ RSME ↓

scene 1 64.00 68.18 100% 85.99 43.12 67.47 100% 86.69 scene 2 18.22 98.08 100% 14.42 16.14 75.59 100% 124.12 scene 3 28.58 96.74 100% 40.75 N/A N/A 33.33% N/A scene 4 120.58 92.35 100% 120.91 N/A N/A 40.00% N/A 

> TABLE VIII
> Open area comparison of G1-Go2(without Mode X), G1-Go2 system and human baseline

Time ↓ CCR q ↑ N1↓ N2↓ N3↓

G1(no X)-Go2 43.78 56.27% 0.6 1.4 3G1-Go2 46.28 86.00% 0 0.2 0.6 Human 54.60 80.00% 0 0 0.2         

> N1, N 2, N 3represent Nh
> rev ,Nq
> rev ,Nq
> rot respectively.
> TABLE IX
> Obstacle Handling comparison of G1-Go2(without Mode Y), G1-Go2 system and human baseline

Time ↓ Vavoid 

G1(no Y)-Go2 System N/A 0.23 G1-Go2 System 154.89 1.00 Human baseline 94.21 1.00 

1) In Open Scenarios Lacking Landmarks: The experiments were conducted in open environments without salient visual references (e.g., locating a sofa in a corridor). As shown in Table VIII, disabling Mode X leads to a noticeable decrease in exploration efficiency and task stability. This result suggests that Mode Ximproves performance in landmark-sparse scenes by reducing repeated exploration caused by visual ambi-guity and limited reference cues. 

2) In Scenarios without Direct Accessible Paths: 

The experiments were conducted in obstacle-rich en-vironments requiring detour-based navigation (e.g., navigating around structural barriers or staircases). As shown in Table IX, removing Mode Y signif-icantly reduces success rates and planning efficiency. The results indicate that Mode Y enhances navigation in structurally constrained environments by enabling corridor probing and temporary deviation from the direct goal direction. Overall, the results show that Mode X and Mode Y address different environmental challenges and jointly improve system adaptability across heteroge-neous scenarios. 

D. Ablation Study on the Necessity of Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Systems for Navigation 

As shown in Table VII, on path planning tasks, the heterogeneous multi-agent system composed of G1 and Go2 demonstrates significantly superior perfor-mance compared to using only a single G1 agent. This comparison illustrates that by integrating the com-plementary capabilities of heterogeneous agents, the heterogeneous multi-agent system can more effectively address path planning challenges in complex environ-ments. It not only highlights its significant advantages in perception coverage, decision-making coordination, and task allocation but also demonstrates the consid-erable potential and promising development prospects of this method for future practical applications. 

V. CONCLUSIONS 

This paper introduced Triple Zero Path Planning (TZPP), a heterogeneous robot collaboration mecha-nism that requires no training, no prior knowledge, and no simulation. By leveraging a coordinator –ex-plorer architecture between humanoid and quadruped robots, TZPP enables robust exploration, efficient path planning, and adaptive navigation in diverse, unseen real-world environments. Our experiments demonstrate that TZPP achieves human-comparable performance while maintaining strong adaptability under landmark-sparse and obstacle-rich scenarios. These results verify the feasibility and practicality of TZPP for real-world deployment, laying the founda-tion for scalable heterogeneous multi-agent systems in dynamic environments. References 

[1] L. Ratnabala, A. Fedoseev, R. Peter, and D. Tsetserukou, “Magn-net: Multi-agent graph neural network-based efficient task alloca-tion for autonomous vehicles with deep reinforcement learning,” 2025. [2] J. Peng, H. Viswanath, and A. Bera, “Graph-based decentralized task allocation for multi-robot target localization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 10676–10683, 2024. [3] Y. Chen and J. Xiao, “Target search and navigation in heteroge-neous robot systems with deep reinforcement learning,” Machine Intelligence Research , vol. 22, p. 79 –90, Jan. 2025. [4] Z. Mandi, S. Jain, and S. Song, “Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language models,” 2023. [5] Y. Chen, J. Arkin, Y. Zhang, N. Roy, and C. Fan, “Scalable multi-robot collaboration with large language models: Centralized or decentralized systems?,” 2024. [6] S. Zhu, Y. Zhao, Y. Xu, A. Chen, J. Chen, and J. Xu, “Taskexp: Enhancing generalization of multi-robot exploration with multi-task pre-training,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 6559–6565, 2025. [7] V. L. N. Venkatesh and B.-C. Min, “Zerocap: Zero-shot multi-robot context aware pattern formation via large language models,” 2025. [8] A. Author, B. Author, and C. Author, “Coherent: Collaboration of heterogeneous models for autonomous agents,” arXiv preprint ,2024. arXiv:2409.15146. [9] X. Author, Y. Author, and Z. Author, “Sigma: Sheaf-informed geometric multi-agent pathfinding,” arXiv preprint , 2025. arXiv:2502.06440. [10] K. de Vos, E. Torta, H. Bruyninckx, C. L. Martinez, and R. van de Molengraft, “Hybrid decision making for scalable multi-agent nav-igation: Integrating semantic maps, discrete coordination, and model predictive control,” 2024. [11] A. J. Sathyamoorthy, K. Weerakoon, M. Elnoor, M. Russell, J. Pusey, and D. Manocha, “Mim: Indoor and outdoor navigation in complex environments using multi-layer intensity maps,” in 

2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 10917–10924, 2024. [12] C. Pan, Z. Yi, G. Shi, and G. Qu, “Model-based diffusion for trajectory optimization,” 2024. [13] K. Su, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Zhu, and B. Zhang, “To boost zero-shot generalization for embodied reasoning with vision-language pre-training,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 33, pp. 5370–5381, 2024. [14] K. Rana, J. Haviland, S. Garg, J. Abou-Chakra, I. Reid, and N. Suenderhauf, “Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning,” 2023. [15] M. Booker, G. Byrd, B. Kemp, A. Schmidt, and C. Rivera, “Embodiedrag: Dynamic 3d scene graph retrieval for efficient and scalable robot task planning,” 2024. [16] A. Werby, C. Huang, M. Büchner, A. Valada, and W. Bur-gard, “Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language-grounded robot navigation,” in First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 ,2024. [17] A. Meysami, S. Kelouwani, J.-C. Cuilliere, V. Francois, A. Amamou, and B. Allani, “An efficient indoor large map global path planning for robot navigation,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 248, p. 123388, 2024. [18] W. Zhang, C. Street, and M. Mansouri, “Multi-nonholonomic robot object transportation with obstacle crossing using a de-formable sheet,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 7349–7355, 2025. [19] S. Wu, C. Wang, J. Pan, D. Han, and Z. Zhao, “Bayesian-guided evolutionary strategy with rrt for multi-robot exploration,” in 

2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 12720–12726, 2024. [20] Z. Xiao, P. Li, C. Liu, H. Gao, and X. Wang, “Macns: A generic graph neural network integrated deep reinforcement learning based multi-agent collaborative navigation system for dynamic trajectory planning,” Information Fusion , vol. 105, p. 102250, 2024. [21] T. Soualhi, N. Crombez, Y. Ruichek, A. Lombard, and S. Galland, “Learning decentralized multi-robot pointgoal navigation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 4117–4124, 2025. [22] F. Khadivar, K. Chatzilygeroudis, and A. Billard, “Self-correcting quadratic programming-based robot control,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 5236–5247, 2023. [23] A. Ghorbanpour, “Cooperative robot manipulators dynamical modeling and control: An overview,” Dynamics , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 820–854, 2023. [24] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn, P. Flo-rence, C. Fu, M. G. Arenas, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Han, K. Haus-man, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, B. Ichter, A. Irpan, N. Joshi, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov, Y. Kuang, I. Leal, L. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, H. Michalewski, I. Mordatch, K. Pertsch, K. Rao, K. Rey-mann, M. Ryoo, G. Salazar, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, J. Singh, A. Singh, R. Soricut, H. Tran, V. Vanhoucke, Q. Vuong, A. Wahid, S. Welker, P. Wohlhart, J. Wu, F. Xia, T. Xiao, P. Xu, S. Xu, T. Yu, and B. Zitkovich, “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” 2023.