Title: MANSION: Multi-floor lANguage-to-3D Scene generatIOn for loNg-horizon tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11554v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:34:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# MANSION: Multi-floor lANguage-to-3D Scene generatIOn for loNg-horizon tasks 

## Lirong Che ∗,1,2 Shuo Wen ∗,3 

> §

## Shan Huang 1 Chuang Wang 2

## Yuzhe Yang 2 Gregory Dudek 3 Xueqian Wang †,1 Jian Su †,2

> 1

Tsinghua University 2AgiBot 3McGill University, MILA - Quebec AI Institute 

Figure 1. MansionWorld: The first building-scale dataset for long-horizon embodied AI tasks. Generated by our MANSION 

framework, this dataset represents the first large-scale collection of multi-story, customizable themed environments. The visualization highlights four representative examples: Kindergarten, Hospital, Supermarket, and a Six-story Office Building, which feature complex functional zoning and fully navigable vertical connections to support long-horizon, cross-floor embodied AI tasks. You can access the MansionWorld dataset at: Link to MansionWorld 

## Abstract 

Real-world robotic tasks are long-horizon and often span multiple floors, demanding rich spatial reasoning. How-ever, existing embodied benchmarks are largely confined to single-floor in-house environments, failing to reflect the complexity of real-world tasks. We introduce MAN-SION , the first language-driven framework for generating building-scale, multi-floor 3D environments. Being aware of vertical structural constraints, MANSION generates re-alistic, navigable whole-building structures with diverse, human-friendly scenes, enabling the development and eval-    

> * Equal contribution. †Corresponding authors. §Work done during an internship at Agibot

uation of cross-floor long-horizon tasks. Building on this framework, we release MansionWorld , a dataset of over 1,000 diverse buildings ranging from hospitals to offices, alongside a Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent that cus-tomizes these environments using open-vocabulary com-mands to meet specific user needs. Benchmarking reveals that state-of-the-art agents degrade sharply in our settings, establishing MANSION as a critical testbed for the next generation of spatial reasoning and planning. 

## 1. Introduction 

The ultimate goal of Embodied AI is to build agents that can autonomously reason and accomplish any difficult tasks 1

> arXiv:2603.11554v1 [cs.CV] 12 Mar 2026

in the complex real world. Many critical applications, ranging from package delivery in offices, supply transport in hospitals, to multi-step chores at home, are inherently long-horizon and at the building scale. These tasks de-mand not only low-level skills such as navigation and ob-ject manipulation [6, 12, 51], but also strong capabilities for long-horizon spatial planning, reasoning, and mem-ory [4, 18, 41]. Recent work has underscored the need for unified planning of manipulation and navigation in con-strained, building-wide settings [26, 39], yet, to the best of our knowledge, no current benchmarks match this level of complexity. One central challenge is the mismatch between the lim-ited existing scene resources and the growing demand from embodied AI and 3D scene generation algorithms for large-scale, diverse, and interactive simulation environments. Al-though real-world scanned datasets provide high-fidelity geometry and textures [5, 8], the data is expensive to col-lect and hard to recycle for downstream editing or recon-figuration, making it difficult to match task requirements. Synthetic environments, generated either procedurally [9] or by data-driven, LLM-based approaches [37, 47], largely focus on single-floor rooms or apartment-scale layouts, and rarely model vertical structure, inter-floor portals, or tran-sit facilities such as elevators and staircases explicitly. As a result, the absence of scalable, easily reconfigurable, and building-scale simulation environments has become a key bottleneck for progress in embodied AI, directly limiting research on long-horizon embodied tasks with a focus on spatial reasoning. To address these problems, we introduce MANSION , a language-driven framework for building-scale environment generation and long-horizon task evaluation. Building on top of it, we also introduce the generated dataset and em-bodied evaluation ecosystem, MansionWorld . See Fig. 1. Our webpage containing the code can be found at: Man-sion Webpage. We summarize our main contributions as follows: • We propose a hybrid multimodal large language model (MLLM)–geometry pipeline that turns natural-language instructions into complete multi-story buildings in 3D scenes, represented as semantically grounded, vertically aligned vector floorplans, with innovative spatial con-straints. These layouts can be used off-the-shelf in AI2-THOR [21] and exported to other physics simulators. • We extend the original AI2-THOR [21] framework with reusable tunneling assets and cross-floor skill APIs, en-abling building-scale, multi-floor embodied tasks to be defined and evaluated. • We design a Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent that transforms the generated static buildings into an adaptable playground by enabling fine-grained scene modifications, allowing the versatile recycling of the same environment to meet the needs of a variety of tasks. • We release MansionWorld , a large-scale ecosystem of over 1,000 diverse, interactive multi-floor buildings span-ning residential, office, and public facility domains. Through experiments on floorplan generation and embod-ied benchmarks, we show that our constrained-growth solver generalizes beyond standard residential datasets, while state-of-the-art embodied agents exhibit sharp degradation on our multi-floor tasks, underscoring the dif-ficulty and value of this setting. 

## 2. Related Work 

Long-Horizon and Multi-Level Embodied Tasks. Driven by recent progress in embodied manipulation and naviga-tion [6, 7, 12, 18–20, 28, 34, 38, 41, 51], robotic systems are increasingly tackling complex, long-horizon tasks at the building scale. To support these extended operations, sev-eral approaches incorporate spatio-temporal memory and topological representations to maintain awareness of the en-vironment state [4, 24, 49]. However, existing benchmarks for embodied tasks remain oversimplified, with isolated fo-cuses on either local close-range manipulation or naviga-tion under basic spatial connectivity, which lack the model-ing of interactions with architectural elements such as doors and elevators [2, 22, 23, 31, 40]. As a result, such bench-marks failed to present the key challenges in real multi-story buildings, including cross-floor mobility, structural interac-tions, and the joint demands of long-horizon planning and memory. This highlights the need for executable multi-floor environment benchmarks that can systematically evaluate navigation, interaction, planning, and memory in a unified setting [26, 39]. 

Floorplan Generation. As a foundational component for structured scene synthesis, the earliest methods in the field of floorplan used finite state grammars [35] or L-systems [3, 15]. More recent methods utilized graph neu-ral networks to convert room adjacencies into layouts [16], while recent diffusion models [17, 37] and LLM-guided paradigms [33, 52] have enabled the direct generation of diverse vector floorplans from text. Despite their impres-sive performance on the topological correctness and diver-sity of single-story residences, these methods are almost universally confined to single-story layouts. They neither model the alignment of exterior contours between floors nor enforce the spatial consistency of vertical cores like stairs and elevator shafts. Furthermore, their output is typically a static vector or raster image, which lacks the executable se-mantics required for direct use in simulation and task plan-ning, making them unsuitable for cross-floor tasks. 

Language-driven 3D Scene Generation. To overcome the limitations of manual or scanned datasets [5, 8, 42, 44] and procedural generation [9] in scalability and seman-tics, recent research has leveraged LLMs as “scene direc-2Table 1. Comparison of floorplan generation methods. 

Bdry. /Topo. /Vert. denote Boundary/Topology/Vertical struc-ture. Boundary/Topology: controllable conditioning at test time. Vertical structure indicates cross-floor aligned cores (walls/rooms/regions) that persist across floors. Room type: resi-dent vs. open-vocab.                                                

> Method Type Bdry. Topo. Vert. core Room type Graph2Plan [16] model-based ✓✓×resident HouseDiffusion [37] model-based ×✓×resident GSDiff [17] model-based ✓××resident ProcTHOR [9] rule-based ✓××resident Holodeck [47] LLM ×××open-vocab
> AnyHome [14] LLM+model ×✓×resident ChatHouseDiffusion [33] LLM+model ✓✓×resident HouseLLM [52] LLM+model ×✓×resident
> MANSION LLM+rules ✓✓✓open-vocab

tors” to achieve controllable 3D synthesis. Methods like Holodeck generate layouts based on spatial constraints to support downstream tasks [10, 47]; SceneCraft emphasizes cross-room visual consistency [46]; and SceneWeaver en-hances physical plausibility through reflection cycles [48]. Despite progress in visual fidelity and in-plane task sup-port, these methods remain universally confined to single-story layouts. They fail to model or validate cross-floor con-nectivity via vertical core structures. Consequently, their topologically “flat” environments lack the complexity for long-horizon, cross-floor planning, hindering scaling to re-alistic, building-scale tasks. In contrast, our work generates building-scale environments that treat vertical structures as an explicit constraint, ensuring provable navigability and task-readiness. 

## 3. MANSION 

While effective for single-floor, existing floorplan genera-tors fail to scale to multi-story buildings due to two fun-damental limitations. First, these generators lack verti-cal consistency, making them unable to align exterior con-tours or critical vertical cores across floors. Secondly, their data-driven nature restricts them to ‘closed-world’ residen-tial datasets( see Table 1), failing to generalize to out-of-distribution types. MANSION systematically solves these issues. Our framework uniquely enforces vertical alignment as a first-class hard constraint, ensuring 3D structural validity. We also employ an MLLM-driven hybrid architecture that de-couples high-level semantics from low-level geometry. This design achieves true open-world scalability, generating di-verse building types without new data or retraining. 

3.1. MANSION Framework 

MANSION is a hierarchical multi-agent framework, as il-lustrated in Fig. 2, that progressively transforms natural-language-specified building requirements into interactive multi-floor 3D scenes. Throughout the generation pipeline, floorplan generation is the key bridge between high-level semantic planning and downstream scene instantiation. We therefore first formalize it as a verifiable constrained search problem, and then present the scene instantiation process. 

Floorplan generation. We begin by formalizing the generation task. Let the outer footprint of each floor be an orthogonal polygon Pf (where f indexes floors), and let V

denote the set of vertical structures (stairs, elevators, shafts, etc.). We denote by Qf,v ⊆ Pf the geometric footprint of vertical core v ∈ V on floor f , and only plan rooms in the free region 

Ωf = Pf \ [

> v∈V

Qf,v .

The high-level layout specification is given as a bubble di-agram G = ( R, E) [16, 17, 37]. Each node r ∈ R cor-responds to a room (or semantic region) to be instantiated, with target area ar ; an edge (ri, r j ) ∈ E indicates that an ad-jacency or connectivity relation should exist between ri and 

rj in the final layout, and may include room–room, room– vertical-core, and cross-floor relations. We formulate floorplan synthesis as a verifiable search over a candidate set :

L⋆ = arg max  

> L∈C

Score( L; w) s.t. Topo( L, G) = true ,

where L is the room partition on the current floor (or the entire building), represented as a set of polygonal regions inside Ωf , and C is a discrete candidate set produced by sampling and constrained growth. The function Score is an energy-based objective used to rank feasible candidates within C.To solve the above search problem, we organize floor-plan generation as a multi-MLLM subsystem orchestrated by LangGraph. The core idea is not to let the MLLM di-rectly regress complete room polygons, but to first decom-pose high-level semantic requirements into an intermediate representation that is more compatible with current MLLM capabilities, and then perform verifiable search under these intermediate constraints using a geometric solver. Specifically, a building-level planning node first deter-mines cross-floor functional zones, target area allocation, and global stylistic preferences from the user’s natural-language specification and the building footprint, thereby ensuring semantic and visual consistency across the whole building. These global constraints are then dispatched to per-floor floor-planning nodes , each of which generates a bubble diagram Gf = ( Rf , Ef ) on the corresponding free region Ωf , specifying the room set, target area ar , and ad-jacency relations to vertical cores and other rooms. Before geometric solving, we rasterize each Ωf into a 2D grid and pass it to a dedicated cutting MLLM node . This node provides an initial growth seed cr ∈ Ωf for each target 3"Get me a small three-story office building."         

> OK, I will plan ：
> 1. Global Style Guidelines; 2. Vertical Core Specification; 3. Per-Floor Functional Zoning
> Chief Designer
> F1
> ···(e.g.: 3 designers)
> OK. I will design 1st floor's:
> 1. Room Id Card; 2. Bubble Diagram
> Geometric Solver
> Received. I will now generate the physical layout: 1.Place Room Seeds; 2.Finalize the floorplan
> OK. Now populating the 3D scene: 1. Assign Materials; 2.Place Doors; 3.Place Objects
> Scene Instantiator
> F2
> Floor Designer
> F3
> Bubble size = Room Area Solid line= Direct Connection Dashed line= Connects to placeholder zone
> Cyan line= Vertical core
> Stage A: Whole Building Planning Stage B: Per-Floor Planning Stage C: Floorplan Synthesis Stage D: Scene Instantiation
> hierarchical splitting
> first round
> Each floor planned
> independently
> Whole Building Plan lift
> building boundary Rasterize

Figure 2. Overview of the MANSION framework: a multi-agent-driven pipeline for generating multi-story 3D buildings from natural lan-guage. The process includes: (A) Whole Building Planning, (B) Per-Floor Planning, (C) Floorplan Synthesis, and (D) Scene Instantiation. 

room, offering coarse spatial guidance for room placement. Prior work suggests that modern MLLMs have significantly improved visual pointing and spatial grounding capabilities, making such a grid-based seed proposal interface feasible in medium-scale scenes [30, 32]. To avoid the high combinatorial complexity of deciding all room locations at once, we further adopt a hierarchical splitting strategy. Starting from a circulation hub node in the bubble diagram, the cutting MLLM only needs to select one valid child room from the current topological front at each step and provide its local seed within the parent region. The solver then takes this seed together with the tar-get area as priors, and realizes the local split using our 

single-cut solver, a topology-aware variant of Lopes-style constrained growth [29]. It generates local candidate par-titions inside the parent region, filters out candidates that violate already-realized topological relations, and ranks the remaining ones with an interpretable energy function, ac-cepting the highest-scoring partition. This process iterates along the topological front until all room nodes on the cur-rent floor have been partitioned. 

Scene instantiation. After obtaining the room partition on each floor, we instantiate the layout into interactive AI2-THOR scenes [21], including architectural elements, doors, and objects. Our instantiation follows a two-level, progressive plan-ning design. First, a building-level “chief designer” node determines the global visual style once at the beginning (e.g., material palette and color scheme), ensuring cross-floor consistency. Then, as each floor-planning node gen-erates its bubble diagram, it attaches a room card to each room node, encoding material preferences, openness type, and finer-grained functional requirements. Downstream in-stantiation nodes (material assignment, opening and door generation, and object placement) realize these room cards under already-satisfied topological constraints, so the final scene remains consistent with the high-level design in both visual style and connectivity. We follow the LLM+rule-based placement paradigm of HOLODECK [47], but shift the design philosophy from quantity-first to usability- and quality-first. First, we enforce hard reachability as a non-negotiable constraint: only objects with sufficient surrounding clearance that the robot can navigate to are retained. Second, to prevent object clustering in large rooms, we introduce anchor-based groups, where an anchor object carries a global spa-tial tag ( edge /middle ) and remaining group members are solved in the anchor’s local reference frame, yielding more uniform spatial distribution and fewer placement con-flicts. Third, we add two structured relation primitives, 

matrix and paired , for grid-pattern and symmetric co-placement, respectively, enabling orderly arrangement of desks, shelves, and chairs in non-residential environments such as classrooms, libraries, and open-plan offices. Finally, we adopt a priority-aware placement order combined with quality-first pruning: wall-adjacent and structured-pattern objects are placed first to minimize interference with navi-gation corridors; any candidate that violates reachability or falls below quality thresholds is discarded outright rather than retained via soft-constraint relaxation. The full generation pipeline detail can be found in Supp. C, and the object placement algorithmic details can be found in Supp. G. 

3.2. MANSION Ecosystem 

The MANSION Ecosystem is built on top of the genera-tion environments for complex tasks. It comprises three key components: a large-scale dataset of 1,000 buildings, 4new stair and elevator assets with enhanced agent cross-floor navigation capabilities, and a Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent for defining limitless embodied tasks within the scenes. 

MansionWorld: A Large-Scale Building-Scale Dataset. Based on the MANSION generation pipeline introduced in the previous section, we build and release 

MansionWorld : a new, large-scale dataset of diverse, interactive multi-story buildings. Moving beyond existing residential-based benchmarks, MansionWorld provides unprecedented diversity in building types, covering functional, non-residential environments such as office buildings, hospitals, schools, supermarkets, and enter-tainment centers. As shown in Fig. 3, MansionWorld spans diverse functional categories and physical scales. The dataset features over 1,000 unique buildings, with structures ranging from 2 to 10 stories in height and totaling over 10,000 individual rooms. To support the broadest possible community research, we also provide tools to export the scene geometry and semantics to other popular platforms, such as Blender for high-fidelity rendering and NVIDIA Isaac Sim for physics-based simulation.  

> Figure 3. MansionWorld statistics: functional composition and floor-area distributions across different floor counts.

Cross-Floor Mobility via Stairs and Elevators. To en-able MansionWorld for the complex, building-scale tasks it is designed for, we extend the core capabilities of the AI2-THOR [21] simulator. We design and integrate two crucial categories of interactive assets: multi-flight stair-wells (Stairs) and functional elevators (Elevators). Beyond the assets themselves, we develop a suite of high-level atomic skill APIs (e.g., UseStairs , CallElevator ,

UseElevator ) that encapsulate the interaction logic. These APIs are critical as they handle the underlying scene-to-scene transition management; for instance, executing 

UseStairs seamlessly unloads the current scene graph and loads the target floor, placing the agent at the correct landing. This, for the first time on the platform, provides agents with robust and seamless cross-floor navigation, a fundamental prerequisite for any building-scale task. 

Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent. Once static multi-floor buildings are generated, a core challenge is to make them versatile enough to efficiently support diverse embodied AI tasks. Generating a new environment for each individual task is not only inefficient, but hard-coding task requirements into the design process also over-constrains the layout, making it less useful for new tasks subsequently. To address this problem, we propose a Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent. It is driven by an MLLM controller that understands high-level natural language instructions and modifies the scene through a series of controlled tool calls to satisfy task preconditions. The agent’s core capa-bility lies in translating a user’s high-level task directive into a sequence of scene edits that ensure task executabil-ity. Rather than allowing the MLLM to directly edit raw scene data, we provide it with a small yet expressive set of tool APIs encapsulated on top of AI2-THOR. These tools permit the agent to query scene structure, retrieve assets, and perform object and container manipulations. As illustrated in Fig. 4, when a user provides a complex, multi-floor task instruction such as, “I need a task where the agent starts in the 1st-floor lobby, grabs a snack from the 2nd-floor table, gets a cold drink from the 2nd-floor fridge, and brings them to the 1st-floor sofa,” the agent does not proceed to execution immediately. Instead, it first de-composes the task into a set of necessary preconditions and initiates a “Check-and-Provision” workflow. Through this “think-verify-act” loop, all preconditions are met, render-ing a task that was initially infeasible due to missing objects fully executable. Furthermore, these edits can be persisted, allowing for the creation and reuse of multiple task varia-tions. This editing approach is designed to complement, rather than replace, existing text-to-environment generation tech-niques. Such systems typically focus on synthesizing new 3D environments from scratch, often prioritizing visual di-versity. In contrast, we assume a pre-generated, structurally stable corpus of buildings and apply minimal, task-oriented edits to specialize them for specific embodied tasks, pre-serving structural realism while crucially ensuring exe-cutability. The core advantage of this design is the dramatic en-hancement of reusability. A single building can dynami-cally host a vast number of language-defined, reproducible tasks. This effectively transforms our building dataset into a task-semantic playground for studying long-horizon, com-positional embodied agents, all without the need to regen-erate an entire environment for each new task. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Floorplan Generation Algorithm 

We evaluate our method on the T2D dataset [25] by apply-ing a unified vectorized pre- and post-processing pipeline 5User's High-Level Instruction ："I need a task where the agent starts in the 1st-floor lobby, grabs a snack                       

> from the 2nd-floor table, gets a cold drink from the 2nd-floor fridge, and brings them to the 1st-floor sofa."
> (a) Path Connectivity Check (b) Snack Availability Check (c) Drink Provisioning & Scene Edit
> All preconditions met. The task is now feasible!
> Before: After:
> First, I must verify if a valid path exists between all key locations.
> Call Tool: Check_Path(...) →Success
> Now, let me check if there's a 'snack' on the table. It's there.
> Call Tool: Check_Surface("table") →Found 'Candy'
> Call Tool: Search_Contents("fridge") →None
> Finally, I'll check the fridge... It's empty. I'll place a 'cola' inside to fix this precondition.
> Call Tool: Place_In_Container("fridge", "cola") →Success

Figure 4. The “Check-and-Provision” workflow of our Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent. The agent first decomposes a high-level instruction (“bring a snack and a drink to the sofa”) into preconditions. It then sequentially performs a (a) Path Connectivity Check, an (b) Object Availability Check, and an (c) Object Provisioning & Scene Edit to ensure the task is executable before generation. 

to the underlying geometry, in order to keep the evalua-tion protocol comparable to prior work. T2D is essen-tially a post-processed derivative of RPLAN [45], so we directly read each room’s polygonal contour and vertex co-ordinates from the original JSON annotations and obtain a vector floor plan in the world-coordinate space. We then uniformly scale each floor plan onto a fixed-resolution grid and rasterize it into a room-level semantic label map after rounding the scaled vertex coordinates to the nearest inte-ger grid points. In this raster space, we run our MLLM-based point selection and hierarchical growth algorithm to generate the corresponding predicted label maps. At evalua-tion time, we compare prediction and ground-truth masks at the same resolution and report pixel-level micro-IoU (over-all IoU over all pixels) and macro-IoU (class-averaged IoU over room categories). Compared to the official T2D im-plementation, we adopt a “polygon-to-raster mask” pipeline instead of the original interface; however, ground truth and predictions share exactly the same scaling and rasterization process, and the grid resolution is sufficiently high relative to the original integer coordinates, so the additional quanti-zation error is negligible. The resulting IoU measurements are therefore theoretically equivalent to the original defini-tion in T2D [25], up to minor finite-resolution effects. We follow the experimental protocol of ChatHouseDif-fusion (CHD) [33] and organize the comparison into two main parts. First, to disentangle the effect of large language models (LLMs), we directly compare CHD’s core diffu-sion model with our constrained growth algorithm under the manual annotation (MA) setting. In CHD, MA refers to using JSON data extracted directly from the floor plans as geometric supervision. For a fair comparison, we adopt the same setting: we extract room centroids from the orig-inal annotations as seed positions and use the ground-truth room areas as inputs to our constrained growth module. 

Table 2. IoU scores under different configurations on T2D 

Method Micro-IoU Macro-IoU 

Obj-GAN [27] 10.68 8.44 CogView [11] 13.30 11.43 Imagen [36] 12.17 14.96 T2D 54.34 53.30 CHD (moonshot) 60.09 56.09 

CHD (gemini-2.5-pro) 76.34 72.24 CHD (MA) 82.81 79.04 

Ours (moonshot) 42.33 40.95 

Ours (gemini-2.5-pro) 69.98 66.40 Ours (MA) 81.67 80.66 

As shown in Table 2, on the T2D dataset our method (Ours-MA) achieves performance comparable to CHD-MA under the same MA setting. This result provides strong evidence that the proposed constrained growth algorithm can effectively fit the complex room layouts commonly seen in residential environments. We then evaluate the end-to-end pipeline and compare different MLLMs, includ-ing Moonshot-v1-8k (used in the original CHD paper) and Gemini-2.5-Pro. When using the earlier Moonshot model, our method lags significantly behind CHD. However, when both methods are driven by the stronger Gemini-2.5-Pro, the performance gap narrows substantially. This observation is consistent with our design intuition: our method fully del-egates semantic understanding and spatial pointing to the LLM, while the constrained growth module focuses solely on geometric solving. As the LLM’s pointing capability (i.e., spatial localization accuracy) improves, the quality of the predicted seeds and area priors improves accordingly, leading to more accurate overall layouts. 6Table 3. IoU scores under different configurations on Resplan-1k 

Method Micro-IoU Macro-IoU 

CHD (gemini-2.5-pro) 29.36 22.25 CHD (8minus-MA) 36.12 26.14 CHD (MA) 33.49 25.39 Ours (gemini-2.5-pro) w/o hierarchical splitting 45.65 42.42 

Ours (gemini-2.5-pro) 63.56 61.65 Ours (MA) 76.74 76.64 

To further assess the generalization ability of our method in more complex and realistic settings, we conduct experi-ments on a 1K-sample subset of the ResPlan dataset [1]. ResPlan provides native vector polygons and room-level topology, and compared with the residential scenes in T2D/RPLAN, it exhibits substantially larger room counts and richer structural complexity. In our sampled subset, nearly 50% of the floor plans contain more than eight rooms, whereas the RPLAN-based training setup of CHD is limited to at most eight rooms. For a fair comparison, we map all room types in ResPlan to the standard category space used by CHD. As summarized in Table 3, although CHD performs strongly on T2D, its performance on the more challenging ResPlan-1K benchmark is unsatisfactory (we do not retrain CHD on ResPlan-1K, but evaluate it in a zero-shot setting, emphasizing its ability to generalize from RPLAN/T2D to more complex, non-residential layouts). Even when we restrict evaluation to the subset with at most eight rooms (CHD 8minus-MA), the IoU remains extremely low. We hypothesize that this degradation is related to the observa-tion in MSD [43] that the RPLAN dataset “contains a se-rious amount of near-duplicates,” which may limit the di-versity of CHD’s training distribution and harm its general-ization to more realistic and structurally diverse layouts in ResPlan. In contrast, our method achieves a micro-IoU of 

76 .74% under the MA setting on ResPlan-1K, demonstrat-ing that the constrained growth algorithm maintains strong layout-fitting ability even in complex scenarios. We further perform an ablation study to validate the importance of our proposed iterative splitting strategy. Specifically, we com-pare the full method, which uses iterative cutting, against a variant that requires the MLLM to output all room seed coordinates in a single step. We observe a significant drop in micro-IoU in the one-shot variant. Our analysis suggests that while the MLLM provides relatively stable area priors, one-shot prediction of all initial seed positions suffers from large pointing errors. This result highlights the importance of the iterative splitting strategy in reducing task complexity and improving spatial localization accuracy. 

4.2. Object Placement Evaluation 

To evaluate the performance of our object placement mod-ule, we conduct comparative experiments on four room types, covering both residential and non-residential envi-ronments, as well as regular and irregular room geome-tries. We compare our method with representative open-vocabulary 3D scene synthesis approaches, including Lay-outGPT [13] and Holodeck [47]. For each room type and each method, we perform 10 independent runs for eval-uation. Our evaluation protocol generally follows Sce-neWeaver [48], while being adapted to embodied-task re-quirements. In particular, we introduce an additional reach-ability metric to measure whether target objects in the gen-erated scene can be effectively approached and interacted with by the robot. We further conduct a user study with 52 participants. The details of this user study can be found in Supp. H. Note that we do not directly compare with SceneWeaver [48]. This is because our current implementation is still a one-shot placement module without reflection-based iterative optimization. Therefore, the purpose of this experiment is to validate the effectiveness of the module as a one-shot placement solver, and to show its potential as a foundation for future iterative refinement. The experimental results are shown in Table 4. Our method achieves lower collision rates and higher reacha-bility while maintaining a high number of placed objects across different room types, achieving 100% reachability in all scenes. The user study further shows that our method performs better in overall layout quality and visual realism. This advantage is particularly evident in non-residential environments such as classrooms, libraries, and offices. Compared with residential scenes, these environments typ-ically involve larger spaces, higher object density, and stronger demands for regular arrangements, as illustrated in Fig. 5. One takeaway from the user study is that MANSION slightly underperformed on Classroom in terms of object count and diversity. We hypothesize that this is mainly be-cause classroom layouts contain a large number of identical desks and chairs arranged in regular, repetitive rectangular formations, which improves structural regularity and reach-ability but reduces the perceived diversity of the layout. 

4.3. Embodied algorithms in MANSION 

To further explore the downstream applications of MAN-SION, we validate its effectiveness by cross-implementing BUMBLE [39], COME-robot [50], and a variant of BUM-BLE with text augmentation. We postpone the introduc-tion of these algorithms and skill library adaptations until Supp. E. We design long-horizon, cross-floor tasks to evalu-ate system performance across three settings: 1) single-floor apartment environments, 2) two-floor office environments connected by stairs or an elevator, and 3) a four-story build-7Table 4. object placement quantitative comparison. We report the average number of placed objects (#Obj, with small items in paren-theses), out-of-boundary objects (#OB), Layout-level collided object pairs (#CN), floor-object reachability (#Rch, %), and user-study preference scores (%) for Realism (Real.), Diversity (Div.), and Layout (Lay.). 

Method Bedroom (4 ×4 m, rect.) Classroom (8 ×8 m, rect.)              

> #Obj ↑#OB ↓#CN ↓#Rch ↑Real. ↑Div. ↑Lay. ↑#Obj ↑#OB ↓#CN ↓#Rch ↑Real. ↑Div. ↑Lay. ↑

LayoutGPT 8.3 (0.0) 0.1 2.6 95.3 3.9 33.3 7.8 14.7 (0.0) 0.0 0.5 98.6 3.9 3.9 13.7 Holodeck 17.5 (7.1) 0.0 0.0 88.7 41.2 9.8 39.2 64.4 (25.2) 0.0 0.0 80.0 0.0 51.0 5.9 

Ours 22.6 (9.2) 0.0 0.0 100.0 54.9 56.9 52.9 57.3 (19.8) 0.0 0.0 100.0 96.1 45.1 80.4 

Method Restaurant (polygon) Library (polygon)              

> #Obj ↑#OB ↓#CN ↓#Rch ↑Real. ↑Div. ↑Lay. ↑#Obj ↑#OB ↓#CN ↓#Rch ↑Real. ↑Div. ↑Lay. ↑

LayoutGPT 7.7 (0.0) 1.0 2.5 89.6 3.9 5.9 19.6 13.3 (0.0) 1.0 3.7 97.2 11.8 9.8 9.8 Holodeck 74.4 (21.8) 0.0 0.0 65.2 15.7 37.3 11.8 73.6 (36.6) 0.0 0.0 88.3 5.9 5.9 9.8 

Ours 78.1 (25.6) 0.0 0.0 100.0 80.4 56.9 68.6 88.6 (34.3) 0.0 0.0 100.0 82.4 84.3 80.4 LayoutGPT Holodeck MANSION 

> Classroom Library
> Figure 5. object placement qualitative comparison.

ing with an elevator. Following the object-retrieval setup of Shah et al. [39], each task requires the agent to navigate the environment to locate a target object. To increase com-plexity, we add a second delivery phase in which the agent must transport the retrieved object to a specified destination, demanding longer-horizon reasoning. To better understand the sources of failure, we also report a progress score that decomposes overall task completion into two components: successful target object retrieval and successful navigation to the final goal location. Representative failure cases are described in Supp. F.5. Table 5 summarizes task success rates across 10 trials for single-, double-, and four-floor settings, with progress scores indicating object-retrieval and navigation success. While COME and standard BUMBLE achieve limited per-formance, adding object-type information to BUMBLE substantially improves success on one- and two-floor tasks. All methods fail in the four-floor setting, reflecting the dif-ficulty of long-horizon, multi-floor tasks. This is probably due to the high-level planner being overwhelmed with in-

> Table 5. Task success rates from 10 trials. Progress score is re-ported in the brackets in the format (Object retrieval success, Nav-igation success)

Method Single fl. Double fl. Four fl. 

COME [50] 30 (50, 30) 20 (50, 20) 0 (0, 0) BUMBLE [39] 40 (50, 40) 20 (30, 40) 0 (0, 0) 

BUMBLE 

w/ object type 60 (90, 70) 60 (80, 60) 0 (0, 0) formation. Across all experiments, we can identify that vi-sion and memory play complementary roles in long-horizon tasks. Enhanced vision modules improve object identifi-cation and retrieval success, while memory supports long-horizon navigation by tracking visited locations and avoid-ing redundant exploration. Together, they are essential for effective multi-floor mobile manipulation. The results also highlight the need to develop new algorithms tackling long-horizon robotics tasks. 

## 5. Conclusion 

We presented MANSION, a language-driven framework that generates multi-floor, building-scale 3D environ-ments from natural-language descriptions via semantically grounded, vertically aligned floorplans. Built on this frame-work, we release MansionWorld, a reusable dataset and ecosystem that extends AI2-THOR with cross-floor as-sets, skill APIs, and task-semantic editing to support long-horizon, multi-floor embodied tasks on shared building lay-outs. Experiments indicate that our generated floorplans are structurally and functionally reasonable, while existing embodied algorithms still exhibit substantial headroom on MANSION, highlighting the simulation’s value as a testbed for future research. 8Acknowledgement 

We sincerely thank the colleagues and friends (in alphabet-ical order) from AgiBot, Cornell University, Fudan Uni-versity, Huazhong Agricultural University, Hunan Univer-sity, L2S-CentraleSup´ elec, McGill University, NTU Singa-pore, Ocean University of China, Peking University, Purdue University, Queen’s University, Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-versity, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, SINTEF Ocean, Texas A&M University, Tsinghua Univer-sity, University of Delaware, University of Massachusetts Lowell, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, University of Pennsylvania, and University of Science and Technology of China for their participation and support in the user study survey. We are grateful to our colleagues at AgiBot for their meaningful discussions during the preparation of this manuscript. 

## References 

[1] Mohamed Abouagour and Eleftherios Garyfallidis. Resplan: A large-scale vector-graph dataset of 17,000 residential floor plans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14006 , 2025. 7 [2] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko S¨ underhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: In-terpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2018) ,pages 3674–3683, 2018. 2 [3] Izabella Antoniuk, Paweł Hoser, and Dariusz Strzeciwilk. L-system application to procedural generation of room shapes for 3d dungeon creation in computer games. In International Multi-Conference on Advanced Computer Systems , pages 375–386. Springer, 2018. 2 [4] Abrar Anwar, John Welsh, Joydeep Biswas, Soha Pouya, and Yan Chang. Remembr: Building and reasoning over long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2025) , 2025. Accepted; preprint arXiv:2409.13682. 2 [5] Gilad Baruch, Zhuoyuan Chen, Afshin Dehghan, Tal Dimry, Yuri Feigin, Peter Fu, Thomas Gebauer, Brandon Joffe, Daniel Kurz, Arik Schwartz, and Elad Shulman. Ark-itscenes: A diverse real-world dataset for 3d indoor scene un-derstanding using mobile rgb-d data. CoRR , abs/2111.08897, 2021. Preprint. 2 [6] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakr-ishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Ju-lian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deeksha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clay-ton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 ,2022. 2 [7] Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning , pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023. 2 [8] Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158 , 2017. 2 [9] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Kiana Ehsani, Winson Han, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural genera-tion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) , 2022. Preprint / dataset & platform avail-able at procthor.allenai.org. 2, 3 [10] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Eli VanderBilt, Anirud-dha Kembhavi, Carl Vondrick, Georgia Gkioxari, Kiana Ehsani, Ludwig Schmidt, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) — Datasets & Benchmarks Track , 2023. 3 [11] Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou, Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:19822–19835, 2021. 6 [12] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duck-worth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal lan-guage model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. 2 [13] Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Ar-jun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual plan-ning and generation with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:18225–18250, 2023. 7 [14] Rao Fu, Zehao Wen, Zichen Liu, and Srinath Sridhar. Any-home: Open-vocabulary generation of structured and tex-tured 3d homes. In European Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 52–70. Springer, 2024. 3, 12 [15] Narendra S Goel and Ivan Rozehnal. Some non-biological applications of l-systems. International Journal Of General System , 18(4):321–405, 1991. 2 

9[16] Ruizhen Hu, Zeyu Huang, Yuhan Tang, Oliver Van Kaick, Hao Zhang, and Hui Huang. Graph2plan: Learning floor-plan generation from layout graphs. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 39(4):118:1–118:14, 2020. 2, 3 [17] Sizhe Hu, Wenming Wu, Yuntao Wang, Benzhu Xu, and Liping Zheng. Gsdiff: synthesizing vector floorplans via geometry-enhanced structural graph generation. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 17323–17332, 2025. 2, 3 [18] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Haus-man, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied rea-soning through planning with language models. In Confer-ence on Robot Learning (CoRL) 2022 , 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608. 2 [19] Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05973 , 2023. [20] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Fos-ter, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kol-lar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 2 [21] Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, et al. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474 ,2017. 2, 4, 5, 21 [22] Jacob Krantz, Erik Wijmans, Arjun Majumdar, Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. Beyond the nav-graph: Vision-and-language navigation in continuous environments. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 104–120. Springer, 2020. 2 [23] Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. Room-across-room: Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatio-temporal grounding. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 4392–4412, 2020. 2 [24] Mingcong Lei, Yiming Zhao, Ge Wang, Zhixin Mai, Shuguang Cui, Yatong Han, and Jinke Ren. Stma: Aspatio-temporal memory agent for long-horizon embodied task planning. CoRR , abs/2502.10177, 2025. Preprint, arXiv:2502.10177. 2 [25] Sicong Leng, Yang Zhou, Mohammed Haroon Dupty, Wee Sun Lee, Sam Joyce, and Wei Lu. Tell2design: Adataset for language-guided floor plan generation. In Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14680–14697, Toronto, Canada, 2023. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. 5, 6 [26] Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, Mona Anvari, Minjune Hwang, Manasi Sharma, Arman Aydin, Dhruva Bansal, Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan Lou, Caleb R Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei Xia, Yunzhu Li, Silvio Savarese, Hy-owon Gweon, C. Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Behavior-1k: A human-centered, embodied ai benchmark with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In 

Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , pages 80–93, 2023. 2 [27] Wenbo Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Lei Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Xiaodong He, Siwei Lyu, and Jianfeng Gao. Object-driven text-to-image synthesis via adversarial training. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12174–12182, 2019. 6 [28] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embod-ied control. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2023) ,pages 9493–9500, 2023. Also appears as arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07753. 2 [29] Ricardo Lopes, Tim Tutenel, Ruben M Smelik, Klaas Jan De Kraker, and Rafael Bidarra. A constrained growth method for procedural floor plan generation. In Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Intell. Games Simul , pages 13–20. Citeseer, 2010. 4[30] Clement Neo, Yongsen Zheng, Kwok-Yan Lam, and Luke Ong. Interpreting vision grounding in vision-language mod-els: A case study in coordinate prediction. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Mechanistic Interpretability , 2025. 4 [31] Aishwarya Padmakumar, Jesse Thomason, Ayush Shrivas-tava, Patrick Lange, Anjali Narayan-Chen, Spandana Gella, Robinson Piramuthu, Gokhan Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Teach: Task-driven embodied agents that chat. In Proceed-ings of the 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2022) , pages 2017–2025, 2022. 2 [32] Joonhyung Park, Peng Tang, Sagnik Das, Srikar Appalaraju, Kunwar Yashraj Singh, R. Manmatha, and Shabnam Ghadar. R-VLM: Region-aware vision language model for precise gui grounding. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 9669–9685, 2025. 4 [33] Sizhong Qin, Chengyu He, Qiaoyun Chen, Sen Yang, Wenjie Liao, Yi Gu, and Xinzheng Lu. Chathousediffusion: Prompt-guided generation and editing of floor plans, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 12 [34] Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf. Sayplan: Ground-ing large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2023) , pages 23–72, 2023. 2 [35] Malvika Rao, Gregory Dudek, and Sue Whitesides. Ran-domized algorithms for minimum distance localization. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 26(9):917–933, 2007. 2 [36] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, 

10 Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:36479–36494, 2022. 6 [37] Mohammad Amin Shabani, Sepidehsadat Hosseini, and Ya-sutaka Furukawa. Housediffusion: Vector floorplan gen-eration via a diffusion model with discrete and continuous denoising. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2023) ,pages 5466–5475, 2023. 2, 3 [38] Dhruv Shah, Bła˙ zej Osi´ nski, Sergey Levine, et al. Lm-nav: Robotic navigation with large pre-trained models of lan-guage, vision, and action. In Conference on robot learning ,pages 492–504. pmlr, 2023. 2 [39] Rutav Shah, Albert Yu, Yifeng Zhu, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın. Bumble: Unifying reasoning and acting with vision-language models for building-wide mobile manipula-tion. pages 13337–13345, 2025. 2, 7, 8, 21 [40] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10740–10749, 2020. 2 [41] Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models. In Second Workshop on Language and Reinforcement Learning , 2022. 2 [42] Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Vondrus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Woj-ciech Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen Koltun, Ji-tendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange their habitat. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2021 , 2021. 2 [43] Casper Van Engelenburg, Fatemeh Mostafavi, Emanuel Kuhn, Yuntae Jeon, Michael Franzen, Matthias Standfest, Jan van Gemert, and Seyran Khademi. Msd: A bench-mark dataset for floor plan generation of building complexes. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 60–75. Springer, 2024. 7 [44] Hanqing Wang, Jiahe Chen, Wensi Huang, Qingwei Ben, Tai Wang, Boyu Mi, Tao Huang, Siheng Zhao, Yilun Chen, Sizhe Yang, et al. Grutopia: Dream general robots in a city at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10943 , 2024. 2 [45] Wenming Wu, Xiao-Ming Fu, Rui Tang, Yuhan Wang, Yu-Hao Qi, and Ligang Liu. Data-driven interior plan generation for residential buildings. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 38 (6):1–12, 2019. 6 [46] Xiuyu Yang, Yunze Man, Junkun Chen, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Scenecraft: Layout-guided 3d scene generation. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 82060–82084, 2024. 3 [47] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Al-varo Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Christopher Clark. Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embodied ai environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 16227– 16237, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 7, 12 [48] Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Shujie Zhang, and Siyuan Huang. Sceneweaver: All-in-one 3d scene synthesis with an extensible and self-reflective agent. CoRR , abs/2509.20414, 2025. Preprint. 3, 7 [49] Qi Zheng, Daqing Liu, Chaoyue Wang, Jing Zhang, Dadong Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Esceme: Vision-and-language nav-igation with episodic scene memory. International Journal of Computer Vision , 133(2):254–274, 2024. 2 [50] Peiyuan Zhi, Zhiyuan Zhang, Yu Zhao, Muzhi Han, Zeyu Zhang, Zhitian Li, Ziyuan Jiao, Baoxiong Jia, and Siyuan Huang. Closed-loop open-vocabulary mobile manipulation with gpt-4v. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4761–4767. IEEE, 2025. 7, 8, 21 [51] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Vanhoucke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut, Anikait Singh, Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Ser-manet, Pannag R Sanketi, Grecia Salazar, Michael S Ryoo, Krista Reymann, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Igor Mor-datch, Henryk Michalewski, Yao Lu, Sergey Levine, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Isabel Leal, Yuheng Kuang, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Ryan Julian, Nikhil J Joshi, Alex Irpan, brian ichter, Jasmine Hsu, Alexander Herzog, Karol Haus-man, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Chuyuan Fu, Pete Flo-rence, Chelsea Finn, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Danny Driess, Tianli Ding, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Xi Chen, Yev-gen Chebotar, Justice Carbajal, Noah Brown, Anthony Bro-han, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, and Kehang Han. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learn-ing , 2023. 2 [52] Ziyang Zong, Zhaohuan Zhan, and Guang Tan. Housellm: Llm-assisted two-phase text-to-floorplan generation. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2411, 2024. 2, 3 

11 Supplemental Materials A. Additional Qualitative Results 

A.1. Qualitative Floorplan Comparison 

We provide a qualitative comparison with ChatHouseDif-fusion (CHD) [33] under the same raster-space protocol used for the quantitative IoU evaluation in Sec. 4.1, as shown in Fig. 6. This is important because CHD formulates floor-plan generation as an image-based diffusion process, whereas our method is a training-free geometric solver that operates directly on polygons.  

> Figure 6. Qualitative floorplan comparison with CHD.

Shared raster-space protocol. To make the comparison as fair as possible, both methods are evaluated on a com-mon 64 × 64 grid aligned to the same floor-plan bound-ing box. Since CHD produces floor-plan outputs in image form, our method is discretized into the same raster space after uniformly scaling the polygonal layout and quantizing the coordinates, following the evaluation protocol used in Sec. 4.1. 

Visual style mismatch. The contour mismatch mainly arises from rendering conventions rather than layout struc-ture. CHD visualizations typically include thick exterior contours and explicit white wall gaps between adjacent rooms, whereas our rasterization directly assigns each in-terior pixel to a room label. As a result, the rendered ap-pearances may differ even when the underlying room ar-rangements are highly similar. 

Why the rasterization comparison is fair. This ras-terization introduces a small representational gap for our method, since a vectorized layout must be converted into raster form before comparison. Minor discrepancies may therefore appear near thin boundaries, corners, or narrow room connections. However, this effect is limited and sys-tematic: both predictions and ground-truth annotations are compared after the same scaling and rasterization proce-dure, so the quantization error is limited and does not mate-rially affect the IoU comparison. 

A.2. Qualitative comparison with Holodeck 

We further provide a qualitative comparison with existing methods that generate both room layouts and instantiated 3D scenes from high-level semantic descriptions. Repre-sentative systems in this category include AnyHome [14] and Holodeck [47]. We focus on Holodeck, since AnyHome relies on a HousGAN++-style floorplan backend mainly tai-lored to residential settings, making it less compatible with our open-vocabulary, non-residential scenario. Figure 7 highlights a key methodological difference. Holodeck follows a bottom-up paradigm that directly pre-dicts room corners and stitches them into a floor layout. This design is effective for lightweight single-floor scene synthesis, but it does not explicitly model building con-tours, topology-preserving floor partitioning, or cross-floor structural consistency. In contrast, MANSION adopts a top-down formulation, where each floor is generated as a con-strained partition under contour, topology, and vertical-core constraints. This makes our method better suited for multi-floor buildings and large-scale non-residential spaces. As shown in Fig. 7, this top-down design provides five practical advantages: contour control , topology control ,

vertical alignment , realistic placement , and style con-sistency . The first three stem from our constrained floor-plan formulation, while the latter two come from our scene-instantiation design for large, non-residential spaces and building-level room-card style propagation. The goal of this comparison is to contrast generation paradigms rather than claim strict metric superiority un-der a shared benchmark. Since Holodeck only produces corner-based layouts and does not explicitly target contour or topology controllability, the most faithful comparison at the layout-generation level is qualitative. 

A.3. Structural Flexibility and Physical Fidelity 

Fig. 8 highlights two properties of MANSION that are im-portant for physical realism. First, MANSION is contour-controllable rather than restricted to identical cross-floor outlines. The consistent contours used in some main-paper experiments are an evaluation simplification, not an algo-12 Input: 2-floor open office of a company  

> Holodeck : bottom-up corner stitching MANSION : top-down space partitioning

Figure 7. Qualitative comparison between Holodeck and MANSION under high-level semantic building prompts. (a) Apartment(two-unit-per-floor) (b) Villa with an attached garage     

> Blue lines denote load-bearing walls spanning all floors.
> Controllable per-
> floor contour
> (can differ)

Figure 8. Structural realism in MANSION. (a) Cross-floor load-bearing walls (blue) are preserved to maintain vertical consistency. (b) A villa with a protruding room and garage shows controllable per-floor outer contours. 

rithmic requirement: floor-wise footprints may differ across floors when specified by the building program. Second, our notion of vertical consistency goes beyond stairs and elevators. During recursive partitioning, load-bearing walls and other fixed vertical structures are pre-served as geometric constraints for subsequent floor splits, enabling cross-floor structural coherence in buildings with more realistic and complex organization. As a result, MAN-SION supports better apartment-, office-, and villa-style structures that are closer to real-world buildings, rather than simple floor-by-floor stacking. 

## B. MansionWorld Dataset Details 

B.1. Physical Scale and Functional Composition 

To build a benchmark environment that both supports high-performance simulation and enables a comprehensive eval-uation of embodied AI across tasks of varying complexity, MANSION WORLD is carefully designed along two dimen-sions: physical scale and functional scene composition. Considering the physics load of AI2-THOR when han-dling dense rigid-body interactions, we cap the effective area of each floor at about 500 m2 to maintain stable frame rates in complex interaction scenes. Leveraging the dy-namic floor loading mechanism of the MANSION frame-work, we adopt a single-floor constrained, vertically open 

spatial strategy: while the area of each individual floor is kept within a controlled range for simulation efficiency, the total number of floors in a building can be extended up to ten. For functional composition, instead of uniformly sam-pling scene types, we follow the major application domains of current real-world robots and construct a three-way mix-ture of residential (50%), office (30%), and public (20%) 13 buildings. This mixture is intended to cover home service robots, intra-building delivery and inspection robots, as well as robots operating in public spaces such as shopping malls, hospitals, and campuses. While residential scenes form roughly half of the corpus in order to support an easy-to-hard curriculum grounded in everyday household tasks, a key novelty of M ANSION WORLD compared to prior home-centric benchmarks lies in its substantial share of non-residential office and public buildings at the building scale. These non-residential environments are where most of our long-horizon, building-scale evaluations are conducted, and they underpin the “non-residential” emphasis in the main paper. On top of this, we deliberately impose a difficulty cur-riculum where simple scenes are more frequent while com-plex scenes form a long tail. Residential buildings serve as the basic testbed: a large number of Studio & Small Flat 

units, although compact in size (typically 60 –90 m2), are populated with high object density and intentionally irreg-ular layouts, in order to stress-test agents’ fine-grained ma-nipulation, short-range navigation, and robustness to clut-ter (e.g., avoiding toys in a messy living room to find a TV remote). In contrast, multi-floor Family Apartment and 

Duplex & Townhouse units introduce vertical connections via internal staircases and elevators, enabling cross-floor tasks in domestic environments. Agents must explicitly model the abstract notion of “floor” to accomplish com-pound household tasks that depend on spatial memory and state tracking, such as “collect dirty clothes from the bed-room on the second-floor and bring them to the laundry room on the first-floor.” 

Office and public buildings further emphasize semantic reasoning and socially aware navigation. The office sub-set often exploits large, nearly 500 m2 floor plates with long corridors and repetitive workstation patterns, posing challenges for robust self-localization in highly similar lo-cal structures and for long-range intra-building delivery (e.g., distributing documents or parcels across an eight-floor building). The public subset (e.g., shopping malls, hospi-tals, schools) highlights explicit functional zoning and se-mantic priors: agents cannot rely on geometry alone, but must leverage commonsense knowledge such as “pharma-cies are not located in cafeterias” or “fresh produce sections tend to be adjacent to cold-chain facilities” to build high-quality semantic maps and perform efficient target search. This addresses a gap in existing datasets, which mostly fo-cus on homes and single-floor dwellings. Overall, M AN -

> SION

WORLD contains a larger number of low-rise, small-to-medium scale scenes that are convenient for day-to-day algorithm development and rapid evaluation, while still re-serving a non-trivial proportion of high-rise, large-scale of-fice and public buildings to stress-test the generality and upper-limit performance of embodied systems. 

> Figure 9. Additional details of the MansionWorld ecosystem.

B.2. Qualitative Examples of MansionWorld Scenes 

To complement the statistics in Fig. 3, we further visualize several representative buildings from M ANSION WORLD 

and the egocentric observations perceived by an embodied agent operating inside these buildings. Each example pairs a 3D view of a multi-floor building with a first-person view from a highlighted room, see Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. 

B.3. Cross-Floor Mobility and Simulator Transfer 

Fig. 9 shows several of our extended cross-floor assets and skills, which support floor-to-floor interaction in Mansion-World, as well as an example of transferring an AI2-THOR scene to NVIDIA Isaac Sim. 

## C. Multi-floor Generation Pipeline Details 

C.1. Input specification and global orchestration 

The user (or a higher-level generator) provides a natural-language building description D together with a (possibly partial) set of numerical constraints. In practice, most of these constraints can be inferred by a large language model from D, and only the geometric footprint is synthesized by the planner. For clarity, we write them explicitly as • Target floor count Ftarget (optional): a desired number of floors. When not explicitly specified, it is inferred from 

D (e.g., “two-storey townhouse” or “high-rise office”). • Target floor area Atarget (optional): a desired gross floor area (per building or per floor). If not given, it is similarly inferred from D under simulator constraints (e.g., a per-floor area cap for stable physics). • Footprint constraint Penv (optional): an outer polygon of the building envelope. In our main experiments, this footprint is not provided by the user; instead, the planner samples a feasible outline consistent with (Ftarget , A target )

and engine limits, and we denote the resulting footprint as Penv .Any of the scalar constraints Ftarget and Atarget may be omit-ted in the input; in that case, the planner first invokes an 14 Classroom 

Meetingroom 

Emergencyroom 

(b) A four story office building 

(a) A high school building 

(c) A large-scale hospital Figure 10. Qualitative examples of non-residential buildings in M ANSION WORLD .

15 Bedroom 

Cardroom 

Homegym 

(a) A entertainment complex 

(b) A compact apartment designed for two people 

(c) A three-story luxury villa equipped with entertainment and exercise facilities Figure 11. Qualitative examples of entertainment and residential buildings in M ANSION WORLD .

16 Algorithm 1 Global multi-floor generation pipeline 

Require: Description D; optional Ftarget , Atarget , Penv 

Ensure: Per-floor scenes {Si}Fi=1  

> 1:

( ˆF , ˆA) ← RESOLVE NUMERIC CONSTRAINTS (D,  

> 2:

\Ftarget , A target ) 

> 3:

Bplan ← PLAN BUILDING PROGRAM (D, ˆF , ˆA, P env ) 

> 4:

F ← NUM FLOORS (Bplan ) 

> 5:

S ← ∅  

> 6:

for i = 1 to F do  

> 7:

Gi ← GENERATE FLOOR TOPOLOGY (Bplan , i ) 

> 8:

Li ← SOLVE FLOOR LAYOUT (Gi, B plan , i ) 

> 9:

Xi ← APPLY FLOOR STRUCTURE (Li) 

> 10:

Yi ← APPLY WALLS AND OPENINGS (Xi) 

> 11:

for each room r ∈ ROOMS (Li) do  

> 12:

Yi ← PLACE LARGE OBJECTS (Yi, r ) 

> 13:

Yi ← PLACE SMALL OBJECTS (Yi, r ) 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

Yi ← ADD LIGHTING (Yi) 

> 16:

Yi ← ADD SKYBOX (Yi) 

> 17:

Si ← PLACE AGENT SPAWN (Yi, B plan , i ) 

> 18:

S ← S ∪ { Si} 

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

return S

LLM to parse D and derive reasonable default values. The footprint Penv is typically synthesized (or, in dataset-driven settings, supplied by the benchmark) and is never manually drawn by the user in our pipeline. This makes the system applicable both when the user prescribes an approximate scale (“three small floors”) and when global dimensions are left entirely to the generator. Given (D, F target , A target , P env ), the multi-floor controller first synthesizes a global building program Bplan as above. It then proceeds floor by floor. For each floor index i ∈{1, . . . , F }, it generates a symbolic room topology Gi =(Ri, E i) consistent with the cross-floor skeleton, and calls the single-floor solver in Algorithm 2 to turn Gi into a ge-ometric layout Li. Internally, this solver constructs a cut schedule Ri and applies the topology-aware cutting node in Algorithm 3 round by round. Once the 2D floorplan Li

is fixed, a deterministic instantiation pipeline applies floor surfaces, walls and openings, then iterates over rooms to populate large and small objects, and finally adds lighting, skybox and agent spawns to obtain an executable 3D scene. The whole process is summarized below. 

C.2. Single-floor topology-driven floorplan solver 

Fig. 12 illustrates the single-floor solver: given a symbolic room topology graph, we construct cut rounds over the free region and finally instantiate the resulting layout as an exe-cutable 3D scene. We reuse the notation from Sec 3.1: for floor f we write Ωf for the free region after removing verti-(a) Topology grap h (b) Cut-round construction (c) Scene Instantiation 

Figure 12. Illustration of the single-floor, topology-driven pipeline. (a) Input room topology graph. (b) Cut-round construc-tion and hierarchical splitting over the free region. (c) Final 3D scene instantiation in AI2-THOR after applying structure, objects, and lighting. 

Algorithm 2 Single-floor topology-driven floorplan solver 

Require: Floor index f ; free region Ωf ; room graph Gf =(Rf , E f ); target areas {ar }r∈Rf ; vertical cores V

Ensure: Floorplan layout Lf partitioning Ωf 

> 1:

main ← SELECT HUB NODE (Gf ) 

> 2:

Rf ← BUILD CUT ROUNDS (Gf , main , V ) 

> 3:

Lf ← INIT LAYOUT (Ω f , V, main ) 

> 4:

for each (pt, C t) ∈ R f do  

> 5:

Lf ← CUT NODE 

 Lf , p t, C t, G f , {ar } 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

return Lf

cal cores and Gf = ( Rf , E f ) for the room graph with target areas {ar }r∈Rf . The solver is a constructive procedure that approximately optimizes the layout objective in Sec. 3.1 un-der the hard topological constraint Topo( L, G f ).The algorithm proceeds by hierarchical splitting. A hub node main ∈ Rf is chosen as the root; a cut-planning rou-tine constructs a sequence of rounds Rf = {(pt, C t)}Tt=1 

with parents pt ∈ Rf and non-empty child sets Ct ⊆ Rf ;and a generic cutting node successively refines the layout in each round. 

Cut-round construction. BUILD CUT ROUNDS performs a breadth-first traversal on Gf rooted at main , assigns a depth to each node, and groups non-vertical rooms by depth and parent. Vertical-core nodes are excluded from the par-ent set. For each non-vertical parent p and its non-empty child cluster C ⊆ Rf , it emits a round (p, C ). The resulting 

Rf induces an order that respects the graph structure (no child is instantiated before its parent) and expands from the hub to the periphery. 

Topology-aware cutting node and adaptive growth. 

For a fixed round (pt, C t) and current layout Lf , the cut-ting node first extracts the parent region Ωf (pt) ⊆ Ωf and renders a top-down preview in which the polygon of pt is highlighted against the rest of the floorplan. This image, to-17 gether with Lf , Gf , pt, Ct and {ar }, is given to an MLLM that outputs a seed plan σt = {(r, c r , α r ) | r ∈ Ct},where cr is a continuous seed (approximate centroid) in 

Ωf (pt) and αr is a target area fraction consistent with ar

and |Ωf (pt)|.Conditioned on σt, the node runs an adaptive sampling procedure with Nretry = 10 retries and batch size B = 100 

local candidates per retry. For each child r ∈ Ct it com-putes an initial radius R(0)  

> r

= rbase + k · ar /|Ωf (pt)| (with fixed rbase = 2 in grid units and scaling factor k) and at retry j uses a scaled radius R(j) 

> r

= γj R(0)  

> r

for a mono-tonically increasing sequence (γj )j . Intuitively, R(j) 

> r

is the adaptive perturbation radius around the seed for room r in retry j, controlling how far candidate seeds may move away from the MLLM-proposed centroid. In retry j, it samples 

B seed perturbations inside the discs of radius R(j) 

> r

(with a minimum separation constraint between seeds), grows B

local candidate partitions of pt, filters them by the predicate 

Topo( ·, G f ), and scores the survivors with the score func-tion Score( L; w) described below. If at least one candidate survives in retry j, the best-scoring one is accepted and the retry loop terminates. If all Nretry retries fail, the node falls back to a Monte Carlo seeding strategy: seeds are sampled uniformly in Ωf (pt) in decreasing order of target area, sub-ject to repulsion, and the same growth, topology filtering and scoring pipeline is applied. The cutting node is summarized in the following skele-ton. 

Energy-based scoring and weight selection. We now detail the energy-based Score( L; w) objective introduced in Eq. 3.1. For each local candidate layout L of the parent region, we compute a per-room energy and aggregate into a total energy E(L; w), from which the score is obtained by negation. For every child room r ∈ Ct with realized polygon Pr ,target area ar , and seed cr , we extract four raw features: • fratio (r) (ratio ): relative area error | area( Pr )−ar |/a r ;• fseed (r) (seed dist ): Euclidean distance between the centroid of Pr and the input seed cr ;• fwall (r) (wall contact ): absolute length of the bound-ary intersection between Pr and the envelope ∂Ωf (pt) of the parent region, i.e. |∂P r ∩ ∂Ωf (pt)|;• fcorner (r) (extra corners ): max(0 , n int (r) − 4) ,where nint (r) is the number of non-collinear corners of 

Pr that do not lie on ∂Ωf (pt).Among these, fratio , fseed , and fcorner are penalty terms (smaller ⇒ better), while fwall is a reward term (larger 

⇒ better, since more envelope contact yields more regular rooms). To balance heterogeneous scales, we apply a mixed nor-malization strategy. Only fseed undergoes min–max normal-

Algorithm 3 Topology-aware cutting node with MLLM-guided seeds (skeleton) 

Require: Layout Lf ; parent pt; children Ct; room graph 

Gf ; target areas {ar }

Ensure: Updated layout L′ 

> f

where pt is split into Ct 

> 1:

Ωf (pt) ← LOCAL FOOTPRINT (Lf , p t) 

> 2:

It ← RENDER HIGHLIGHT PREVIEW (Lf , Ωf (pt), p t) 

> 3:

σt ← PLAN SEEDS WITH MLLM (It, L f , G f , 

> 4:

\pt, C t, {ar }) 

> 5:

{R(0)  

> r

} ← COMPUTE BASE RADII (Ω f (pt), C t, {ar }) 

> 6:

best ← NONE 7: for j = 0 to Nretry − 1 do  

> 8:

˜Σj ← SAMPLE SEED BATCH (σt, {R(0)  

> r

}, j ) 

> 9:

Lj ← GROW CANDIDATES (Ω f (pt), p t, C t, ˜Σj ) 

> 10:

Lj ← FILTER BYTOPOLOGY (Lj , L f , G f ) 

> 11:

cand ← SELECT BEST BYSCORE (Lj ) 

> 12:

if cand ̸ = NONE then  

> 13:

best ← cand ; break  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

if best = NONE then  

> 17:

best ← FALLBACK MONTE CARLO (Ω f (pt), p t, 

> 18:

\Ct, {ar }, L f , G f ) 

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

L′ 

> f

← MERGE LOCAL PARTITION (Lf , p t, best ) 

> 21:

return L′

> f

ization across the room set within a single candidate: 

zseed (r) = clamp [0 ,1] 

 fseed (r) − f min 

> seed

f max  

> seed

− f min  

> seed

+ ε



,

with f min  

> seed

= min r fseed (r) and f max  

> seed

= max r fseed (r). For 

fratio and fcorner , we found that using raw values directly pro-vides more stable value differences across candidates with varying room counts and boundary complexities, because min–max normalization can compress informative differ-ences when the candidate set is homogeneous. Similarly, 

fwall enters as a raw value clamped to [0 , 1] .The per-room energy contribution is 

e(r) = wratio fratio (r) + wseed zseed (r)+ wcorner fcorner (r)

− wwall clamp [0 ,1] 

 fwall (r),

The dominant wratio strongly penalizes area mismatch; 

wcorner discourages complex room shapes; wwall encourages rooms to align with the building envelope; and wseed pro-vides a mild bias toward the MLLM-proposed centroid. where penalty terms enter with positive signs (higher ⇒

worse) and the wall reward enters with a negative sign (more contact ⇒ lower energy). The total energy sums over 18 all child rooms and relates to the search objective (Eq. 3.1) by negation: 

E(L; w) = X

> r∈Ct

e(r),

Score( L; w) = −E(L; w).

Among all candidates in a round that satisfy 

Topo( ·, G f ), the cutting node retains the layout with the lowest energy (equivalently, the highest Score ). We set w by random search on a held-out subset of the RPLAN dataset: candidate weight vectors are sam-pled from a low-dimensional simplex, the solver is run on RPLAN-style instances, and configurations that yield good area agreement and regular room shapes are retained; one such w is fixed for all experiments. We intentionally use this hand-crafted, interpretable energy rather than a learned scoring network, since RPLAN is dominated by residen-tial layouts and a learned scorer trained on it would be strongly domain-specific. In contrast, the feature-based en-ergy can be reweighted to accommodate different building types without retraining. 

Spur removal and hole filling. After growth, room poly-gons may contain thin protrusions (spurs)—single cells connected to the room body by at most one edge. A spur cell is identified as any occupied cell whose same-room 4-neighbor count is at most one while having at least one neighbor belonging to a different room or lying outside the interior. Spur removal proceeds iteratively: in each pass, all detected spur cells are set to empty; passes repeat until no spurs remain, yielding a spur-free grid. Subsequently, each remaining empty connected component within the interior is filled by the room sharing the longest boundary with that component. This fill-then-clean cycle repeats up to 20 iter-ations to ensure that hole filling does not re-introduce spur artifacts. A practical limitation is that when Ωf (pt) is highly con-strained and Gf is complex, the number of candidates sat-isfying the hard topological constraints can be very small. In this scenario, the solver is feasibility-driven, where the influence of Score( L; w) is reduced. 

## D. Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent 

D.1. System Architecture 

We illustrate the detailed architecture of our Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent in Fig. 13. Operating as a high-level 

neuro-symbolic scheduler , our system decouples semantic reasoning from physical simulation, achieving both compu-tational efficiency and physical plausibility. The architec-ture comprises three core subsystems: 

The ReAct Controller (Cognitive Layer). The agent’s core is a Large Language Model (LLM) utilizing a Re-Act (Reason+Act) protocol. It processes natural language instructions and conversation history, outputting structured JSON actions to invoke specific tools. This abstraction en-ables the agent to plan over long horizons by manipulating scene semantics rather than raw pixels or low-level motor commands. 

Hybrid State Management (Dual-Backend). A key inno-vation is the separation of static data from dynamic simula-tion. This dual-backend approach ensures optimal resource utilization: • Static Semantic State (JSON + Asset DB): The primary ”source of truth” is a lightweight Holodeck-compatible JSON file. All logical checks (e.g., path connectivity) and geometric planning (e.g., surface area calculation) are executed directly against this JSON structure and an ex-ternal Asset Metadata Database (Asset DB). This avoids rendering overhead, enabling rapid ”mental simulation” and topological reasoning. • On-Demand Physics Engine (Unity): Calling physics simulation is an expensive, on-demand resource. An AI2-THOR controller is temporarily instantiated only for actions requiring physical validation (specifically, 

PlaceInContainer or PlaceOnSurface ). It exe-cutes atomic physics-based actions (e.g., SpawnAsset ,

OpenObject , PlaceObjectAtPoint ) to resolve collisions and gravity. The object’s final valid pose is then synchronized back to the static JSON, and after that, the simulator instance is stopped. 

The Tool Invoker. Serving as the execution bridge, this component parses the JSON requests from the ReAct con-troller and redirects function calls to the appropriate back-end, from querying the static semantic state for fast percep-tion tasks to triggering the on-demand physics engine for complex interactions, and returns the execution results as observations to the agent. 

D.2. Tool Library Cards 

We present the detailed specifications of the toolset used in the ”Check-and-Provision” workflow. For brevity, we cate-gorize the Data Source of each tool into three components: • JSON : Operations on the static scene graph file (fast, ge-ometric). • Asset DB : Queries to the external Objaverse/AI2-THOR metadata library. • Unity : Runtime physics simulation via AI2-THOR (atomic actions). 19 User Input 

> NL Instructions

Tool Invoker 

> Parses request, calls tool
> JSON Tool Request

Perception Tools 

> (CheckPath, Search)
> Static Semantic State(No Simulation)

Scene JSON Asset DB 

> Object Metadata

Action Tools 

Unity Instance  

> On-Demand Physics(Unity / AI2-THOR
> Perception / Planning Action / Execution
> Update State
> Thought Action Observation

ReAct Controller (LLM) 

> Reason+Act Planning+History
> Tool Response

Figure 13. System Architecture of the Task-Semantic Scene Editing Agent. The system operates via a ReAct Controller (top) that iteratively plans and issues JSON tool requests. A Tool Invoker (middle) serves as an execution bridge, routing perception tasks to the fast Static Semantic State (bottom left) and action tasks to the On-Demand Physics Engine (bottom right). The dashed arrow highlights the Hybrid State Management mechanism, where physical simulation results are synchronized back to the static scene JSON to ensure consistency. 

D.2.1. Perception Tools (Checking Phase) 

## Tool: CheckPath 

Data Source JSON 

Description Verifies topological connectivity and room existence to validate navigation feasibility. 

Input Global Context (No specific arguments) 

Logic Parses the polygon boundaries of each room and the coordinates of connecting portals (doors/stairs) from the JSON. It constructs a topological path graph to verify if a valid navigable route exists between the task’s start and end locations. 

## Tool: SearchAssets 

Data Source Asset DB 

Description Retrieves new interactive objects based on natural language queries. 

Input query , top k , properties (optional) 

Logic Utilizes the retrieval method from Holodeck : it employs CLIP (visual) and SBERT (semantic) embed-dings to match the user’s query against the asset library. It returns assetId s that match specific physical prop-erties (e.g., Pickable ). 

## Tool: ListObjects 

Data Source JSON + Asset DB 

Description Lists existing objects in the scene, sup-porting filtering by location and functional properties. 

Input room (optional), keyword/id (optional) 

Logic Iterates through the JSON to find objects. The 

keyword input supports both fuzzy name matching and exact ID lookup. It cross-references each object’s 

assetId with the Asset DB to retrieve implicit func-tional properties (e.g., Receptacle , CanOpen ) not stored in the scene file. 

## Tool: CheckSurface 

Data Source JSON 

Description Inspects what is currently placed on top 

of a specific object. 

Input keyword/id 

Logic Identifies the target object (by keyword or exact ID) and retrieves its child nodes from the JSON hierar-chy. It geometrically verifies the ”on-top” relationship by comparing the child’s centroid height ( y) against the parent object’s Axis-Aligned Bounding Box (AABB) top surface. 

20 Tool: SearchContents 

Data Source JSON 

Description Inspects what is currently stored inside acontainer. 

Input keyword/id 

Logic Identifies the target container and retrieves its child nodes. Unlike surface checks, it verifies the ”inside” relationship by checking if the child’s cen-troid is strictly contained within the vertical range (ymin , y max ) of the parent’s AABB. 

D.2.2. Action Tools (Provisioning Phase) 

Action tools modify the scene. These tools automatically handle collision avoidance via an internal geometric solver before invoking native AI2-THOR actions for physical con-sistency. 

## Tool: PlaceInContainer 

Data Source JSON + Asset DB + Unity 

Description Physically instantiates an asset inside an openable container (e.g., placing a cola inside a fridge). 

Input asset id , container id 

Logic The system first calculates valid non-overlapping (x, z ) coordinates using an internal ge-ometric solver. It then triggers an on-demand AI2-THOR instance and executes a sequence of native atomic actions :1. OpenObject : Fully opens the container to ensure accessibility. 2. SpawnAsset : Instantiates the asset (loaded from Asset DB) at the planned coordinates. 3. PlaceObjectAtPoint : Uses the physics en-gine to verify collisions and settle the object. Finally, the stable pose is captured and written back to the static JSON. 

## Tool: RemoveObject 

Data Source JSON 

Description Deletes specific objects from the scene. 

Input object id (optional), receptacle id 

(optional) 

Logic Directly edits the JSON scene graph. If 

object id is provided, it removes that specific node. If receptacle id is provided, it recursively deletes all child nodes associated with that receptacle, effec-tively clearing the surface. 

## Tool: PlaceOnSurface 

Data Source JSON + Asset DB + Unity 

Description Physically instantiates an asset on an open surface (e.g., table, sofa). 

Input asset id , receptacle id 

Logic Similar to container placement, this tool uses an internal 2D bin-packing algorithm to determine the planar position. It then invokes the following atomic actions in AI2-THOR: 1. SpawnAsset : Instantiates the asset from the Asset DB. 2. PlaceObjectAtPoint : Allows the object to settle naturally under gravity. This process ensures the object rests naturally on un-even surfaces (e.g., sofa cushions) without floating or clipping before updating the JSON. 

## E. Embodied Algorithms in Mansion 

Here, we briefly introduce BUMBLE [39], COME-robot [50], and a variant of BUMBLE with text augmenta-tion. These algorithms are representative embodied mobile robot systems for long-horizon navigation and manipula-tion tasks. BUMBLE is a whole-building framework with a VLM-driven reasoning core, and an open-world perception system, integrating parameterized navigation and manipu-lation skills guided by dual-layer memory for long-horizon planning and recovery [39]. COME-robot operates sim-ilarly as a closed-loop, open-vocabulary system, exposing perception and execution APIs and using GPT-4V to refine code-level plans from visual feedback iteratively, but with-out long-term memory [50]. We enable the global percep-tion map of COME-robot by providing rich object informa-tion in the scene when prompting the VLM planner. Within MANSION, we adapt the skill libraries and de-cision modules from both systems to our multi-floor exper-imental setting and evaluate their performance in terms of success rate and robustness to complex layouts. We omit intricate real-world robotic manipulation components, such as dexterous grasping, localization, and low-level motor control, and instead focus on evaluating high-level sequen-tial decision-making for task completion. To enable richer scene interaction, we extend the systems with new skills built upon the atomic actions provided by AI2-THOR [21], allowing the agents to operate effectively in multi-floor en-vironments. Furthermore, to enhance exploration capabili-ties, we introduce a rotation skill that enables the agent to reorient itself and continue searching when the target object is not initially in sight. For consistency and to balance API query time with model performance, we adopt GPT-4.1 as the VLM backbone [39]. However, a key limitation arises from the VLM’s reduced object identification accuracy in 21 simulated environments. Although the agent can generate coherent action sequences for the retrieval and delivery of the task, it frequently misidentifies the target object, lead-ing to task failure. To mitigate this issue, we introduce a variant of BUMBLE that exposes the object type only dur-ing skill selection, providing the agent with just enough se-mantic guidance to better interpret its surroundings. Impor-tantly, the agent does not receive object-type information when executing the skills. In single-floor tasks, the agent is required to locate an ob-ject (e.g. basketball, laptop) and deliver it to another room. In two-floor tasks, the agent is asked to first get a cloth from the first floor and deliver it to the second floor. The exam-ple is shown in Fig. 14. In the four-story setting, the agent starts on the first floor, collects an orange toolbox on the third floor, and delivers it to the fourth floor. 

## F. Skills in MANSION 

F.1. Skill library expansion in MANSION 

To better support the baseline algorithms in MANSION, we extend the original AI2-THOR skill library with three es-sential atomic skills required for multi-floor, long-horizon tasks: CallElevator , UseElevator , and TakeStairs . The de-tailed descriptions of these skills can be found in the fol-lowing skill cards. 

## Skill: UseElevator 

Description Selects the target floor and performs a floor transition using the elevator if a valid floor num-ber is provided. State information transition will be processed internally. 

Prerequisite 

• The robot must already be positioned at the elevator entrance. • CallElevator skill is used. 

Input target floor 

Internal process The parameter target floor 

is converted into a floor offset: floor delta =

target floor - current floor , which is passed to ThorGym.update floor(floor delta) .

update floor(floor delta) internally: 1. Removes the currently held object from the current-floor JSON and inserts it into the target-floor JSON. 2. Calls controller.reset(scene=...) to reload the target floor’s scene. 3. Reconstructs room landmarks and the room graph. 4. Teleports the robot to a standardized starting pose outside the elevator on the new floor, oriented out-ward from the elevator. 

## Skill: CallElevator 

Description Call the elevator to the robot’s current floor and open the elevator door. 

Prerequisite 

• The robot must be located near the elevator entrance. 

Input None 

Internal process Invokes the environment’s elevator-calling mechanism: 1. Sends a call request to bring the elevator to 

current floor .2. Open the elevator door for the next step operation. 

## Skill: TakeStairs 

Description Move the robot between adjacent floors using the staircase. This skill serves as an alternative to elevator-based floor transitions. The VLM determines whether the robot should go Up or Down based on the stair-view image. 

Prerequisite 

• The robot must be positioned at the staircase en-trance. • The direction must correspond to an available adja-cent floor. 

Input direction ∈ { Up , Down }

Internal process The parameter 

direction is mapped to a floor offset: 

floor delta =

(

+1 if direction = Up ,

−1 if direction = Down .

This floor delta is passed to 

ThorGym.update floor(floor delta) .

F.2. Progress Score 

We decompose task completion into two components: cor-rect object retrieval and successful navigation, as described in Section 4.2. This separation reflects a key limitation of current VLMs: they struggle to reliably identify and retrieve small objects, even though they possess a stronger, more global understanding of room layout and spatial context. Therefore, in addition to reporting overall success rates, we also evaluate performance using a progress score that cap-tures partial task completion. 

F.3. Task details 

We now provide the detailed prompts that we used in the Table 6. Some sample test environments that we used can be found in the following Fig. 15–17. 

F.4. Algorithms implementation details 

In integrating the embodied algorithms into MANSION, we introduce several key adaptations to better reflect the robot’s 22 Figure 14. Sample screenshots from a task execution. The robot begins on the second floor, takes the elevator to the first floor to retrieve a cloth, and then returns to the sofa. Task query: I want to clean my sofa. Go get a cloth from the first floor and come back near the sofa. 

> Table 6. Task Settings and Prompts

Environment Prompt 

Single-floor apartment Find a box on the bed and bring it to the bathroom. Double-floor office Find a cellphone on a blue couch on the first floor and bring it to the round table on the second floor. Four-floor office Go to the third floor, find a laptop on the desk in the meeting room on the third floor, and take it to the restroom on the fourth floor. 

> Figure 15. Single-floor apartment layout.

actual capabilities within the simulated environment. 

GoToLandmark: The success of embodied navigation algorithms depends heavily on the VLM’s ability to obtain reliable visual observations of different rooms. The robot can only plan a route to the correct destination if the VLM correctly identifies the room type. However, in the orig-inal BUMBLE implementation, each room is represented by a single image. When that image happens to capture a featureless or uninformative part of the room, the robot’s failure rate increases significantly. To address this, we pro-vide panorama views for each room, giving the robot a more complete and informative visual representation of the envi-

> Figure 16. Two-floor office layout.
> Figure 17. Four-floor building layout.

ronment and improving its ability to recognize the correct room. An example can be found in Fig. 18. To balance image granularity with the input constraints of VLMs, each room’s panorama is constructed by concatenating three im-ages captured at yaw angles of 0°, 120°, and 240°. 

> Figure 18. Panorama view of the service shaft room.

UseElevator: The agent is informed of its current floor and given a visual observation that includes the elevator but-ton panel. It must identify the valid floor numbers from the panel and select the target floor it intends to reach. 

TakeStairs: The agent is told of its floor and provided with the corresponding visual observation. To prevent in-valid decisions, such as attempting to go downstairs from 23 the first floor, we overlay valid directional arrows onto the visual input, ensuring the agent is guided toward only fea-sible movement options. 

F.5. Failure Case Analysis 

In this subsection, we analyze several representative task failure cases and their underlying causes. 

Failure Case Analysis 1: Two-floor task. A typical fail-ure pattern is as follows: the agent navigates into a corner and, even after attempting to backtrack and rotate, still can-not escape from the corner, eventually exhausting the step budget and failing the task. See in Fig. 19 

> Figure 19. Failure case 1

Failure Case Analysis 2: Four-floor task. The most prominent issue is that goto landmark needs to stitch all landmarks into a single long image as input to the VLM. However, in the four-floor building, there are too many landmarks, so the stitched image must be heavily downsampled when resized to the VLM input resolution, causing severe information loss and making it difficult for 

goto landmark to function effectively. See in Fig. 20 

> Figure 20. Failure case 2

## G. Object Placement 

For complex rooms, the key challenge lies not only in ac-commodating a larger number of objects, but also in pre-serving regular global distribution under dense and repeated furniture patterns. A purely instance-level object placement algorithm tends to over-emphasize local relations, which can overfill one part of a large room while leaving other feasible regions unused. We shift our planning focus from individual objects to structured groups before solving the geometry. We require the LLM to output object-level constraints for each item, including three types of constraints: global placement constraints (e.g., edge , middle , or 

unconstrained ), structural constraints (e.g., single ,

matrix , or paired ), and optional relative position con-straints (e.g., near , far , etc.). The matrix primitive compactly represents repeated rows such as desk rows or bookshelf blocks, while paired expresses one-to-one ac-cessory relations such as desk–chair pairs. This repre-sentation reduces the burden on the LLM, since in large spaces such as classrooms, libraries, or offices, it no longer needs to output dozens of nearly identical instance-level 

Algorithm 4 Priority-aware group-based object placement 

Require: Room polygon Ω; normalized object groups G;placement constraints C

Ensure: Placement set P 

> 1:

Sort G by the constraints of a(G):

edge+matrix ≻ edge ≻ matrix ≻

middle ≻ free  

> 2:

P ← ∅  

> 3:

for each group G in G do  

> 4:

if a(G) has a matrix constraint then  

> 5:

(r, c ) ← requested matrix size of a(G) 

> 6:

Q ← ∅  

> 7:

while r ≥ 1 and c ≥ 1 and Q = ∅ do  

> 8:

ˆo ← BUILD MACRO OBJECT (G, r, c ) 

> 9:

Q ← FIND FEASIBLE PLACEMENT (ˆ o, Ω, P, C) 

> 10:

if Q = ∅ then  

> 11:

(r, c ) ← DOWNGRADE MATRIX (r, c ) 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end while  

> 14:

if Q̸ = ∅ then  

> 15:

P ← P ∪ Q  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

else  

> 18:

for each object o in G do  

> 19:

Q ← FIND FEASIBLE PLACEMENT (o, Ω, P, C) 

> 20:

if Q̸ = ∅ then  

> 21:

P ← P ∪ Q  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

return P

constraints. We then normalize these constraints into groups 

G = ( a, M ), where a denotes the anchor object and M de-notes the member set. The anchor carries the global spatial role of the group, while the remaining members are placed in the anchor’s local frame. We present our object placement algorithm in Algo-rithm 4. Our algorithm follows a priority-aware con-structive search. Groups are sorted according to the con-straints of their anchor object, yielding a strict priority or-der. Groups that are both wall-dependent and highly struc-tured are processed first, since they occupy the most con-strained regions of the room and strongly affect later cir-culation. For a matrix group, the solver first places the whole pattern as a macro object; if no feasible placement is found, it progressively downgrades the matrix size and re-tries. For a non-matrix group, objects are processed sequen-tially within the group, starting from the anchor object. For each object, the solver samples candidate positions and fil-ters them by hard constraints including collision checking, 24 constraint consistency, and incremental reachability. Ob-jects that do not admit a feasible placement are discarded, while the solver continues with the remaining objects. Reachability is evaluated on the remaining free space when searching for feasible positions, ensuring that the room entrance remains connected to the required circula-tion areas and to accessible interaction zones around the placed objects. Candidates that block passages or destroy walkable structures are discarded immediately. As shown in the Fig. 21, our method maintains full reachability while preserving a high object placement count. LayoutGPT Holodeck MANSION  

> Reachable (blue) Unreachable (red)
> Figure 21. Reachability visualization in a library scene.

## H. User Study 

To understand how real-person users perceive our generated scenes compared to other methods, we conducted a com-prehensive user study with 52 participants from different backgrounds. The full list of participating institutions can be found in Section 5, and we thank them again for their input. For each scene type, we randomly sample two cases from the 10 generated results with the same prompt for sub-jective evaluation. In each scene setting, participants are presented with one set of images from the three methods and are asked to select the best method in terms of real-ism, diversity, and overall layout quality. To prevent bias, we made sure that the recruited participants had no prior experience or exposure to 3D scene generation. Further-more, we kept the names of the corresponding algorithms hidden from them throughout the survey. A sample of the user study image and form can be seen in Fig. 22. We also provide the metric instructions that we used in the survey to guide the users to rank the different methods below.  

> Figure 22. Sample from the user study for the classroom scene category.

## Instructions 

• Realism: How realistic and plausible the scene is (object choices and placements make sense in the given setting; no obvious weird placements or impossible arrangements). Which one is most realistic to real life? • Diversity: How different and varied the generated scenes are across different generated scenes of the SAME method (variety in object selection, ar-rangement, and overall design, while still match-ing the scenario) • Layout: How well-organized and functional the spatial arrangement is (clear structure, reasonable spacing, good flow, and sensible grouping of ob-jects). 

## I. Prompt Templates 

We present prompt templates for three representative mod-ules: (i) whole-building program planning, (ii) single-floor topology (bubble graph) generation, and (iii) LLM-guided seed box selection for cutting. For readability, these templates preserve the core task definition, input fields, output schema, and major constraints, while abstracting away some implementation-level details. The templates are shown in Fig. 23–25. 25 Prompt Template: Whole Building Planning 

Module: building program planner 

System Instruction: You are an experienced architect asked to program a complete multi-floor building using the first-floor plan as reference. 

Inputs: 

• Visual: [Image Input: Base64 rasterized boundary] 

• Geometry: First-floor boundary JSON • Params: Floors: {floors }, {area note }

• Requirement: {user part }

Core Placement Preferences: 

• Place stairs/elevators only in corners that are bounded by two exterior walls; pick the corner whose surrounding leftover space is smallest to keep large continuous areas intact. • Make use of tight/awkward leftover pockets. • Quantize core boxes to integer coordinates and size exactly {core area }. Coordinates must be non-negative. 

What to Do: 

1. Analyze the outline and area and reason about a practical building function. 2. Decide the vertical connectivity method: stair | elevator | stair and elevator, consistent with the rule. 3. Choose locations for vertical cores; each stair/elevator occupies an axis-aligned {core area } bbox within the floor polygon. Output as x=[x1,x2], y=[y1,y2] with integer coordinates. 4. For each floor, produce a list “rooms” with ID-only entries, area estimates, and material specifications. Do NOT include a “type” field. The first room in the list MUST be the circulation hub of the floor (traffic core): choose logically based on building type. Each room must include floor material and wall material fields with descriptive text. 5. Room sums must not exceed the gross floor area; keep 12–25% as circulation/core reserve unless justified. 6. Ensure totals are reasonable; indicate whether plans fit within GFA. 7. If a floor layout should be exactly the same as another floor, use a shorthand: specify only {"index": k, ‘‘copy": j}.

Output Schema (Strict JSON):                                                                           

> {"reasoning": "<Brief explanation of program and area logic>", "vertical_connectivity": {"method": "stair |elevator |stair_and_elevator", "cores": [{"type": "stair", "x": [<int>, <int>], "y": [<int>, <int>]} ], "justification": "<Why this choice fits rules and requirements>" }, "floors": [{"index": <int>, "requirement": "<Natural language requirement for this floor>", "gross_floor_area": <float>, "rooms": [{"id": "hub_room", "area_estimate": <float>, "floor_material": "<Description (e.g., warm oak hardwood, matte)>", "wall_material": "<Description (e.g., soft beige drywall, smooth)>", "notes": "circulation hub (put FIRST)" }, {"id": "<other_room_id>", "area_estimate": <float>, "floor_material": "<Description>", "wall_material": "<Description>", "notes": "<Optional>" }], "area_summary": {"sum_rooms": <float>, "reserve_ratio": <float>, "fits_within_gfa": <boolean>, "notes": "<Optional notes>" }}]}

Floor Layout Context: {layout json }

Figure 23. Prompt template for whole-building program planning. 

26 Prompt Template: Single-Floor Topology Generation 

Module: topology bubble planner 

System Instruction: You are an experienced architect designing the abstract topological connectivity of a single floor. 

Inputs: 

• Overall program reasoning: {reasoning }

• Floor context: Floor index {idx }, Gross floor area {gfa } m2, Floor requirement {requirement }

• Floor polygon JSON (main space after cores removed): {layout json }

• Vertical cores: {vtext }

• Floor hints from program: {rooms json } (first item is the suggested circulation hub) • Material selection guidance: {material hints text }

Your Task: 

• Derive a minimal useful set of rooms/spaces for this floor based on the requirement and rooms list, and assign each node an estimated area ( m2); capture only abstract connectivity, not geometry. • Include all elevator/stair connectors indicated by the floor layout as fixed nodes for this floor; do not omit them. • Treat the provided rooms list as hints (the first item is the suggested circulation hub), but re-evaluate which space should serve as 

main if one space clearly dominates the floor. 

Output Requirements: 

• Return exactly one JSON object with two top-level fields: nodes and edges , with no extra explanatory text. • Required node fields: id , type , area , floor material , wall material , open relation .• Node types allowed: main , Entities , area , elevator , stair .• Edge kinds allowed: access , adjacent .• Every node must include floor material and wall material using descriptive text. • open relation must be either “open” or “door”. For main , use “open”; for elevator and stair , use “door”. 

Design Preferences: {node hierarchy & branching }, {area vs. Entities selection }, {open relation assignment }

Output Schema:                                                        

> {"nodes": [{"id": "lobby", "type": "main", "area": 80.0, "floor_material": "warm oak hardwood, matte", "wall_material": "soft beige drywall, smooth", "open_relation": "open"}, {"id": "office_zone", "type": "area", "area": 30.0, "floor_material": "warm oak hardwood, matte", "wall_material": "soft beige drywall, smooth", "open_relation": "door"}, {"id": "room_1", "type": "Entities", "area": 15.0, "floor_material": "carpet, neutral gray", "wall_material": "painted drywall, white", "open_relation": "door"} ], "edges": [{"source": "lobby", "target": "office_zone", "kind": "adjacent"}, {"source": "office_zone", "target": "room_1", "kind": "adjacent"} ]}

Figure 24. Prompt template for single-floor topology generation. 

27 Prompt Template: Hierarchical Seed Planning 

Module: seed guidance 

System Instruction: You are a floor plan seed planning assistant. Given the floor topology and a preview image containing the full floor outline with stairs/elevators, your task is to plan an axis-aligned rectangular bounding box for each target room within the current parent room, expressed as x=[xmin,xmax], y=[ymin,ymax] to indicate each room’s approximate position and extent. 

Context provided: 

• Target room list: {target ids text }

• Parent room ID: {parent id }, Type: {parent type }, Area: {parent area } m2

• Adjacent room IDs (already placed): {neighbor ids text }

• Project requirement: {requirement }

• Topology JSON and area hints per room • {special instruction }

Coordinate convention: x increases to the right, y increases upward; the parent room’s approximate coordinate range is x ∈

[{minx }, {maxx }], y ∈ [{miny }, {maxy }]; your output should use values within this coordinate interval. 

Output format: The output must be a JSON array where each element contains: • room id : string, the room ID (must be chosen from the candidate list only) • x: array of length 2 [xmin,xmax] , the bounding box in the x direction, requires xmin ≤ xmax 

• y: array of length 2 [ymin,ymax] , the bounding box in the y direction, requires ymin ≤ ymax 

• area : float, the approximate fraction of the parent room’s area this room occupies (0.0–1.0, optional, used as a downstream hint) • reason : a brief one-sentence explanation of why you placed this room at this position 

Output Schema (Strict JSON):                                      

> [{"room_id": "lobby", "x": [0.0, 8.0], "y": [0.0, 6.0], "area": 0.45, "reason": "Main lobby occupies the central area, enclosing the stair core."}, {"room_id": "office_1", "x": [8.0, 12.0], "y": [0.0, 5.0], "area": 0.2, "reason": "Office placed at the east wing, away from the stair core."} ]

Please refer to the floor outline and existing stair/elevator positions in the preview image to provide a reasonable bounding box allocation. Note: bounding boxes should be placed as much as possible within the parent room outline; avoid large-area overlaps. 

Figure 25. Prompt template for LLM-guided seed box planning for cutting. 

28