Title: When Should a Robot Think? Resource-Aware Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning for Embodied Robotic Decision-Making

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.16673v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 01:28:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# When Should a Robot Think? Resource-Aware Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning for Embodied Robotic Decision-Making 

Jun Liu 1, Pu Zhao 2, Zhenglun Kong 3, Xuan Shen 4, Peiyan Dong 5, Fan Yang 6, Lin Cui 7, Hao Tang 8,Geng Yuan 9, Wei Niu 9, Wenbin Zhang 10 , Xue Lin 2, Gaowen Liu 11 , Yanzhi Wang 2, Dong Huang 1

Abstract вҖ” Embodied robotic systems increasingly adopt large language model (LLM)-based agents to support high-level reasoning, planning, and decision-making during interactions with the environment. However, invoking LLM-based rea-soning incurs substantial computational latency and resource overhead, which can disrupt action execution and degrade system reliability. Excessive reasoning may delay actions, while insufficient reasoning often leads to incorrect decisions and task failures. A fundamental challenge, therefore, arises: when should an embodied robot agent think, and when should it act? 

In this work, we propose RARRL (Resource-Aware Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning), a hierarchical framework de-signed for the resource-aware orchestration of embodied agents. Rather than learning low-level control, RARRL learns an 

orchestration policy that operates at the agentвҖҷs decision-making layer. This policy enables the embodied agent to adaptively decide whether to invoke reasoning, which reasoning role to employ, and how much computational budget to allocate based on its observations, execution history, and remaining resources. Extensive experimentsвҖ”including evaluations using empirical latency profiles from the ALFRED benchmarkвҖ”demonstrate that RARRL consistently improves task success rates, reduces execution latency, and enhances robustness compared to fixed or heuristic strategies. These results highlight the importance of adaptive reasoning control for reliable and efficient embodied robotic agents. 

I. INTRODUCTION Embodied robotic systems are increasingly deployed in real-world environments where they must autonomously perceive the environment, reason about task progress, and execute actions under strict time and computational con-straints [1], [2]. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have significantly enhanced the high-level reasoning and planning capabilities of robotic systems, enabling robots to interpret complex instructions, decompose long-horizon tasks, and adapt to diverse and unstructured scenarios [3], [4], [5]. As a result, LLM-based robotic agents have emerged as a promising paradigm for embodied robotic autonomy [6], [7]. However, incorporating LLM-based reasoning into embod-ied robotic systems introduces a critical challenge. High-level reasoning is computationally expensive and often incurs substantial latency, making it impractical to invoke indiscrim-inately during task execution [8], [9]. In real-world robotic deployments, excessive reliance on LLM-based reasoning can delay action execution and disrupt interaction with the           

> 1Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University; 2Northeastern Univer-sity; 3Harvard University; 4Cornell University; 5MIT; 6Fujitsu Research of America; 7Tsinghua University; 8Peking University; 9University of Georgia; 10 Florida International University; 11 Cisco Systems

Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed single-agent embodied architecture. A reinforcement learning (RL) policy operates at the decision-making layer to regulate when the agent should act directly and when to invoke expensive LLM-based reasoning modules under resource constraints. The reward signal is used during training to update the orchestration policy based on task outcome and execution latency. environment, while insufficient reasoning frequently leads to incorrect decisions, unsafe behaviors, or task failure [11], [12]. This tension between reasoning depth and execution efficiency significantly limits the reliability and responsive-ness of embodied robotic agents. Existing robotic systems typically address this issue using manually designed heuristics or fixed invocation strategies to regulate the use of high-level reasoning modules [15], [16]. Such approaches, however, lack the ability to adapt to varying task complexity, environmental uncertainty, and ex-ecution feedback. Consequently, robots often fail to allocate reasoning resources appropriately across different operational contexts, leading to suboptimal performance and degraded system robustness. A principled and adaptive mechanism that enables robotic agents to decide when and how to invoke high-level reasoning during task execution remains largely unexplored. To address these challenges, we propose RARRL (Resource-Aware Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning), an orchestration framework for embodied robotic agents that learns to govern the invocation of LLM-based reasoning modules during environmental interaction. Operating at the decision-making layer of the robotic system, RARRL adap-tively manages high-level cognitive processes without modi-fying low-level perception or motor control. At each decision 

> arXiv:2603.16673v1 [cs.RO] 17 Mar 2026

step, the learned policy determines whether to invoke high-level reasoning, selects the appropriate reasoning role (e.g., planning or verification), and allocates a suitable compu-tational budget based on the robotвҖҷs current observations, execution history, and remaining resources [13], [14]. By explicitly accounting for the cost of reasoning, the proposed approach enables robotic agents to balance reasoning depth and execution efficiency in a data-driven manner. Figure 1 provides an overview of the proposed resource-aware orches-tration framework for embodied robotic agents. The agent interacts with the environment through high-level executable actions, while a reinforcement learningвҖ“based orchestrator adaptively decides when and how to invoke costly LLM-based reasoning modules during task execution. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  

> вҖў

We identify and formalize a previously underexplored problem in embodied robotic autonomy: resource-aware decision-making for LLM-based robotic agents , which concerns how an agent should adaptively decide when and how to invoke high-level reasoning during task execution under limited computational and interaction budgets.  

> вҖў

We propose a reinforcement learning framework that operates at the agent decision-making layer, learning an orchestration policy over LLM-based reasoning mod-ules without modifying low-level control.The learned policy enables the agent to balance reasoning depth and execution efficiency based on its observations, execution history, and remaining resources.  

> вҖў

We demonstrate through extensive experiments across multiple embodied task scenarios that adaptive rea-soning control significantly improves the task success rate, reduces execution latency, and enhances system robustness compared to fixed or heuristic reasoning strategies. These results highlight the importance of learning-based reasoning orchestration for reliable and efficient embodied robotic agents. II. R ELATED WORK 

Embodied Decision-Making in Robotics. Embodied robotic systems have long been studied as sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty, where agents must per-ceive, reason, and act through continuous interaction with the environment [21].Classical robotics frameworks typi-cally adopt hierarchical architectures that decouple high-level decision-making from low-level perception and control, enabling modularity and interpretability [1]. While effective, these approaches often rely on manually designed deci-sion rules or fixed abstractions, limiting their adaptability to complex and dynamic tasks. Learning-based methods, particularly reinforcement learning (RL), have introduced data-driven alternatives for robotic decision-making and hi-erarchical control [10]. However, most RL-based systems focus on learning action-selection policies or task-specific controllers and do not explicitly model the computational cost of high-level reasoning or the dynamic allocation of reasoning resources during execution. 

Language Models for Embodied Reasoning. Recent ad-vances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled robots to perform high-level semantic reasoning, task planning, and instruction following [4], [20], [17], [29]. Prior work has ex-plored grounding language models in robotic action spaces, allowing robots to translate natural language instructions into executable behaviors [5], [22]. More recent systems integrate multimodal language models to support embodied reasoning across perception, language, and action [7], [6]. Despite their success, most existing LLM-enabled robotic systems invoke high-level reasoning in a static or heuristic manner. These approaches typically assume that reasoning is always beneficial, without accounting for the substantial computational cost and latency of LLM inference [30]. As a result, excessive reasoning may delay action execution, while insufficient reasoning can lead to task failure, highlighting the need for adaptive reasoning control. 

Resource-Aware and Adaptive Control. Resource-aware autonomy has been studied in robotics concerning com-putation, energy, and real-time constraints [24]. Existing approaches investigate scheduling, bounded rationality, or task prioritization under limited resources, but often treat reasoning modules as cost-free or rely on static allocation strategies [31], [32]. In the context of LLM-based agents, recent work has emphasized the significant overhead in-troduced by large-scale reasoning models [25], motivating adaptive mechanisms for regulating reasoning usage. 

Reinforcement Learning for High-Level Orchestration. 

Reinforcement learning has been widely applied to robotics for learning control policies and decision-making strategies [8]. While hierarchical RL explores multi-level decision structures [16], most prior work focuses on learning be-haviors or skills rather than regulating the invocation of reasoning processes. III. T HE PROPOSED METHOD 

A. Robot Model 

We model the robot as an embodied agent operating at the execution and decision-making levels. Rather than simulating low-level dynamics, the robot is represented using a discrete-time abstraction that captures task progress, execution uncer-tainty, and resource constraints. This modeling choice reflects the structure of many practical robotic systems, where high-level supervisors issue commands to low-level controllers. 

a) Task Definition: We consider a representative multi-step delivery task. Initially, the robot starts from a designated starting location and navigates to a task region, which serves as an intermediate workspace. At this stage, it is unknown whether deliverable objects are present. The robot then performs an inspection to identify and confirm a target object. If a valid object is identified, the robot picks it up and delivers it to a target zone, completing the task. 

b) State: At time step t, the robot state is defined as 

st = ( xt, h t),

where xt denotes the task-related state and ht encodes recent execution history. Fig. 2: Decision process and training pipeline of the pro-posed orchestration policy. The embodied agent observes the current task state, execution history, and remaining computa-tional budget, which are encoded and provided to a reinforce-ment learningвҖ“based policy. At each decision step, the policy determines whether to execute a high-level action directly or to invoke an LLM-based reasoning module. Execution feedback, including task outcome and execution latency, is used to compute rewards and update the orchestration policy during training. 

c) Action Space: The robot executes a set of high-level actions commonly used in robotic task planning: 

at вҲҲ { Navigate (r), Inspect , Pick , Deliver (z), Wait },

where Navigate (r) moves the robot to a specified region 

r, Inspect inspects the current region to identify task-relevant objects, Pick attempts to grasp a confirmed object, and Deliver (z) transports the object to a target zone z.For simplicity, these actions abstract away low-level control details. 

d) State Transition and Latency Modeling: 

After executing action at, the environment returns 

(st+1 , Оҙ t, o t+1 , done ), where Оҙt denotes the wall-clock latency incurred at step t. Latency directly affects the reward via a cost penalty: rt = rtask t вҲ’ О»Оҙ t. Reasoning actions (T HINK ) incur substantially higher latency than direct execution (A CT ), reflecting real LLM inference cost. Thus, frequent reasoning increases cumulative delay and reduces overall return. Episodes terminate either upon task completion or when a fixed time horizon is reached, creating an explicit trade-off between task success and responsiveness. Execution outcomes are stochastic to reflect real-world un-certainty. For example, navigation may fail with a probability 

pnav ; inspection may produce false positives or negatives; and manipulation actions may fail with a probability pmanip .

e) Reward Function: The robot receives a sparse task-level reward defined as 

rt =

пЈұпЈҙпЈҙпЈҙпЈІпЈҙпЈҙпЈҙпЈі

+1 , if the object is successfully delivered ,

вҲ’О» В· Оҙt, to penalize execution latency ,

вҲ’Ој, if an action fails ,

0, otherwise ,

where О» and Ој control the trade-off between task efficiency and robustness. 

f) Adaptive Reasoning Control: At each decision step, the agent may optionally invoke high-level reasoning actions 

ut вҲҲ { None , Plan , Verify },

which incurs additional computational costs but reduces execution uncertainty. The orchestration policy learns when such reasoning should be invoked to balance task success and execution efficiency. 

B. Architecture Overview 

Figure 2 shows the overall architecture. We consider a single embodied agent interacting with an abstract sequen-tial task process through an observationвҖ“action interface. A reinforcement learning (RL) policy governs when to invoke computationally expensive LLM-based reasoning modules, explicitly trading off task performance and resource con-sumption. The key idea is to decouple high-level reasoning orchestration from low-level action execution. 

a) RL-Based Orchestration: At each step, the orches-tration policy (the decider ) selects between two modes: ACT , which directly executes a low-level action, and T HINK ,which invokes an LLM-based reasoning module (e.g., plan-ning or verification). Reasoning is modeled as a costly decision and is only invoked when it is expected to improve downstream execution under limited budgets. 

b) Execution and Reasoning Interface: When the A CT 

is selected, control is passed to a low-level executor. When the T HINK is selected, a reasoning role is invoked, and its output is stored as guidance (e.g., high-level instructions or constraints) that condition subsequent execution. The executor itself remains fixed, and reasoning outputs influence behavior only through this external guidance channel. 

c) Training Signal and Abstraction Note: During train-ing, the orchestration policy is updated using a reward signal derived from task outcomes and execution costs. This reward is used solely for learning and is not required at inference time. We emphasize that the proposed architecture is defined at an abstract decision-making level and does not require real-time interaction with a physical robot or any physics-based simulation. Additional architecture details, including state aggregation and training signals, are provided in the Appendix VI-A. 

C. Problem Formulation 

We formulate adaptive reasoning orchestration as aMarkov decision process (MDP), where an agent must decide when to invoke costly high-level reasoning under limited resources. At each decision step, the policy observes an aggregated state summarizing the current task context, remaining budget, and execution history, and selects be-tween direct action execution (A CT ) or invoking a reasoning module (T HINK ) The reward encourages task completion while penalizing excessive reasoning costs. The orchestration policy is trained using reinforcement learning. A full MDP specification, including state, action, transition, and reward definitions, is provided in the Appendix VI-B. 

D. Orchestration Policy Learning 

We learn the orchestration policy using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [8], a policy gradient method known for its stability in long-horizon decision-making. Advan-tages are computed using generalized advantage estimation (GAE) [18]. Our use of PPO focuses on learning high-level orchestration decisions rather than low-level control. 

a) Policy and Value Parameterization: The policy 

ПҖОё (at | st) is parameterized by a neural network that outputs: (i) the probability of selecting A CT versus T HINK , (ii) a distribution over reasoning roles r conditioned on T HINK ,and (iii) a distribution over budget levels c. A value function 

VП•(st) is learned jointly to estimate expected returns and serve as a baseline for advantage estimation. The discrete budget c вҲҲ { 0, 1, 2} is deterministically mapped to concrete LLM invocation configurations at runtime. When c = 0 , no LLM call is issued and the executor acts directly. When 

c = 1, only the planner role is invoked with a fixed 

max tokens =256. When c = 2 , both planner and veri-fier are sequentially invoked, each with max tokens =512. Thus, c strictly controls (1) the number of LLM forward passes and (2) the maximum generated tokens per environ-ment step. Across all budget levels, the LLM configuration is fixed (GPT-4o-mini, temperature 0.2, top-p=1.0, single sample, no tool calls), so compute differences arise only from role activation and token caps. Token limits are enforced via hard API caps, and calls are sequential, so larger c strictly increases latency and token usage, ensuring reproducible and controlled budget scaling. 

b) Training Objective: We optimize the policy using the clipped PPO objective: 

LPPO (Оё) = Et

h

min 



ПҒt(Оё) ЛҶAt, clip  ПҒt(Оё), 1 вҲ’ Пө, 1 + Пө ЛҶAt

i 

,

(1) where ПҒt(Оё) = ПҖОё (at | st)/ПҖ Оёold (at | st) and ЛҶAt denote the advantage estimates. 

Algorithm 1 Orchestration Policy Learning (PPO)  

> 1:

for iteration = 1 to Niter do  

> 2:

Collect trajectories of length T using ПҖОё 

> 3:

Compute advantages ЛҶAt using GAE ( О»GAE = 0 .95 ) 

> 4:

Update policy parameters Оё using PPO objective  

> 5:

Update value parameters П• via mean squared error regression on returns  

> 6:

end for 

c) Training Procedure: The orchestration policy is trained via on-policy interaction with an abstract task model implemented as a purely computational process, rather than a physics-based simulator or physical robot. At each training iteration, the agent interacts online with this abstract process to collect trajectories using the current policy. Such pro-cesses may be instantiated as programmatic task generators or executable abstractions derived from offline embodied benchmarks. The LLM-based reasoning modules are treated as black-box components with fixed behavior during training, and only the orchestration policy and value function are updated. The overall training loop is summarized in Algo-rithm 1. By learning a stochastic orchestration policy, the proposed framework adapts reasoning behavior to task context and resource availability without relying on manually designed heuristics. The separation between orchestration and execu-tion enables compatibility with diverse reasoning backends and abstract interaction processes, making the approach broadly applicable to resource-aware embodied decision-making. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Implementation Details 

We implement our framework in Python 3.8 using Py-Torch 1.13.0. All experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA A6000 GPU. The orchestration policy and value networks are multilayer perceptrons with three hidden layers of 256 units and ReLU activations. We train the orchestration policy using PPO with standard hyperparameters ( Пө = 0 .2, learning rate О· = 3 Г— 10 вҲ’4,and О»GAE = 0 .95 ), which we found to be robust across tasks. During training and evaluation, reasoning modules (e.g., LLM-based planners or verifiers) are treated as frozen black boxes. All results are averaged over 5 random seeds, with standard deviations reported in parentheses. In all experiments, we use О» = 1 .0 and Ој = 0 .5. Additional im-plementation details and experimental settings are provided in Appendix VI-C. 

B. Robotic Tasks 

As illustrated in Figure 3, we evaluate the proposed ap-proach on embodied robotic tasks composed of multiple exe-cution stages with heterogeneous reasoning demands. Specif-ically, we consider: (1) Navigation tasks, where the agent must reach target locations under execution uncertainty; (2) 

Inspection tasks, which require visiting and verifying objects Fig. 3: Illustration of a representative multi-step embodied robotic task. The agent performs navigation, inspection, and delivery stages, during which reasoning demands vary. Com-plex stages benefit from high-level reasoning, while routine stages favor direct execution, motivating adaptive reasoning orchestration. or regions; and (3) Multi-step Delivery tasks, which sequen-tially combine navigation, inspection, and object delivery. These tasks reflect common high-level robotic operations and naturally require adaptive orchestration between direct execution and costly reasoning. 

C. ALFRED Runtime Evaluation 

To assess real-world deployment feasibility, we evaluate our orchestration policy in the ALFRED benchmark using the AI2-THOR simulator with real LLM inference in the loop. All baselines use identical LLM configurations and prompt templates. Compared to full reasoning, our orchestration policy re-duces LLM inference time by more than 60% while main-taining comparable task success. Relative to heuristic and constrained PPO baselines (Appendix VI-C), our method achieves consistently higher task success under substantially lower token consumption. Importantly, the reduction in wall-clock latency directly translates into improved responsiveness in interactive embodied settings. These results demonstrate that adaptive reasoning orchestration learned in abstract environments can transfer effectively to physics-based sim-ulation with real LLM modules in the loop. We further analyze latency calibration and distribution shift effects in Appendix VI-D. 

D. Main Results on Abstract Tasks 

Table II reports results on abstract task scenarios. The proposed orchestration policy achieves higher task success than heuristic baselines while substantially reducing reason-ing frequency and token usage relative to full reasoning. Across abstract tasks, our method approaches the suc-cess rate of always-on reasoning while incurring signifi-cantly lower computational cost, demonstrating an improved successвҖ“efficiency trade-off in controlled settings. 

1) Performance Ceiling Analysis: We analyze how or-chestration performance is bounded by the strength of the underlying execution and reasoning modules. Figure 4 re-ports task success rates across discrete executionвҖ“reasoning Weak Low Weak High Strong Low Strong High 

> Underlying Module Strength
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 85
> 90
> Task Success Rate (%)
> Heuristic Orchestration
> Ours (RL Orchestration)

Fig. 4: Performance ceiling analysis. Each point shows mean task success over 5 random seeds with standard deviation. Execution and reasoning strength jointly determine the at-tainable performance ceiling, while adaptive orchestration enables closer approach to this ceiling. None Low Medium High 

> Latency Uncertainty Level
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 85
> 90
> Task Success Rate (%)
> Heuristic Orchestration
> Ours (RL Orchestration)

Fig. 5: Robustness to latency uncertainty. Task success rate under increasing execution and reasoning latency variabil-ity. Points show mean performance over 5 random seeds, with error bars indicating standard deviation. The proposed orchestration policy degrades more gracefully than heuristic strategies as latency uncertainty increases. configurations. Increasing execution strength consistently raises the achievable performance ceiling, indicating that execution fidelity directly constrains maximum task success. Stronger reasoning further improves performance, particu-larly when execution is weak, while under strong execution the marginal gains diminish. Across all configurations, the proposed orchestration policy consistently outperforms the heuristic baseline, demonstrating more effective exploitation of available execution and reasoning capacity under resource constraints. 

2) Robustness and Deployment-Proxy Analysis: Although trained on abstract interaction processes, real-world de-ployment involves uncertainty and resource variability. We evaluate robustness using deployment-proxy experiments that inject realistic disturbances into the interaction interface. 

Latency uncertainty and budget shock. We introduce stochastic delays to both action execution and reasoning invocation to simulate execution and computational latency. As shown in Figure 5, all methods degrade as latency vari-ance increases, but the proposed policy adapts by reducing unnecessary reasoning and maintains higher task success. We further evaluate robustness under abrupt resource changes by introducing a budget shock , where the remaining computational budget is reduced by a fixed fraction at a random timestep. Table III shows that our policy responds by TABLE I: ALFRED runtime evaluation with real LLM inference. Results are reported as mean Вұ standard error over 50 episodes per task category. Time is measured in wall-clock seconds. TSR: Task Success Rate (%), Time: Average wall-clock time per episode (s), LLM-Time: Average LLM inference time per episode (s), Tok: Average token consumption per episode. 

> вҲ—

p < 0.05 , вҲ—вҲ— p < 0.01 compared to Constrained PPO (paired t-test).                                                               

> Navigation Inspection Delivery (PickвҖ“Place) Method TSR вҶ‘Time вҶ“LLM-Time вҶ“Tok вҶ“TSR вҶ‘Time вҶ“LLM-Time вҶ“Tok вҶ“TSR вҶ‘Time вҶ“LLM-Time вҶ“Tok вҶ“
> Full Reasoning [27] 84.0 Вұ1.8 42.3 Вұ2.1 31.5 Вұ1.9 4100 Вұ180 78.5 Вұ2.0 48.7 Вұ2.4 36.8 Вұ2.1 4300 Вұ200 71.2 Вұ2.3 55.1 Вұ2.7 40.4 Вұ2.4 4500 Вұ220 Heuristic [21] 72.4 Вұ2.1 27.6 Вұ1.6 15.8 Вұ1.2 1700 Вұ140 66.3 Вұ2.4 31.4 Вұ1.8 18.1 Вұ1.3 1850 Вұ150 60.5 Вұ2.6 36.9 Вұ2.0 21.7 Вұ1.5 2100 Вұ170 Constrained PPO 79.3 Вұ1.9 30.8 Вұ1.7 18.4 Вұ1.3 1950 Вұ150 73.1 Вұ2.2 34.6 Вұ1.9 20.7 Вұ1.4 2150 Вұ160 65.8 Вұ2.5 39.2 Вұ2.1 23.9 Вұ1.6 2400 Вұ180 Ours (RARRL) 82.7 Вұ1.7 вҲ—25.1 Вұ1.4 вҲ—вҲ— 12.3 Вұ1.0 вҲ—вҲ— 980 Вұ90 вҲ—вҲ— 76.4 Вұ1.9 вҲ—29.8 Вұ1.6 вҲ—вҲ— 14.1 Вұ1.1 вҲ—вҲ— 1100 Вұ100 вҲ—вҲ— 69.5 Вұ2.1 вҲ—33.7 Вұ1.8 вҲ—вҲ— 16.8 Вұ1.3 вҲ—вҲ— 1350 Вұ120 вҲ—вҲ—

TABLE II: Main results across abstract embodied tasks (mean Вұ std over 5 seeds). EL execution latency, RE resource efficiency, RF reasoning frequency, and Tok average LLM token usage per episode. The proposed orchestration policy consistently approaches the success rate of full reasoning while significantly reducing execution latency, reasoning frequency, and token consumption, demonstrating an improved successвҖ“efficiency trade-off under limited computational budgets. 

Task Decomposition Structured Navigation Method TSR (%) вҶ‘ EL вҶ“ RE вҶ‘ RF вҶ“ Tok вҶ“ TSR (%) вҶ‘ EL вҶ“ RE вҶ‘ RF вҶ“ Tok вҶ“

No Reasoning 45.2 Вұ2.1 12.3 0.92 0.0 0 52.1 Вұ1.8 15.4 1.05 0.0 0Full Reasoning [27] 85.4 Вұ1.5 45.6 0.75 50.0 4200 88.3 Вұ1.3 48.2 0.78 50.0 4100 Fixed ( k = 3 ) [28] 68.7 Вұ1.9 28.4 0.85 16.7 1450 72.5 Вұ2.0 30.1 0.88 16.7 1380 Heuristic [21] 72.1 Вұ1.6 25.7 0.89 13.2 1120 75.4 Вұ1.4 27.3 0.91 13.5 1090 Ours(RARRL) 82.3 Вұ1.2 18.5 0.95 7.4 620 84.6 Вұ1.1 20.2 0.97 6.9 580 

TABLE III: Robustness to budget shock. Task success rate (TSR, %) and average number of reasoning invocations per episode (RI) before and after an abrupt reduction of remaining computational budget. Results are averaged over 5 random seeds. 

Before Shock After Shock Method TSR (%) вҶ‘ RI вҶ“ TSR (%) вҶ‘ RI вҶ“

Heuristic [21] 78.5 14.2 61.8 15.1 Ours(RARRL) 87.6 11.3 74.9 7.6 

TABLE IV: Ablation study on key components of the orches-tration policy. We report task success rate (TSR, %), average reasoning invocations per episode (RI), and normalized exe-cution cost (Cost; lower is better). Results are averaged over 5 random seeds. 

Variant TSR (%) вҶ‘ RI вҶ“ Cost вҶ“

Full (Ours) 87.6 11.3 1.00 

w/o Budget State ( вҲ’bt) 80.9 15.8 1.18 w/o History ( вҲ’ht) 78.7 13.9 1.12 Planner-only (no verifier) 83.1 12.5 1.06 Verifier-only (no planner) 79.4 12.1 1.05 Fixed Budget (no c) 82.6 13.7 1.10 

shifting toward action-heavy execution, preserving substan-tially higher task success than heuristic baselines that fail to adapt their reasoning rate. 

E. Ablation Studies 

We ablate key design components of the proposed orches-tration framework to identify their individual contributions. Table IV summarizes results under the same evaluation protocol as the main experiments. Removing the budget state ( bt) yields a notable drop in task success and in-creases reasoning frequency and execution cost, indicating that explicit resource awareness is essential for preventing over-invocation of expensive reasoning. Removing execu-tion history ( ht) also degrades performance, suggesting that history-aware orchestration decisions help resolve partial observability and recover from past failures. We further ablate the reasoning-role selection by restricting the policy to a single role. Planner-only variants outperform verifier-only variants, reflecting the importance of long-horizon guidance, while the full model achieves the best performance by com-bining complementary planner and verifier signals. Finally, disabling adaptive budget allocation (fixed c) consistently increases cost and reduces success, confirming the benefit of learning fine-grained control over reasoning expenditure. V. D ISCUSSION 

Our modular formulation highlights key system-level con-siderations for resource-aware embodied agents. First, or-chestration performance is bounded by underlying modules: as shown in our ceiling analysis, stronger executors and reasoners raise the attainable success rate, consistent with hierarchical robotic systems where high-level coordination assumes reliable low-level execution. Second, while we isolate orchestration from sensor noise and actuation delays to enable controlled analysis of reasoningвҖ“action trade-offs, extending to physical deployment requires incorporating such uncertainties into state and reward design. Overall, decoupling orchestration from control yields a modular and deployable design that supports integration with stronger modules and more realistic environments. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We presented a reinforcement learning framework that op-timizes the use of costly reasoning in embodied agents. Our results confirm that a learned orchestration policy effectively navigates the trade-off between task success and computa-tional latency, maintaining robustness under resource fluctu-ations. By decoupling high-level decision-making from low-level control, this work provides a scalable foundation for resource-constrained embodied intelligence, moving toward agents that can autonomously determine when to think and when to act. APPENDIX 

A. Additional Architecture 

Interaction Interface: The loop consists of an abstract envi-ronment with observation and action interfaces. Observations encode task context, and actions correspond to executable decisions. We model this interface abstractly, without as-suming a physical robot or simulator, enabling instantiation from offline embodied benchmarks (e.g., ALFRED) without hardware interaction. 

State Aggregation: The agent employs a state aggrega-tion module to fuse multiple information sources into a compact decision state st. This includes: (i) the current observation ot, (ii) a resource encoding of remaining com-putational/interaction budget (e.g., normalized tokens or timesteps), and (iii) an execution history of past orchestration decisions and outcomes. In practice, these are concatenated directly. The history is encoded via a recurrent network or pooling layer, while the resource state uses simple normal-ization. In the ALFRED benchmark, the state comprises the instruction embedding, the last action with its success flag, a short history of recent actionвҖ“outcome pairs, and the normalized remaining budget. No privileged simulator information is used, and no explicit uncertainty estimates are provided; gating decisions rely on observable proxies such as recent failures or action repetitions. 

B. Detailed Problem Formulation 

We formulate adaptive reasoning control as an MDP, where the policy decides when to invoke reasoning versus act under limited budgets. 

State Space: At step t, the state st aggregates the current observation ot, resource state bt, and execution history ht.These components summarize task progress and remaining budget for orchestration. Observations are encoded as fixed-dimensional embeddings and concatenated with resource and history representations as policy input. 

Action Space: The action space is defined as A =

{ACT , THINK (r, c )}, where ACT executes directly and THINK (r, c ) invokes reasoning with role r and budget c.Roles are selected from a small discrete set (e.g., planner, verifier), and budgets are discretized (e.g., low/medium/high) for stable learning and cost control. 

Effect of THINK on Dynamics: After invoking Think , the failure probability of executing action a in state s becomes 

P think f ail (s, a ) = (1 вҲ’ Оұ(s)) P exec f ail (s, a ), where Оұ(s) вҲҲ [0 , 1] 

denotes the reasoning gain. In the abstract environment, we model Оұ(s) as a state-dependent function of measurable execution uncertainty, Оұ(s) = О· u (s), where u(s) вҲҲ [0 , 1] is a normalized uncertainty signal (e.g., recent failure frequency or belief entropy), and О· вҲҲ [0 , 1] is a global reasoning effec-tiveness coefficient. We treat О· as an environment parameter and do not learn it during policy training; the orchestration policy only observes u(s) and the remaining budget. 

Reward Function: The reward is defined as rt = rtask  

> t

вҲ’

О» r cost  

> t

, where rtask  

> t

encourages task completion and rcost 

> t

penalizes reasoning expenditure. For example, rtask  

> t

may assign a positive reward upon task completion, while rcost  

> t

is proportional to reasoning time or token usage. The coefficient 

О» is selected via validation on held-out trajectories, with typical values in the range [0 .1, 1.0] .

Objective: The orchestration policy ПҖОё (at | st) is optimized to maximize the expected discounted return: 

max Оё EПҖОё

hPTt=0 Оіtrt

i

, where Оі вҲҲ (0 , 1] is a discount factor and T is the task horizon. We adopt soft budget penal-ties for computational simplicity and stable optimization; extending the formulation to hard constraints via constrained MDPs or Lagrangian methods is left for future work. 

C. Additional Implementation Details 

Task Scenarios: We consider two abstract embodied task scenarios that capture long-horizon decision-making and interaction structure while remaining independent of physical execution. 

Task Decomposition: A long-horizon instruction-following task where a high-level goal is decomposed into executable sub-actions. We use a symbolic abstraction derived from embodied benchmarks. 

Structured Navigation: A procedurally generated symbolic navigation task where the agent reaches a target under resource constraints. Observations encode local structure and goal information, and actions are discrete navigation primi-tives. For each task, we generate 1,000 training trajectories and 200 test trajectories using the corresponding abstract task processes. Each episode has a budget of 50вҖ“100 units. Reasoning costs are sampled from [5 , 20] units depending on the selected reasoning role and budget level. For ALFRED runtime evaluation, we use the official ALFRED validation split and execute tasks in the AI2-THOR physics simulator. At each reasoning invocation, we query the OpenAI GPT-4o-mini model via API. We fix temperature to 0.2 and cap generation at 512 tokens per call. Reasoning traces are not exposed to the orchestration policy; the policy only observes the current state features and remaining compute budget. Token usage is accumulated per episode and treated as a hard budget constraint during evaluation. No synthetic latency is injected: all reasoning latency reflects real API response time. Execution latency corresponds to environment step time in AI2-THOR. 

Training Details. The orchestration policy is trained using PPO with hyperparameters described in Sec. III-D. Episodes last up to T = 50 steps. We use Оі = 0 .99 and О»GAE = 0 .95 

across all experiments. 

Baselines: We compare the proposed method against the following baselines: (1) No Reasoning: The agent never invokes high-level reasoning and always executes actions directly. (2) Full Reasoning: The agent invokes reasoning at every decision step [27]. (3) Fixed Invocation [28] : The agent invokes reasoning at fixed intervals (every k steps, with k вҲҲ { 3, 5} tuned on validation data). (4) Heuristic Budget [21]: The agent invokes reasoning when a hand-crafted uncertainty signal exceeds a threshold. All baselines share the same low-level executor and reasoning modules for fair comparison. Constrained PPO Baseline: We implement a cost-aware PPO with an explicit episode-level reasoning budget con-straint. Let C(П„ ) denote total reasoning cost per episode. The constraint is: E[C(П„ )] вүӨ Cmax , where Cmax matches the budget used in our method. We adopt a Lagrangian formulation: L(Оё, О» ) = E[R(П„ )] вҲ’О» (E[C(П„ )] вҲ’ Cmax ) , with dual update О» вҶҗ [О» + О·О»(E[C(П„ )] вҲ’ Cmax )] +. We use 

О·О» = 0 .01 and keep all other PPO hyperparameters identical to ours. 

Metrics: (1) Task Success Rate (TSR): Fraction of episodes completed successfully. (2) Execution Latency (EL): Average number of steps per episode, serving as a proxy for execution time (lower is better). (3) Resource Efficiency (RE): Task success normalized by total budget consumption (higher is better). (4) Reasoning Frequency (RF): Average number of reasoning invocations per episode. 

D. Calibration and Distribution Shift Analysis 

(1) Latency Measurement: We measure GPT-4o-mini latency in ALFRED runtime over 300 reasoning calls. Mean API latency is 0.82s (std 0.27s; 95th percentile 1.34s). Mean token usage per invocation is 380 tokens. (2) Calibration: Before transfer, the abstract reasoning cost model is rescaled to match the measured mean and variance of runtime latency. Abstract cost units are linearly mapped to token usage so that expected per-episode budget matches ALFRED runtime statistics. No policy fine-tuning is performed after calibra-tion. (3) Transfer Gap: After calibration, the abstract-to-runtime performance gap is below 3% absolute TSR across task categories. Token consumption prediction error reduces from 11.3% to 4.6%. (4) Shift Robustness: Under artificial latency inflation (1.5 Г—), TSR degrades by less than 2.5%, as the policy automatically reduces reasoning frequency. REFERENCES [1] Siciliano, B., Khatib, O., & KrВЁ oger, T. (2008). Springer Handbook of Robotics . Springer. [2] S. Thrun, вҖңProbabilistic robotics,вҖқ Communications of the ACM , vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 52вҖ“57, 2002, ACM New York, NY, USA. [3] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, et al., вҖңLanguage models are few-shot learners,вҖқ Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1877вҖ“1901, 2020. [4] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, et al., вҖңChain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,вҖқ Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 24 824вҖ“24 837, 2022. [5] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, et al., вҖңDo as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. [6] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, et al., вҖңRt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,вҖқ in Conference on Robot Learning , 2023, pp. 2165вҖ“2183, PMLR. [7] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. M. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu, W. Huang, et al., вҖңPalm-e: An embodied multimodal language model,вҖқ 2023. [8] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, вҖңProximal policy optimization algorithms,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [9] J. Wang, E. Shi, H. Hu, et al., вҖңLarge language models for robotics: Opportunities, challenges, and perspectives,вҖқ Journal of Automation and Intelligence , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 52вҖ“64, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.jai.2024.12.003. [10] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-tion , 2nd ed., MIT Press, 2018. [11] X. Li, G. Cheng, Z. Chen, Y. Sun, and Y. Qu, вҖңAdaLoGN: Adap-tive Logic Graph Network for Reasoning-Based Machine Reading Comprehension,вҖқ in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,Dublin, Ireland, 2022, pp. 7147вҖ“7161, Association for Computational Linguistics. [12] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence, and A. Zeng, вҖңCode as policies: Language model programs for embodied control,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07753 , 2022. [13] M. L. Puterman, Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dy-namic programming . John Wiley & Sons, 2014. [14] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, et al., Reinforcement learning: An intro-duction , vol. 1, no. 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. [15] M. A. Goodrich, A. C. Schultz, et al., вҖңHumanвҖ“robot interaction: a survey,вҖқ Foundations and trendsВ® in humanвҖ“computer interaction , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 203вҖ“275, 2008, Now Publishers, Inc. [16] L. P. Kaelbling and T. Lozano-PВҙ erez, вҖңHierarchical task and motion planning in the now,вҖқ in 2011 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation , 2011, pp. 1470вҖ“1477, IEEE. [17] M. Li, S. Zhao, Q. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Srivastava, C. Gokmen, T. Lee, E. Li, R. Zhang, W. Liu, P. Liang, L. Fei-Fei, J. Mao, and J. Wu, вҖңEmbodied agent interface: Benchmarking LLMs for embodied decision making,вҖқ Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 100428вҖ“100534, 2024. [18] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, вҖңHigh-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estima-tion,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 , 2015. [19] C. Qian, Z. Liu, S. Kokane, A. Prabhakar, J. Qiu, H. Chen, Z. Liu, et al., вҖңxRouter: Training Cost-Aware LLMs Orchestration System via Reinforcement Learning,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08439 , 2025. [20] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al., вҖңLanguage Models are Few-Shot Learners,вҖқ in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 1877вҖ“1901. [21] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics . MIT Press, 2005. [22] Liang, X., et al. вҖқCode as Policies: Language Model Programs for Embodied Control.вҖқ (2023). [23] TELLEX , S., et al. вҖңFoundations of Resource-Aware Robotics.вҖқ Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 2020. [24] S. A. S. Mohamed, M.-H. Haghbayan, A. Miele, O. Mutlu, and J. Plosila, вҖңEnergy-efficient mobile robot control via run-time monitor-ing of environmental complexity and computing workload,вҖқ in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2021, pp. 7587вҖ“7593, IEEE. [25] F. Xu, Q. Hao, Z. Zong, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, et al., вҖңTowards large reasoning models: A survey of reinforced reasoning with large language models,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09686 , 2025. [26] H. Shi, Z. Sun, X. Yuan, M.-A. CЛҶ otВҙ e, and B. Liu, вҖңOpex: Acomponent-wise analysis of llm-centric agents in embodied instruction following,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03017 , 2024. [27] R. Ramrakhya, M. Chang, X. Puig, et al, вҖңGrounding Multimodal LLMs to Embodied Agents that Ask for Help with Reinforcement Learning,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00907 , 2025. [28] K. Yang, Y. Liu, S. Chaudhary, R. Fakoor, P. Chaudhari, G. Karypis, and H. Rangwala, вҖңAgentoccam: A simple yet strong baseline for llm-based web agents, 2024,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13825. [29] L. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Ren, H. Zhao, et al, вҖңTowards end-to-end embodied decision making via multi-modal large language model: Explorations with gpt4-vision and beyond,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02071 , 2023. [30] Y. Chen, H.-J. You, J.-J. Shao, X.-W. Yang, M. Yang, et al, вҖң Re 2

Agent: Reflection and Re-execution Agent for Embodied Decision Making,вҖқ in NeurIPS 2025 Challenge on Foundation Models for Embodied Agents , 2025. [31] S. Eiffert, N. D. Wallace, et al, вҖңResource and response aware path planning for long-term autonomy of ground robots in agriculture,вҖқ 

Field Robotics , vol. 2, pp. 1вҖ“33, 2022, FRPS. [32] Z. Xu and V. Tzoumas, вҖңResource-aware distributed submodular maximization: A paradigm for multi-robot decision-making,вҖқ in 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2022, pp. 5959вҖ“5966, IEEE.