Title: 2603.26773v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26773v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:03:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Robot Arm Control via Cognitive Map Learners 

Nathan McDonald 

Christian Brazeau 

Air Force Research Laboratory 

nathan.mcdonald.5@us.af.mil 

Colyn Seeley 

Rochester Institute of Technology 

Abstract — Cognitive map learners (CML) have been shown to 

enable hierarchical, compositional machine learning. That is ,

independently trained CML modules can be arbitrarily composed 

together to solve more complex problems without task -specific 

retraining. This work applies this approach to control the 

movement of a multi -jointed robot arm, where by each arm 

segment’s angular position is governed by an independently 

trained CML. Operating in a 2D Cartesian plane, target points are 

encoded as phasor hypervectors according to fractional power 

encoding (FPE). This phasor hypervector is then factorized into a 

set of arm segment angles either via a resonator network or a 

modern Hopfi eld network . These arm segment angle s are 

subsequently fed to the ir respective arm segment CMLs, which 

reposition the robot arm to the target point without the use of 

inverse kinematic equations. This work presents both a general 

solution for both a 2D robot arm with an arbitrary number of arm 

segments and a particular solution for a 3D arm with a single 

rotating base. 

Keywords —hyperdimensional computing, vector symbolic 

architectures, cognitive map learner, compositional machine 

learning, robotics 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Deep neural networks (DNN) are frequently implemented as 

monolithic solutions, e.g. a single DNN trained for a single task. 

A limitation of this approach is that training by stochastic 

gradient preclude s trivial post -training composability of diverse 

pretrained DNNs. Even ensemble networks deliberately 

constructed with multiple pretrained DNNs must still be fine -

tuned as a monolithic entity for optimal results [ 1]. DNNs are 

therefore not suitable as the primary module for composable 

machine learning. Such a framework might consist of 1) 

fundamental computing modules that 2) may be arbitrarily 

composed together to 3) solve more complex operations than the 

modules individually yet 4) without reoptimizing the modules 

per new task, typically necessitating 5) a consistent input/out 

(I/O) representation [2, 3]. (For example, d igital logic is a 

composable framework where Boolean logic gates are the 

composable modules and binary the common I/O. )

This work presents an example of cognitive map learners 

(CML) [4] as composable ML module s operating upon 

hyperdimensional computing (HDC) hypervectors as the 

“common communication protocol” [3, 5, 6]. CML s are a 

collection of separate single -layer artificial neural networks 

(matrices) collaboratively trained to learn internal 

representations of node states, edge actions, and edge action 

availability from an abstract graph. The key capability of this 

unusual ML module is that it iteratively p erforms path planning 

between any current and desired node state pairing , though 

never explicitly trained to do so . CMLs can be readily trained or 

even explicitly constructed [6] to learn discrete state space s;

however, training a CML on continuous state spaces often 

requir e numerous attempts to find a viable solution, e.g. a state 

space comprised of the position angles of all four legs of a

quadruped robot [4]. 

Instead of attempting to learn this continuous state space 

directly, this work describes a preliminary approach to control a 

single multi -jointed robot arm via a collection of discrete space 

CMLs : one CML per arm segment. A target point is defined in 

2D Cartesian space, encoded as a phasor hypervector via 

fractional power encoding (FPE), then factorized into a set of 

arm angles also expressed as hypervectors from the CMLs .

From there, the arm segment CMLs plot a path to the desired 

angle s, reposition ing the whole arm arbitrarily close to the target 

point (Figure 1) . This approach is a general solution for 

manipulating a 2D robotics arm comprised of an arbitrary 

number of arm segments . S ince rotation are not commutative, 

only a particular solution to 3D arm control is presente d.

The main contributions of this work are as follows: 

• Define d a workflow for generating target points and arm 

segment CMLs in a shared representation space via 

fractional power encoding (FPE) of phasor hypervectors 

• Reinterpreted finding the set of arm angles attaining the 

target point as equivalent to the knapsack problem, 

solvable via hypervector factorization methods .              

> Fig. 1. Robotic arm with 3 arm segments, articulated by 3 different angles
> (green dashed lines ), target point (a,b), and workflow diagram for
> re positioning the robot arm. Target point is converted to a phasor
> hypervector via fractional power encoding (FPE), which is then factorized
> by the resonator into a set of arm segment angles received as input by their
> respective CML. CMLs plot sequence of angular state sin parallel .

• Detail ed a method for repositioning a robot arm via 

CMLs without inverse kinematics equations .

Section II describes the mathematics of HDC and CMLs, 

while Section III details both the construction of the arm 

segment CMLs and the workflow for their orchestration. Section 

IV presents the results for this approach , followed by discussion 

and future applications of this research in Section V. 

II. BACKGROUND 

A. Cognitive Map Learner (CML) 

A cognitive map learner is a collection of three single layer 

neural networks (matrices) which are trained or constructed to 

encode the topology of a n abstract graph of n nodes and e edges. 

Each neural network learns one aspect of the graph : 1) node 

state representations S ∈ ℝ(d,n), 2) edge action representations A

∈ ℝ(d,e), and 3) the availability G ∈ ℝ(e,n ) of edge actions from 

each node state, where d is the size of the representation space. 

A CML is trained to predict the next node state st+1 given the 

current node state st and chosen edge action at,

st+1 = st + at, (1) 

For the use case here, the node states S are predefined by 

fractional power encoding with phasor hypervectors (Section 

II I. A, B), so the edge action matrix A is calculated explicitly as 

aij = si – sj. (2)

The chief use of the CML is for path planning , despite not 

having been explicitly trained for the task (only pairwise state 

transitions are presented in Eq. (2 )). The CML module takes 

two inputs: the current node state st and a desired node state sd

(Fig ure 2). Because all node states are unambiguously stored as 

column vectors in S, they may be trivially extracted from any 

pretrained CML , providing the vocabulary for an external agent 

to task the CML . The CML can also clean up noisy inputs  ŝ 

provided they exceed a minimum similarity threshold with 

respect to the known state hypervectors in S, Eq. (6) .

For each iteration of the CML, the utility of every edge 

action with respect to sd is calculated by multiplying the 

difference between the desired and current node state by the 

pseudo -inverse of edge action matrix A,

u = A † (sd – st), (3)

where † denotes the Moore -Penrose pseudo -inverse. The gating 

vector gt (corresponding to node st) is multiplied elementwise 

with the utility scores vector, ensuring only legal edge actions 

have nonzero values. A winner -take -all (WTA ) algorithm 

produces a one -hot vector indicating the index of the most 

useful edge action, which is then added to the current node state  ŝ  

> t+1

= st + A∙WTA (gt⊙u), (4)

where ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication ; and the CML 

returns  ŝ t+1 as output, the predicted most useful, legal next node 

state. Since this output is also a valid input, the CML can iterate 

over Eq. ( 3, 4) until sd ≈ st; whereby, the CML finds a 

reasonabl y minimal path between any initial and desired node 

state, competitive with Dijkstra and A* [ 7] but without the 

mathematical optimality guarantees [ 4]. 

B. Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) 

By making the CML representation space size d ≥ 512, node 

and edge vectors become semantically meaningful entities 

suitable for symbolic reasoning using hyperdimensional 

computing (HDC) algebra [ 8, 9 ]. The key metric under HDC is 

similarity sim . As the length of randomly generated 

hypervectors increases, the similarity between any two 

converges to pseudo -orthogonality [ 10 ]. The basic operations 

of HDC , viz. addition, multiplication, and recovery, therefore 

create and manipulate similarities among hypervectors .

Addition and multiplication are elementwise operations, so the 

dimension of the resultant hypervector remains d regardless of 

the number of hypervectors added or multiplied together. The 

normalized dot product is used to compare hypervector s, where 

identical vectors have a similarity of sim = 1 and pseudo -

orthogonal hypervectors sim ~ 0. 

Addition is analogous to set creation, where the sum 

hypervector is similar to each of the component hyper vectors, 

q = [ s1 + s2 + s3], (5)

and sim (q,s1) ~ sim (q,s2) ~ sim (q,s3) ≫ sim (q,s4) ~ 0. 

Multiplication, denoted as ⊙, binds hypervectors together, 

analogous to key -value pairing. Unlike addition , the product 

hypervector is not similar to either of its factor hypervectors ,

sim (x⊙y, x) ~ 0; but importantly the operation is reversible 

(Section III. A) . The recovery, or cleanup, operation rec 

compares a noisy query hypervector to all other known 

hypervectors stored in a dictionary and returns the most similar 

hypervector above a threshold θ,

rec (ŝ 1, S, θ) = s1. (6)

III. MET HODS 

A. Specifying a target point 

Let a robotic arm have n arm segments. The goal is to 

determine the angle of each arm segment such that the end 

effector of the arm touches a target point (Figure 1). Cartesian 

axes x and y are each defined as a unique base vector of length 

d =1024, whose elements are phasors, complex value s with unit 

amplitude,        

> Fig. 2. CML wiring diagram: inputs sdand st; output  ŝ t+1 ; and internal node
> state representations S, edge actions A, and gating G.

x = e j2πU 

y = e j2πU , (7)

where j is the imaginary unit and U is a uniform random vector 

with elements [0,1] . Given target point ( a, b) ∈ ℝ, each 

hypervector x and y is raised to the corresponding power, hence 

the name f ractional power encoding (FPE) [ 11 ], then multiplied 

together, 

(a, b) ⇒ p = xa ⊙ yb, (8)

What makes FPE uniquely suitable for this application is that 

multiplication of phasors is equivalent to addition of their 

exponents (Figure 3). Encoded positions can be further 

manipulated along both axes by subsequent multiplication, 

including negative exponents (multiplicative inverse) through 

use of the complex conjugate *, e.g. 

x3y4 = (x1y2.2 ) ⊙ (x2y1.8 )

= ( x5y5) ⊙ (x2y1)* , (9)

where the ⊙ between x and y is dropped for visual clarity. 

B. Arm segment CML 

Consider a single arm segment of length r about a pivot, 

tracing a circle in the 2D plane. The accessible angle states per 

arm segment are restricted as the mth roots of unity, 

ωk = 2π k/m, (10 )

where k = {1, 2, … , m-1, m} (Figure 4).

To interact with the target point defined in Eq. ( 8), each of 

the m node states sm are also encoded via FPE using the same x

and y basis vectors from Eq. ( 7),

a = r cos (2 π k /m)

b = r sin (2π k /m) (11 )

sk = xa ⊙ yb. (12 )

In the first 2D case, let the arm segments not be constrained 

by physics, namely permitted to pass through one another. In 

this way, each arm segment CML learns a bidirectional ring 

graph. Since each angle state sk is precomputed by Eq. ( 12 ), each 

edge action a between sequential states sk+ 1 and sk is explicitly 

calculated as 

ak+ 1, k = sk+ 1 - sk. (13 )

ak,k+ 1 = sk - sk+ 1. (14 )

A CML Cn is created for each arm segment, and each Cn is 

created independently of any other CML, excepting that all 

CMLs must use the same x and y basis vectors, Eq ( 7). 

For a concrete baseline, let r = 1 for n = 3 arm segments. Let 

each arm segment touch m points on the circumferences of the 

unit circle. Given a sufficiently high number of states m per arm 

segment, any point satisfying 3 2 ≥ x2 + y2 is expected to be a

valid robot arm effector position. Therefore , given target 

hypervector p from Eq. ( 8), the goal is to recover sets of arm 

position states sm of the form 

p = xa yb

≈ x(i + j + k) y(l+m+n)

≈ xi yl ⊙ xj ym ⊙ xk yn, (15 )

where the product of the recovered factors has a similarity 

greater than a threshold θ.

C. Factoring hypervectors 

Recall that for HDC algebra, multiplication results in a

product hyper vector pseudo -orthogonal to its factors . Therefore ,

factoring a product hypervector via a similarity search alone 

results in a combinatorial explosion problem, since even partial 

products of factors are dissimilar. However, both a resonator 

network [ 12 , 13 ] and a modern Hopfield network [ 14 ] can 

efficiently factor product hypervectors given codebooks of the 

candidate vectors. 

For the n = 3 arm segments case, the three CML angle state 

matrices S serve as codebooks of candidate factors, which for 

visual clarity are referred to here as A = [ a1, …, am], B = [ b1, …, 

bm], and C = [ c1, …, cm]. Given target point p ≈ ai ⊙ bj ⊙ ck, to 

factor via a resonator network, the following resonator module 

equations are iterated â 

(t+1) = f (AA ⊤ (p ⊙ b̂ *(t) ⊙ ĉ *(t))) 

b̂ (t+1) = f (BB ⊤ (p ⊙ â *(t) ⊙ ĉ *(t))) ĉ 

(t+1) = f (CC ⊤ (p ⊙ â *(t) ⊙ b̂ *(t))), (16 )

where  â , b̂ , and  ĉ are estimations of a factor from each codebook ,

* denotes the complex conjugate, and f forces the magnitude of 

all elements to 1 . The current arm angle estimates  â , b̂ , and  ĉ are 

initialized as some combination of 1) the current arm segment 

state , 2) the sum (or superposition) of all node states of the           

> Fig .3. Similarity of FPE encoded points, illustrating multiplication as
> addition of exponents.
> a) b)
> Fig. 4. a) m= 11 discrete arm segment angle states (blue dots) and
> b) similarities among node states phasor hypervectors using FPE and
> circular encoding.

respective codebook, and/ or 3) a random phasor hypervector to 

inject noise into the system . Every iteration t, each resonator 

module recovers an estimate of its own factor by unbinding the 

estimates from all other module s with the target point . The 

decoded hypervector is then compared to the module’s 

codebook , and an auto -associative memory attempts to converge 

each estimate . In this way, the resonator network leverages 

superposition to search multiple potential factorizations 

simultaneously. Each new factor estimate is then shared with the 

other modules to update their own factor estimates. 

After every 10 iterations, the similarity of each estimated 

factor is measured against its respective codebook. If the index 

of the most similar entry is the same for the last two iterations 

per codebook, then the resonator algorithm terminates and the 

actual codebook entr ies are returned (Fig ure 5a). Note, it is not 

uncommon for the resonator to converge on pairs of anti -parallel 

version s of the factor, sim (a,-a) = -1. Mathematically, t his is 

because negatives cancel out , sim (a⊙b, -a⊙-b). The proposed 

arm configuration to reach the target point is computed directly 

from the indexed codebooks entries ,

p̂ = ai ⊙ bj ⊙ ck. (17 )

This is because the resonator only approximates the recovery 

operation on the estimated factors , Eq. (6) . Figure 8a shows the 

range of estimated factor similarities when the resonator 

algorithm terminates. However, the recovery operation can be 

subsequently applied successfully to all estimated factors , since 

their similarit ies are all greater than the noise floor for random 

vectors , ηfloor = 0.0 5 for d = 1024. 

Alternatively, a modern Hopfield network is used [14] .

While the original Hopfield network is an iterative algorithm, 

minimizing the energy calculation between the input state 

pattern and that stored in the network, this updated algorithm 

attains near optimal pattern restoration after only a single 

iteration, 

s = softmax (βS⊤ŝ )S, (18 )

where S is the codebook,  ŝ is the initial query vector, s is the 

recovered pattern, and β is a bias term. Given target point p as 

before, to factor via a modern Hopfield network, the following 

equations are iterated â 

= softmax (βA⊤(p ⊙ b̂ * ⊙ ĉ *)) A

b̂ = softmax (βB⊤(p ⊙ â * ⊙ ĉ *)) Bĉ 

= softmax (βC⊤(p ⊙ â * ⊙ b̂ *)) C. (19 )

After each iteration, the similarities of the estimated factors 

are measured with their respective codebook s. Unlike a

resonator network which converges to a solution , the Hopfield 

network jumps among solutions over subsequent iterations 

(Figure 5b) . So for a termination condition, per iteration, i f each 

estimated hypervector has a similarity greater than sim max (ŝ , S)

≥ 0.75, then Hopfield network is considered converged and the 

actual codebook entries are returned. 

Regardless of factorization method, after 50 iterations, if 

either 1) not all the codebooks have converged or 2) the 

proposed arm configuration p̂ is below the similarity threshold, 

then the factorization method is reinitialized , with a random 

subset of estimated factors initialized as random phasor 

hyper vectors to inject noise into the system. If after 50 

reinitializations an acceptable solution is still not found, then the 

threshold is reduced by 0.01 until the system succeeds. 

D. Repositioning arm segments via CML s

Lastly, each arm segment CML receives as input the 

respective recovered factor sn = { ai, bj, ck} as the desired state sd.

Each CML then iteratively plots a state transition path from its 

current angle state st the desired state sd in parallel ; whereupon 

the robot arm effector approaches the target point ( a, b) with 

arbitrary precision .

E. 3D arm control 

2D vector addition is commutative, and this property is 

preserved in the elementwise multiplication of FPE 

hypervectors, such that the robot end effector position is 

unaffected by the order of the arm segments. This is not true 

when operating in 3D space, since rotations are not 

commutative. The following is one possible solution for 

controlling an n = 3 arm segments arm with only a rotating base.         

> a)
> b)
> Fig. 5. a) Factorization via resonator network, where each row is one
> iteration of the network. Colors indicate the similarity of the estimated
> factors with respect to their codebooks. Figure shows convergence to anti -
> parallel versions of codebook entries. b) Factorization via modern
> Hopfield network.

The target point ( a, b, c) in Cartesian space is first converted 

to spherical coordinates ( ρ, θ, ϕ). ρ and θ are then re -converted 

back to the XY plane, 

p = x ρ cosθ cos ϕ y ρ cosθ sin ϕ. (20 )

The above 2D arm positioning algorithm is then run as before to 

position the arm end effector to point ( ρ, 0, ϕ). 

Instead of using FPE to encode the final rotation of the arm 

to θ, circular coding is used for the CML . The initial state of the 

rotating base is initialized as 

s1 = 𝑒 𝑗 2𝜋  

> 𝑚 𝑈

, (21 )

where U is a uniform random distribution of integers k = {1, 2, 

…, m} and m is the total number of states to be generated. Each 

subsequent state is incremented as 

sk+1 = sk ⊙ 𝑒 𝑗 2𝜋  

> 𝑚

. (22 )

That is, the FPE arm segment CML states encode allocentric 

orientation; whereas, the circular CML encodes egocentric 

orientation. The circular CML only has two edge action states: 

forward (counter -clockwise) and backwards (clockwise), 

a1 = 𝑒 𝑗 2𝜋  

> 𝑚

, (23 )

a2 = 𝑒 − 𝑗 2𝜋  

> 𝑚

, (24 )

respectively. Due to the periodic nature of phasors, after m

nodes, the node states repeat, s1 = sm ⊙ a1 (Figure 5b) . Since th is

circular CML share s no basis vectors with the arm segment 

CMLs, a dictionary must be maintained pairing the codebook 

index with a real -valued angle. Given target angle θ, the index 

of the circular CML state closest to that angl e is selected as the 

desired state sd for the circular CML. The circular CML thereby 

rotate s the whole arm to arrive at ( ρ̂ , θ̂ , ϕ̂ ), approximating the 

target point ( a, b, c). 

IV. RESULTS 

A.  2D unconstrained arm 

For the unconstrained 2D case, the arm segments are allowed 

to pass through one another. Given an arm of n = 3 arm segments 

of length r = 1, then all points satisfying 3 2 ≥ x2 + y2 are expected 

to be accessible by the robot arm. As a practical measure, this 

space was discretized into 0.1x0.1 grid cells, defining 2,809 

possible target points p. When each arm ha d m = 29 angle 

positions, there were 24,389 possible end effector states (Figure 

6a); however, only 74.5% of the aforementioned grid cells were 

reachable due to the highly structured point distribution (Figure 

6b). However, leveraging the insights of residue number 

systems [ 15 ], giving the arm segment CMLs sequential co -

primes of angle states m = [ 19, 23, 29] cover ed 98.8% of the 

available grid cell points (Figure 6d) yet with only 12,673 end 

effector states due to a more diffuse point spread (Figure 6c). 

While the target point was given in Cartesian space, the 

factorization routines were contingent upon only the similarity 

of the reconstructed product hypervector p̂ and the target vector 

p, sim (p̂ , p) ≥ θ. Heuristically, a hypervector similarity threshold 

of θ ≥ 0.99 corresponded well with an arbitrarily acceptable Euclidean displacement of <0.1 (Figure 7a ). The mean 

displacement using the resonator was ϵ = 0.071 ± 0.036 and ϵ =                            

> a) b)
> c) d)
> Fig. 7. Scatter plot of target point and final arm position for a) 2D and c)
> 3D arms .Strong correlation between Euclidean displacement and
> hypervector sim ilarity for resonator network and Hopfield network for b )
> 2D and d)3D arms .
> a) b)
> c) d)
> e) f)
> Fig. 6. For m= [29, 29, 29], a) all 24,389 attainable points and b)
> corresponding histogram when mapped to 0.1×0.1 grid cells, covering
> only 74.5% of possible cells. For m= [19, 23, 29], c) all 12,673 attainable
> points and d) histogram covering 98.8% of possible cells. e) For the
> gripper arm, all attainable points within the first quadrant and f) histogram
> covering 99.4% of cells. Inaccessible points (white cells) are color shifted
> to enhance contrast.

0.061 ± 0.030 using the Hopfield network. However, the high 

similarity threshold required multiple factorization 

initializations ( Figure 8b) . Out of 100 random accessible target 

grid cell points, the resonator network found a solution on the 

first initialization attempt 14% of the time (mean 15.0 ± 12.1 

initializations) and the Hopfield network 10% of the time (mean 

31.6 ± 25.9 initializations ). 

As shown in Figure 6d, the number of arm configurations 

that reached a grid cell point varied significantly. Since 

factorization is deterministic, the inclusion of random phasor 

hypervectors as part of initialization prompted the system to find 

multiple acceptable arm configurations. Given 100 random 

accessible grid cell points and 20 factorization initializations 

each , the resonator found 5.1 ± 2.3 arm configurations per point 

and the Hopfield network found 5.8 ± 2.2 (Figure 8 c). Presently, 

there is no mec hanism included for evaluating among multiple 

proposed solutions . A possible selection criterion is to minimize 

the total change across the arm angle states s ince the index the 

target and current node states are known. 

B.  Constrained 3D arm 

To illustrate the relevance of this technique to 3D physics -

based robots, the n = 3 arm segments were not permitted cause 

any part of the arm to contact the floor nor pass through one 

another. These physical limitations were enforced through the 

arm segment CMLs directly. The arm segment graphs were 

made linear graphs (as opposed to ring graphs) by removing the 

bidirectional edges between the first s1 and last sm node state. 

The last arm length was shorted to rc = 0.5 , and the maximum 

range of movement for each arm was restricted and then further 

offset (Figure 1) :

ωa = [0, π],

ωb = [0, π] + 3π/2 ,

ωc = [0, π/2] + 15 π/ 8. (25) 

Since the circular CML for θ can be made arbitrarily close, 

the following results focus on attaining (ρ, ϕ) in the 2D XY 

plane. These restrictions limited the arm to operate only in the 

first quadrant of the Cartesian space yet preserv ed 99.4 %

coverage (Figure 6e, f) . As before, t he mean displacement using 

the resonator was ϵ = 0.082 ± 0.041 and the Hopfield network 

was ϵ = 0.065 ± 0.026 ( Fig ure 7c, d ). Out of 100 random 

accessible target grid cell points, the resonator network found a 

solution on the first initialization attempt 15 % of the time (mean 

13.5 ± 12.4 initializations) and the Hopfield network 13 % of the 

time (mean 35.1 ± 29.9 initializations) ( Fig ure 8e ). Lastly, g iven 

100 random accessible grid cell points and 20 factorization 

initializations, the resonator found 6.74 ± 3.22 arm 

configurations per point, while the Hopfield network found 7.28 

± 3. 01 (Fig ure 8f ). 

V. DISCUSSION 

The emphasis on this work wa s to illustrate how CMLs can 

be arranged to collaboratively control 2D and 3D robot arm 

movement. In essence, this approach reinterpret ed arm 

positioning as a special case of the knapsack problem, a subset 

sum problem. Due to the superposition properties of HDC, 

factorization techniques exist that can efficiently solve this task. 

At this time, a formal comparison against standard inverse 

kinematics equation solvers has not been accomplished, which 

would include additional metrics such as computation time and 

path length [ 16, 17 ]. It is worth noting meanwhile that this CML 

framework avoids the singularity failure condition of inverse 

kinemati cs solvers by iteratively relaxing of the minimum                       

> a) b) c)
> d) e) f)
> Fig. 8. Histogram of the similarities of the estimated factors with their codebook entry, δ(â ,a), upon completion of factorization for a) unconstrained 2D and
> d) constrained 3D . Histogram of factorization initializations to recover arm position above threshold for b) 2D and e) 3D . Number of unique arm positions for
> 100 point s with 20 initializations for c) 2D and f) 3D .

similarity threshold until a solution is produced (Figure 7b, d) .

The current framework also does not include environmental 

sensors to invoke an obstacle avoidance routine, but it has 

already been shown that CMLs immediately adapt to changes in 

state or action availability [ 4]. Renner, et al. also described non -

commutative factorization techniques which may be applicable 

to expanding the framework described here to control a standard 

6-degree of freedom robot arm [ 18, 19 ]. The same work also 

described a met hod for implementing phasor HDC operations in 

spiking neural networks on the Loihi neurotrophic hardware, 

which could enable deployment of these algorithms on smaller 

robotic platforms. 

The proposed 3D arm positioning method will next be 

applied to the inciting observation about the limitations of using 

a CML to control the quadruped robot . Because the arm 

segments states are created via FPE, it is straightforward to copy 

the CML framework, amend the node states S, and recompute 

the action matrix A for each additional leg. Using a central 

pattern generator to prescribe target leg positions in time, the 

proposed method is expected to control a basic quadruped robot, 

though with nominally 12 CMLs (3 CMLs per leg) instead of a

single, monolithic CML . One simplification may be to consider 

the possible interplay between CMLs and subsumptive robotics 

design ideas [20, 21, 22 ], focusing on egocentric leg 

displacement (joint angles α and β) independent of physical 

displacement. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

Cognitive map learners (CML) are examples of ML 

modules, capable of being independently created then composed 

together to perform more complex operations. In this work, each 

CML controls the angular displacement of a single arm segment. 

Because the states are expressed as high dimensional phasor 

vectors, hyperdimensional computing (HDC) algebra can be 

used to factorize a target point, also expressed a phasor vector, 

into a set of arm angles without use of inverse kinematic 

equations. Having recovered this s et of angles, the arm segment 

CMLs reposition themselves such that in the aggregate, the 

robot arm moves to the target point. This method for controlling 

a single arm should extend to controlling multiple arms, e.g. a 

quadruped robot, where a central patte rn generator defines the 

target point per leg in time. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Any opinions, findings and conclusions, or recommendations 

expressed in this material are those of the authors, and do not 

necessarily reflect the views of the US Government, the 

Department of Defense, or the Air Force Research Lab. 

Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited: AFRL -

2026 -0765 

REFERENCES 

[1]  A. Mohammed and R. Kora, “A comprehensive review on ensemble deep 

learning: Opportunities and challenges,” J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. 

Sci. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 757 -774, 2023. 

[2]  S. Duan, “Unifying Kernel Methods and Neural Networks and 

Modularizing Deep Learning,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Florida, 

Gainesville, FL, USA, 2020. 

[3]  V. Clay, N. Leadholm, and J. Hawkins, “The Thousand Brains Project: A 

New Paradigm for Sensorimotor Intelligence,” arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2412.18354 , 2024. 

[4]  C. Stöckl, Y. Yang, and W. Maass, “Local prediction -learning in high -

dimensional spaces enables neural networks to plan,” Nat. Commun. , vol. 

15, no. 1, p. 2344, 2024. 

[5]  N. R. McDonald, “Modular, hierarchical machine learning for sequential 

goal completion,” in Disruptive Technologies in Information Sciences 

VIII , vol. 13058, SPIE, 2024, pp. 19 -33. 

[6]  N. McDonald and A. Dematteo, “Assembling modular, hierarchical 

cognitive map learners with hyperdimensional computing,” in Proc. 2024 

Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN) , 2024, pp. 1 -9. 

[7]  S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 

Hoboken, NJ: Pearson, 2021. 

[8]  D. Kleyko, D. Rachkovskij, E. Osipov, and A. Rahimi, “A Survey on 

Hyperdimensional Computing aka Vector Symbolic Architectures, Part I: 

Models and Data Transformations,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 6, 

p. 130, 2023. 

[9]  D. Kleyko, D. Rachkovskij, E. Osipov, and A. Rahimi, “A Survey on 

Hyperdimensional Computing aka Vector Symbolic Architectures, Part 

II: Applications, Cognitive Models, and Challenges,” ACM Comput. 

Surv. , vol. 55, no. 9, p. 175, 2023. 

[10]  P. Kanerva, “Hyperdimensional computing: An introduction to 

computing in distributed representation with high -dimensional random 

vectors,” Cognitive Computation , vol. 1, pp. 139 –159, 2009. 

[11]  B. Komer, T. C. Stewart, A. R. Voelker, and C. Eliasmith, “A neural 

representation of continuous space using fractional binding,” in Proc. 

Annu. Meeting Cogn. Sci. Soc. , vol. 41, 2019. 

[12]  E. P. Frady, S. J. Kent, B. A. Olshausen, and F. T. Sommer, “Resonator 

networks, 1: An efficient solution for factoring high -dimensional, 

distributed representations of data structures,” Neural Comput. , vol. 32, 

no. 12, pp. 2311 -2331, 2020. 

[13]  S. J. Kent, E. P. Frady, F. T. Sommer, and B. A. Olshausen, “Resonator 

networks, 2: Factorization performance and capacity compared to 

optimization -based methods,” Neural Comput. , vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2332 -

2388, 2020. 

[14]  H. Ramsauer et al., “Hopfield networks is all you need,” arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2008.02217 , 2020. 

[15]  C. J. Kymn et al., “Computing with residue numbers in high -dimensional 

representation,” Neural Comput. , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1 -37, 2024. 

[16]  KuCuk, Serdar, and Zafer Bingul. "The inverse kinematics solutions of 

industrial robot manipulators." In Proceedings of the IEEE International 

Conference on Mechatronics, 2004. ICM'04. , pp. 274 -279. IEEE, 2004. 

[17]  Huang, Guo -Shing, Chiou -Kou Tung, Hsiung -Cheng Lin, and Shun -Hui 

Hsiao. "Inverse kinematics analysis trajectory planning for a robot arm." 

In 2011 8th Asian control conference (ASCC) , pp. 965 -970. IEEE, 2011. 

[18]  A. Renner, et al. , “Neuromorphic visual scene understanding with 

resonator networks,” Nat. Mach. Intell. , vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 641 -652, 2024. 

[19]  A. Renner, et al. , “Visual odometry with neuromorphic resonator 

networks,” Nat. Mach. Intell. , vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 653 -663, 2024. 

[20]  R. A. Brooks, “A robot that walks; emergent behaviors from a carefully 

evolved network,” Neural Comput. , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 253 -262, 1989. 

[21]  N. Pashenkov and R. Iwamasa, “One -Chip Solution to Intelligent Robot 

Control: Implementing Hexapod Subsumption Architecture Using a 

Contemporary Microprocessor,” Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst. , vol. 1, no. 2, p. 

10, 2004. 

[22]  Bates, Alexander Shakeel, Jasper S. Phelps, Minsu Kim, Helen H. Yang, 

Arie Matsliah, Zaki Ajabi, Eric Perlman et al. "Distributed control circuits 

across a brain -and -cord connectome." bioRxiv (2025).