Title: Persistent Robot World Models: Stabilizing Multi-Step Rollouts via Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25685v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 01:30:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Persistent Robot World Models: Stabilizing Multi-Step Rollouts via Reinforcement Learning 

Jai Bardhan 1 , Patrik Drozdik 1 , Josef Sivic 1 , and Vladimir Petrik 1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague 

{first.last}@cvut.cz https://www.jaibardhan.com/persistworld 

Abstract. Action-conditioned robot world models generate future video frames of the manipulated scene given a robot action sequence, offering a promising alternative for simulating tasks that are difficult to model with traditional physics engines. However, these models are optimized for short-term prediction and break down when deployed autoregressively: each predicted clip feeds back as context for the next, causing errors to compound and visual quality to rapidly degrade. We address this through the following contributions. First, we introduce a reinforcement learning (RL) post-training scheme that trains the world model on its own au-toregressive rollouts rather than on ground-truth histories. We achieve this by adapting a recent contrastive RL objective for diffusion models to our setting and show that its convergence guarantees carry over ex-actly. Second, we design a training protocol that generates and compares multiple candidate variable-length futures from the same rollout state, reinforcing higher-fidelity predictions over lower-fidelity ones. Third, we develop efficient, multi-view visual fidelity rewards that combine com-plementary perceptual metrics across camera views and are aggregated at the clip level for dense, low-variance training signal. Fourth, we show that our approach establishes a new state-of-the-art for rollout fidelity on the DROID dataset, outperforming the strongest baseline on all met-rics (e.g., LPIPS reduced by 14% on external cameras, SSIM improved by 9.1% on the wrist camera), winning 98% of paired comparisons, and achieving an 80% preference rate in a blind human study. 

Keywords: World Models · Reinforcement Learning · Robotics 

## 1 Introduction 

Action-conditioned video diffusion world models (WM) represent a transfor-mative frontier for robot learning, offering the potential to simulate complex, human-centric tasks that are notoriously difficult to model with traditional physics-based engines. Recent works [10] have demonstrated that finetuning pre-trained video diffusion backbones with action conditioning on large-scale robotics datasets [22] can yield world models that generate impressively faithful clips that      

> arXiv:2603.25685v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026 2J. Bardhan et al. Ground Truth Video Baseline Ours
> Fig. 1: Autoregressive video rollout quality. We use an action-conditioned robot world model to generate multi-view image predictions from a single observed state. The ground-truth (blue) is compared against the baseline (red) and our post-trained model
> PersistWorld (green). While the baseline accumulates error and destroys the object (cyan bowl) within seconds, our method maintains structural integrity and spatial consistency, establishing a new state-of-the-art in rollout fidelity.

are consistent with the robot’s actions. By synthesizing high-fidelity visual roll-outs conditioned on robot actions, these models can serve as scalable virtual environments for benchmarking and improving Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policies. However, realizing this potential requires generating long-horizon autoregres-sive rollouts — multiple seconds of coherent video — where each predicted clip feeds back as context for the next. This is precisely where current models break down. This phenomenon, known as exposure bias [31], arises from a train/test distribution mismatch, i.e., the model is trained to predict from ground-truth 

history frames, but at deployment it must condition on its own previously gen-erated outputs, which carry growing imperfections. The consequences are rapid and severe. Within seconds of autoregressive generation, manipulated objects lose their structural identity — a bowl dissolves into an amorphous blob (see Fig. 1) — robot end-effectors drift from their commanded trajectories, and en-tire scene configurations decohere (see Fig. 3). Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a natural framework for addressing this problem: by computing a training signal directly on the model’s own autore-gressive rollouts, it incentivizes consistent long-horizon generation rather than single-step accuracy. However, applying RL to diffusion models is challenging — standard policy-gradient methods require likelihoods that diffusion models do not provide, and backpropagating through the full denoising process is pro-hibitively expensive. Recent work [42] offers an elegant workaround by generating multiple candidate outputs, scoring them with a reward, and using the compari-son to update the model — avoiding backpropagation through denoising entirely. However, this approach was developed for single-image generation and does not directly apply to our setting for two reasons. First, our robot world model uses a different type of denoising network, which means the theoretical guarantees need to be re-derived. Second, in image generation, the model can simply draw multiple independent samples from the same text prompt and compare them. In autoregressive video, there is no fixed prompt — each generation step builds on the previous output, creating an evolving shared state. This means we need a new mechanism for producing comparable candidates that can be meaning-PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 3

fully ranked against each other. We address these challenges via the following contributions: 1. RL post-training for robot world models. We introduce a post-training scheme that optimizes the world model directly on its own autoregressive rollouts rather than on ground-truth histories. We adapt a recent contrastive RL method for diffusion models [42] to our setting, where the denoising network directly predicts clean frames rather than intermediate noise, and show that convergence guarantees carry over exactly (Sec. 3.2). 2. A training protocol for autoregressive robot world models. Au-toregressive robot world model has no fixed prompt from which multiple candidates can be drawn and compared. We observe that the model’s accu-mulated history at any rollout step serves as a natural shared context from which multiple candidate continuations can be independently generated and ranked. By randomly sampling how deep into the rollout we branch these candidates, we expose training to both mild early-stage and severe late-stage error regimes (Sec. 3.3). 3. Multi-view visual rewards and task-relevant evaluation. We design clip-level rewards that combine complementary perceptual metrics across all three camera views, normalized so that the training signal reflects relative quality within each group of candidates. We further introduce object-centric and robot-centric masked evaluations that confirm our improvements come from better modeling of task-relevant dynamics rather than background preservation (Sec. 3.4 and Sec. 4). 4. State-of-the-art rollout quality. Our post-trained model sets a new state-of-the-art on the DROID dataset [22] across all visual quality metrics, with the largest improvements on the wrist camera—the view most critical for capturing fine-grained object manipulation. In paired comparisons, our model outperforms the baseline on approximately 98% of validation samples. A blind human preference study confirms these gains, with raters favoring our rollouts 80% of the time (Sec. 4). 

## 2 Related work 

Video Diffusion Models. Diffusion models have emerged as a dominant paradigm for high-fidelity visual generation and have been successfully extended from im-ages to videos by modeling space-time volumes with denoising objectives [15, 16, 34]. Latent video diffusion approaches adapt image diffusion backbones with temporal modules, enabling strong image-to-video and text-to-video generation while encoding rich visual priors about object motion, lighting, and physical plausibility [6]. While these models produce impressive open-loop clips, long-horizon generation via autoregressive stitching of short segments causes errors in early frames to compound as the model conditions on its own imperfect outputs, leading to temporal drift and degradation. Our setting inherits this challenge in an action-conditioned, multi-view robotics regime. 4 J. Bardhan et al. 

Robotic World Models and Video-Based Planning. World models have a long history in model-based RL as learned dynamics models enabling plan-ning through imagined rollouts [11–14]. Several works frame robot planning and evaluation directly as video generation [5, 7, 18, 23], and IRASim [44] demon-strates that a trajectory-conditioned diffusion world model can serve as a pol-icy evaluation. Large pre-trained video diffusion backbones have been adapted into controllable robot world models via action conditioning: Ctrl-World [10] and WPE [30], both trained on DROID [22], generate multi-view manipulation trajectories and can rank downstream policy performance; AVID [33] adapts pretrained video diffusion via a learned mask adapter without parameter access; and UWM [43] jointly models video and action diffusion. None of these directly address the training-inference mismatch under self-conditioned rollout. 

Post-Training Diffusion Models. Aligning diffusion models to downstream objectives has been studied through RL and preference optimization [4, 25, 29, 35,39]. DiffusionNFT [42] proposes a negative-aware fine-tuning objective on the forward diffusion process, enabling efficient online RL updates without back-propagating through the denoising trajectory. DPPO [32] applies RL fine-tuning to diffusion-based robot action policies; our work instead post-trains the world model itself. RLVR-World [38] applies RL with verifiable rewards to improve world model transition quality, further evidencing that RL objectives outper-form MLE for rollout fidelity. However, they work with token based models, whereas we work on improving video diffusion models. Contemporary to our work, [36] applies contrastive RL post-training [42] to a camera-pose-conditioned world model, targeting improvements in camera pose following and visual fi-delity—including a prefix rollout strategy in which the model’s own outputs serve as context for subsequent clip generation. Our work shares this core motivation and training paradigm, but differs in several respects. We adopt a randomized prefix horizon during post-training rather than a fixed schedule, which we find better captures the distribution of compounding errors at test time. Our setting targets dynamic manipulation scenes in a multi-view robotic world model and we introduce a novel adaptation of the contrastive RL objective to the x0-prediction parameterization used by some robot WMs. We further design visual rewards that are efficient and scalable for the multi-view robot manipulation set-up. Fi-nally, we additionally validate our approach through quantitative evaluation on robot-centric metrics and a human preference study. 

Exposure Bias and the Rollout Gap. The mismatch between teacher-forced training and self-conditioned inference is a longstanding problem in sequence generation [1, 31], and has been studied specifically for diffusion models [26]. In video generation the effect is amplified: small per-frame errors accumulate over long rollouts, degrading coherence and limiting world model utility for evaluation and simulation. We address this rollout gap with RL post-training that directly exposes the model to its own generated histories during training. 

Large-Scale Robot Datasets. Large-scale robot datasets enable both train-ing data-hungry video world models and the held-out ground-truth trajectories PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 5Generate a shared prefix Branch K candidate continuations Score and Rank Eq. (1) Eq. (1) 

Inference using autoregressive rollout Reinforcement learning post training on generated rollouts 

GT noise ... World Model 

++-

World Model World Model World Model Add to History Robot Policy Robot Policy Robot Policy Initial Condition Add to History Add to History Generate Actions Input for Policy Input for Policy Generate Actions Generate Actions Input for Policy Apply Loss and Update Weights Eq. (2) S 1S 2 S3S 4

Fig. 2: Overview of our method: (Top) Autoregressive inference: A robot pol-icy generates actions fed to the world model, which produces multi-view frames that are appended to the history buffer and condition the next generation step. (Bottom) 

RL post-training: (S1) A shared variable-length prefix is rolled out autoregressively from a ground-truth initial condition. (S2) K independent candidate continuations are branched from the frozen prefix state. (S3) Candidates are scored against ground-truth using multi-view perceptual rewards. (S4) Reward weights r scale implicit posi-tive/negative x0 predictions used in contrastive model updates via loss L.

our reward computation relies on. DROID [22] provides diverse multi-camera manipulation demonstrations, and Open X-Embodiment [27] aggregates demon-strations across many embodiments and institutions—making dataset-driven re-ward evaluation feasible without human preference labels. 

## 3 Improving Robot World Models with Reinforcement Learning 

Action-conditioned video diffusion world models are trained to predict the next chunk of video frames given a clean, ground-truth history — a setup that works well in isolation, but breaks down the moment the model is deployed autoregres-sively over longer horizons. The central challenge we address is the following: 6 J. Bardhan et al. 

because the model has never seen imperfect history at training time, any error introduced at one step propagates forward and compounds at the next, caus-ing rollout quality to degrade rapidly. Resolving this requires more than better data or longer training; it requires a different approach to training — one that explicitly optimizes the model under the same auto-regressive, self-conditioned regime in which it operates at test time. This section develops our approach in three stages. We begin by character-izing the train/test distribution mismatch and why standard training cannot resolve it (Sec. 3.1). We then formulate post-training as an online reinforce-ment learning (RL) problem and derive a tractable objective by adapting a con-trastive forward-process training designed for velocity-prediction flow-matching models [42] — to the EDM [21] x0-prediction parameterization of Ctrl-World’s SVD backbone; we show that the branch construction and policy-improvement guarantees carry over exactly, with no σ-dependent correction terms (Sec. 3.2). Finally, we address two concrete design challenges: how to construct a group-relative training signal from autoregressive video rollouts (Sec. 3.3), and how to define rewards that faithfully assess multi-view, multi-step visual quality (Sec. 3.4). 

3.1 The Closed-Loop Gap in Autoregressive World Models Model overview. An autoregressive robot world model, such as Ctrl-World [10], operates in a loop: at each step, it receives a history buffer of recent frame la-tents encoding the visual context so far, together with past and future robot actions, and generates the next chunk of future frames. The generated frames are then encoded and appended to the history buffer, which conditions the next generation step. In detail, at each autoregressive step, the model receives three inputs: (i) a history buffer ft−H+1: t of H=6 recent frame latents that encode the visual context of what has transpired so far; (ii) the corresponding robot end-effector (EEF) poses eHt−H+1: t; and (iii) a sequence of future EEF pose targets 

et+1: t+L ∈ RL×7. From these, the model simultaneously generates L=5 future frames across three camera views — two external views and one wrist-mounted view. 

The closed-loop gap. Training follows a standard diffusion objective under teacher forcing: given a clip of length H + L from the dataset, the model learns to denoise the final L frames conditioned on the preceding H ground-truth frames as history. This produces a reliable training signal, but installs a structural mis-match with deployment. At test time, no ground-truth history is available; each generated clip is encoded and appended to the rolling history buffer, which then conditions the next denoising pass. The model must now condition on its own previous outputs — inputs it was never trained to handle. The consequence is an error compounding loop. A minor spatial or temporal inaccuracy in clip t

corrupts the latents stored in the history buffer. These corrupted latents con-dition clip t + 1 with increased error, which in turn corrupts the history for clip t + 2 . Within seconds, generated scenes decohere: object configurations blur, PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 7

robot state diverges from the commanded trajectory, and scene identity dissolves. Rollouts beyond a few seconds become unreliable as surrogates for real-world ex-ecution — precisely the use-case that makes world models valuable. This is not a data sufficiency problem. No amount of teacher-forced training gives the model incentive to be robust to its own imperfect history, because imperfect history is absent from the training distribution by construction. What is needed is a training signal computed directly from the model’s own autoregressive outputs — one that rewards coherent closed-loop generation and penalizes compounding drift. 

3.2 Online RL Post-Training via Reward-Contrasted Denoising 

Online reinforcement learning offers a principled solution: generate rollouts au-toregressively, evaluate them against held-out ground truth, and update the model toward higher-fidelity outputs — with the training distribution defined by the model’s own production rather than teacher-forced ground truth. Because the reward is computed on self-generated frames, the training signal inherently reflects the closed-loop statistics of deployment. The challenge is making this compatible with diffusion models. 

Reward-conditioned forward-process training. We address this challenge by recasting policy improvement as contrastive denoising [42]: rather than es-timating reverse-process likelihoods, we generate a group of candidate outputs, score them with a reward, and encode the relative quality signal directly into the denoising loss — reinforcing what the model produces for high-reward candidates and penalizing what it produces for low-reward ones. The contrastive denoising approach [42] was originally derived for velocity-prediction flow-matching mod-els such as SD3 [9]. However, some world models — including Ctrl-World [10], which we build upon — employ an x0-prediction parameterization, where the network directly estimates the clean data x0 rather than a velocity field. We show that the contrastive denoising framework transfers naturally to this setting: be-cause the mapping from network output to clean-data prediction is affine, the contrastive objective construction and its policy-improvement guarantees carry over exactly, with no additional correction terms. The full derivation is in the Appendix A . The resulting x0-adapted ob-jective takes the following form. Let ˆx0,θ denote the model’s clean data ( x0)prediction and ˆxold 0 a frozen exponential moving average (EMA) copy serving as the reference policy. For a candidate with normalized reward weight r ∈ [0 , 1] 

and mixing coefficient β, we construct implicit positive and negative clean data (x0) predictions: 

ˆx+0 = (1 − β) ˆ xold 0 + β ˆx0,θ , ˆx− 

> 0

= (1 + β) ˆ xold 0 − β ˆx0,θ , (1) and minimize the reward-weighted denoising loss: 

L(θ) = E

h

r ∥ˆx+0 − x0∥22 + (1 − r) ∥ˆx− 

> 0

− x0∥22

i

. (2) 8 J. Bardhan et al. 

Intuitively, the difference ˆx0,θ − ˆxold 0 defines the direction in which the current model has drifted from the frozen reference. The positive branch ˆx+0 extrapo-lates along this direction: it takes the reference prediction and moves it toward the current model by a factor β, amplifying whatever changes the model has learned. Conversely, the negative branch ˆx− 

> 0

reverses this direction, construct-ing a counterfactual prediction that moves away from the current model’s output. The loss in Eq. 2 then uses the reward weight r to interpolate between fitting 

ˆx+0 (reinforcing the model’s current direction for high-reward samples) and fit-ting ˆx− 

> 0

(repelling the model from its own predictions for low-reward samples). The mixing coefficient β controls the strength of this amplification: larger β

produces a stronger reinforcement signal but risks destabilizing training, while 

β → 0 recovers standard supervised denoising against the reference. Note that this formulation requires only the clean generated samples and the reference predictions — it avoids backpropagating through the denoising chain entirely, making it compatible with any black-box sampler. 

3.3 Adapting Group-Relative Training to Autoregressive Video 

The RL formulation above addresses how to update a diffusion model given reward-scored samples. Applying it to an autoregressive world model raises a second, distinct challenge: the formulation assumes a natural grouping structure — a shared conditioning input from which multiple independent candidate out-puts are drawn. In image generation, this structure is straightforward: sample K

independent images from the same text prompt and compare them by reward. In autoregressive video generation, no such fixed prompt exists. Each generation step produces a clip that modifies the shared history buffer, which then condi-tions the next step; candidate clips are not independent draws from a common condition, but sequential extensions of an evolving shared state. The key observation is that the history buffer state immediately before any generation step plays exactly the role of the prompt in the group-relative set-ting: it is the accumulated context from which distinct candidate continuations can be independently branched. Freezing this buffer state and sampling K in-dependent candidate next clips from it yields a group that shares a common context, enabling meaningful reward-based comparison and contrastive training. This recovers the shared-context / independent-response structure required by group-relative objectives. We realize this structure through the following rollout protocol at each training step: S1: Generate a shared prefix. Starting from a single ground-truth observation — with the history buffer backfilled by replicating its encoded latent — we autoregressively generate P consecutive clips, feeding the model’s own out-puts back as history at each step. This mirrors closed-loop deployment and produces a history buffer state that has been corrupted by the model’s own accumulated errors. The prefix length is sampled as P ∼ Unif {0, 1, . . . , 9},exposing training to the full spectrum of rollout positions — from early steps where the buffer is nearly clean to late steps where compounding drift is severe. PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 9

S2: Branch K candidate continuations. From the frozen prefix history buffer, we independently sample K=16 candidate next segments. Each candidate is a short autoregressive sequence of F chunks: the model generates L frames across all three views simultaneously, encodes and appends them to a private copy of the history buffer, and repeats for F steps. Each candidate follows its own distinct stochastic trajectory from the shared context. S3: Score and rank. A visual reward R(k) 

> t

is computed for each candidate by comparing its generated frames against held-out ground-truth frames across all three camera views (Sec. 3.4). Rewards are group-normalized over the K

candidates to form relative advantages, removing the influence of absolute reward scale at different rollout positions. S4: Update the model. The group-normalized reward weights are used to scale the positive and negative denoising losses (Eq. 2), and the model is updated via gradient descent. Only LoRA adapters and the action encoder receive gradient updates; the backbone is frozen. The variable prefix length serves two purposes. It ensures the model is opti-mized to maintain quality across the full rollout depth, not only at short horizons. It also exposes the update to diverse history buffer corruption profiles — from lightly drifted early-step buffers to heavily degraded late-step ones — preventing overfitting to any single error regime. 

3.4 Visual Rewards for Multi-View Video Clips 

Defining an effective reward for autoregressive robot video generation requires carefully considering what to measure and how to aggregate it. The signal must be dense enough to be informative at each training step, directly tied to percep-tual quality rather than proxy statistics, and consistent across the three camera views, which provide complementary perspectives on the manipulated scene. A reward aggregated across an entire long-horizon rollout would be high-variance and would make credit assignment to specific generations difficult; we therefore score at the granularity of individual clips. For each candidate clip at time t, we compare generated frames ˆx(v)

> t+1: t+L

against the held-out ground-truth frames x(v) 

> t+1: t+L

for each view v ∈ V =

{wrist , ext 1, ext 2}. Per-frame metrics are first averaged temporally over the L

frames of the clip: 

m(v) 

> t

= 1

L

> L

X

> ℓ=1

m



ˆx(v)

> t+ℓ

, x(v)

> t+ℓ



, m ∈ { LPIPS , SSIM , PSNR }, (3) and then averaged equally across the three views: 

mt = 13



m(wrist)  

> t

+ m(ext 1) 

> t

+ m(ext 2)

> t



. (4) We use three complementary metrics to capture distinct failure modes. LPIPS [41] measures perceptual similarity in deep feature space, penalizing structural dis-10 J. Bardhan et al. 

tortions even when pixel values are numerically close. SSIM [37] captures lu-minance, contrast, and local structural fidelity over spatial patches. PSNR [19] provides a global signal-to-noise measure that is sensitive to large pixel devi-ations, acting as a coarse indicator of catastrophic scene drift. Using all three produces a reward robust to the blind spots of any individual metric. LPIPS cap-tures perceptual distortions invisible to pixel-level metrics, SSIM is sensitive to local structural changes, and PSNR flags large-scale pixel drift; combining them guards against failure modes that any single metric would miss. The per-view, per-metric averages are combined into a single scalar reward: 

Rt = −wLPIPS LPIPS t + wSSIM SSIM t + wPSNR PSNR t, (5) where LPIPS is negated (it is lower-better), and the weights w are set to bring the three components to a comparable numerical scale (values in Sec. 4). 

Group normalization. Because absolute reward values vary significantly across rollout positions — early clips score much higher than late ones — we normal-ize rewards within each group to focus the training signal on relative quality differences. The per-candidate rewards R(k) 

> t

are group-normalized over the K

candidates via z-score normalization: 

A(k) = R(k) − μR

σR + ϵ , μR = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

R(k), σR = std k(R(k)). (6) This converts absolute reward values into relative rankings within the group, removing the confound of reward scale variation across rollout positions. The z-scored advantages are clipped to [−1, 1] and linearly rescaled to the [0 , 1] range required by Eq. 2: 

r(k) = clip( A(k), −1, 1) + 1 2 . (7) This normalization encourages the model to discriminate between better and worse continuations from the same context, and keeps the gradient magnitude bounded regardless of the absolute level of visual quality at any given rollout position. 

## 4 Experiments 

Implementation details. We use the pre-trained Ctrl-World model [10] as our base. For the proposed post-training, we apply LoRA [17] adapters to the UNet backbone (rank r=64 , α=64 ) and additionally finetune the action encoder; all other parameters (other UNet layers, VAE, etc.) are frozen. We train for 8,000 steps with learning rate 1×10 −4 using the Muon optimizer [20] with the batch size 64 and group size K=16 . Additionally, we subsample the group elements by taking the 10 most informative samples (top-5 and bottom-5 ordered by the reward) per update step. Reward weights are set to: wLPIPS =wSSIM =1 and PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 11 

wPSNR = 132 , with the 132 factor bringing PSNR into a comparable numerical range with SSIM ∈ [0 , 1] . The model is trained on 8 NVIDIA H200 GPUs for 3 days. 

Dataset. We evaluate on the DROID dataset [22], a large-scale robot manip-ulation dataset collected on a Franka Emika Panda robot across a diverse set of tabletop environments. DROID comprises teleoperated demonstrations across a wide variety of everyday manipulation tasks and uses a standardized three-camera setup (two external cameras and one wrist-mounted camera). We use Ctrl-World’s held-out validation split for all quantitative evaluations. 

Autoregressive rollout quality evaluation. We evaluate autoregressive roll-out quality on pre-recorded trajectories from the validation split. Starting from a single observed state (frames from all cameras + robot EEF pose), we generate 14 consecutive clips ( 14 × L=70 frames, covering approximately 11 s at 5 Hz) using the autoregressive procedure from Sec. 3.3. We then compare the gener-ated frames to the corresponding ground-truth frames from the dataset using SSIM [37], PSNR [19], and LPIPS [41]. We report metrics separately for exter-nal cameras and the wrist camera, as these views capture qualitatively different aspects of the scene. Our model establishes a new state-of-the-art for autoregressive rollout qual-ity on the DROID dataset, consistently outperforming all baselines—WPE [30], IRASim [44], and Ctrl-World [10]—across every metric (Table 1). Compared to Ctrl-World baseline, our approach achieves significant gains on external cameras, improving PSNR by 1.40 dB and reducing LPIPS by 14.0%. These margins widen considerably against WPE and IRASim, where we see PSNR improvements of 4.09 dB and 3.06 dB and LPIPS reductions of 46.6% and 40.2%, respectively. The most pronounced gains occur on the wrist camera (SSIM +9.1%, PSNR +1.59 dB). This indicates that our closed-loop-aware post-training specifically excels at capturing the fine-grained object contact and hand-eye coordination details critical for downstream policy evaluation. Qualitatively, Fig. 3 confirms these improvements, while Fig. 4 illustrates a consistent distribution shift to-ward higher-fidelity generations. A 1-to-1 paired comparison reveals that our model outperforms the baseline in ∼98% of validation samples, demonstrating the consistency of our gains across the entire dataset. Finally, Fig. 5 analyzes performance over extended rollouts; while both models naturally degrade as the horizon increases, our method maintains significantly higher fidelity over time. 

Object- and Robot-Centric Evaluation. General-purpose world models of-ten achieve high full-frame scores by over-optimizing for static background preser-vation while failing to capture the complex dynamics of manipulated objects. To evaluate task-relevant fidelity, we isolate the foreground using RoboEngine [40] to segment interacting objects and the robot arm. Computing metrics on these masked regions provides a rigorous measure of spatial and control consistency, which is more critical for downstream policy learning than raw background re-construction. Table 2 confirms that our model’s gains are concentrated on these task-critical regions. On object-masked pixels, our improvements are even more pronounced than full-frame results: external camera LPIPS drops by 16 .3% (vs. 12 J. Bardhan et al. 

Table 1: Visual quality metrics for 14-step autoregressive rollouts ( ≈11 s) on the DROID validation split. Values represent averages over the full rollout duration. Results marked with ∗ are from [10]; † indicates our reproduction. Evaluated Cameras Model Pixel/Structure Perceptual SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

External Camera WPE ∗ 0.77 20.33 0.131 IRASim ∗ 0.77 21.36 0.117 Ctrl-World ∗ 0.83 23.56 0.091 Ctrl-World † 0.84 23.02 0.081 

Ours 0.86 24.42 0.070 

Wrist Camera Ctrl-World † 0.62 17.80 0.310 

Ours 0.67 19.39 0.277 Table 2: Masked visual metrics for 14-step autoregressive rollouts ( ≈11 s) .We isolate object-only and robot-only pixels to evaluate task-relevant spatial and con-trol consistency. Our model demonstrates superior fidelity in these dynamic regions compared to baselines, confirming that performance gains are driven by accurate inter-action modeling rather than background reconstruction. All metrics are averaged over the full rollout horizon. Evaluated Cameras Model Object-Only Robot-Only SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

External Camera Ctrl-World † 0.88 22.25 0.025 0.82 17.62 0.039 

Ours 0.89 23.60 0.021 0.86 19.25 0.033 

Wrist Camera Ctrl-World † 0.73 18.52 0.088 0.83 25.50 0.027 

Ours 0.76 19.87 0.078 0.86 27.24 0.023 

14 .0% full-frame), while wrist-camera SSIM improves by 5.4% . We observe sim-ilar trends for robot-centric metrics, with PSNR increasing by 1.63 dB and 

1.74 dB for external and wrist views, respectively. These results demonstrate that our training objective successfully captures the intricate dynamics of robot-object interactions rather than relying on incidental background fidelity. 

Human Preference Study. To complement automated evaluation, we con-ducted a blind human preference study to assess perceived realism and temporal consistency. Raters were presented with side-by-side video pairs from our model and the baseline, alongside the ground-truth video as a reference. They were tasked with selecting the rollout that appeared most realistic and remained most consistent with the ground-truth dynamics. Ours (Post-Trained) 

> (80%)
> Baseline
> (20%)

Fig. 6: Human preference results. 

Our model significantly outperforms the baseline, achieving an 80% preference rate ( 174 wins vs. 43 ). This substantial margin is further reflected in the Elo rat-ings, where our model reaches 884 .8 compared to the baseline’s 715 .2. These results confirm that our quantitative gains translate to a qualitatively superior PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 13 

Fig. 3: Qualitative comparison of autoregressive rollout stability. We compare long-horizon (11 s) generations from the baseline [10] against our PersistWorld for the wrist camera. Left: Object-centric fidelity. The baseline model suffers from rapid decoherence; as errors compound in the history buffer, manipulated objects like the cup lose their structural identity and dissolve into amorphous textures. In contrast, our method maintains the spatial consistency and structural integrity of the object throughout the rollout. Right: Robot-centric consistency. The baseline exhibits significant robot decoherence , where the generated robot arm loses their geomet-ric structure. Our approach maintains structural persistence. Please see additional video results on the associated project page. 

experience, with human observers consistently favoring our model’s ability to maintain coherent dynamics over long horizons when compared directly against the ground-truth reference. 

Ablations. Please refer to Appendix B for an in-depth ablation analysis of reward functions, prefix lengths, rollout horizon, and learning regularization. 0.00 0.05 0.10      

> LPIPS (Ours - Baseline)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Count
> Zero
> Median 024
> PSNR (Ours - Baseline)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Count
> Zero
> Median 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
> SSIM (Ours - Baseline)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Count
> Zero
> Median

Fig. 4: ∆metric of paired videos from the validation dataset. On 1−1 paired comparison, our PersistWorld world model is better than the baseline on ∼ 98% of the sample (p < 10 −6). 14 J. Bardhan et al. 0 10 20 30 40 50           

> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> LPIPS
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained) 010 20 30 40 50
> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> PSNR
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained) 010 20 30 40 50
> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> SSIM
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained)

Fig. 5: Temporal evolution of wrist camera metrics. While both models exhibit natural degradation over longer horizons (x-axis), our post-trained model, PersistWorld (green), consistently maintains higher fidelity and slower error accumulation compared to the baseline (orange). Specifically, our method preserves a higher PSNR and SSIM while suppressing LPIPS drift, effectively extending the stable prediction horizon for complex, fine-grained interactions. See Fig. 11 in Appendix. E.2 for external camera results. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we addressed the critical challenge of exposure bias in action-conditioned robot world models. While existing diffusion-based world models produce high-fidelity short-term clips, their utility as simulators has been lim-ited by compounding errors during autoregressive deployment. We introduced a reinforcement learning post-training framework that bridges this “closed-loop gap" by training the model on its own generated rollouts rather than ground-truth teacher forcing. Our technical contributions—adapting a contrastive online reinforcement learning objective to x0-prediction backbones and designing a variable-length branching training protocol with multi-view perceptual rewards—enable the model to remain stable over longer horizons. Empirically, our approach estab-lishes a new state-of-the-art on the DROID dataset, significantly reducing per-ceptual drift and maintaining structural integrity. The 80% preference rate in our human study and the marked improvement in object and robot-centric metrics suggest that RL post-training is a powerful tool for transforming video genera-tors into reliable, persistent robot simulators. By stabilizing multi-step rollouts, this work paves the way for using world models as scalable, high-fidelity virtual environments for the evaluation and improvement of general-purpose robotic policies. 

Limitations and Future Work. Despite these gains, our approach has lim-itations. The group-relative training protocol requires sampling K = 16 inde-pendent candidates per update, which increases computational overhead during post-training compared to standard supervised fine-tuning. However, a signifi-cant advantage of our framework is its modularity; the contrastive objective is reward-agnostic, meaning the model can be optimized against any combination of perceptual, physical, or task-specific signals. While our current implemen-PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 15 

tation utilizes visual fidelity rewards (LPIPS, SSIM, PSNR) to stabilize the rollouts, these do not yet explicitly enforce physical or geometrical constraints. Future work will leverage this flexibility to explore additional consistency re-wards—including physics-informed constraints and geometry-aware metrics—to further enhance physical realism. Additionally, we intend to investigate the ap-plication of these persistent world models directly within the policy optimization loop to accelerate the development of robust agents in human-centric environ-ments. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon Europe projects AGIMUS (No. 101070165), euROBIN (No. 101070596), ERC FRONTIER (No. 101097822), and ELLIOT (No. 101214398). Compute resources and infrastruc-ture were supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic through the e-INFRA CZ (ID:90254) and by the European Union’s Horizon Europe project CLARA (No. 101136607). 

## References 

1. Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., Shazeer, N.: Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems 28 (2015) 2. Bjorck, J., Castañeda, F., Cherniadev, N., Da, X., Ding, R., Fan, L., Fang, Y., Fox, D., Hu, F., Huang, S., et al.: Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 (2025) 3. Black, K., Brown, N., Driess, D., Esmail, A., Equi, M., Finn, C., Fusai, N., Groom, L., Hausman, K., Ichter, B., et al.: pi 0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 (2024) 4. Black, K., Janner, M., Du, Y., Kostrikov, I., Levine, S.: Training diffusion models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301 (2023) 5. Black, K., Nakamoto, M., Atreya, P., Walke, H., Finn, C., Kumar, A., Levine, S.: Zero-shot robotic manipulation with pretrained image-editing diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10639 (2023) 6. Blattmann, A., Dockhorn, T., Kulal, S., Mendelevitch, D., Kilian, M., Lorenz, D., Levi, Y., English, Z., Voleti, V., Letts, A., et al.: Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127 (2023) 7. Du, Y., Yang, S., Dai, B., Dai, H., Nachum, O., Tenenbaum, J., Schuurmans, D., Abbeel, P.: Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 9156–9172 (2023) 8. Elo, A.E.: The Rating of Chessplayers, Past and Present. Arco Publishing (1978) 9. Esser, P., Kulal, S., Blattmann, A., Entezari, R., Müller, J., Saini, H., Levi, Y., Lorenz, D., Sauer, A., Boesel, F., Podell, D., Dockhorn, T., English, Z., Lacey, K., Goodwin, A., Marek, Y., Rombach, R.: Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03206 16 J. Bardhan et al. 10. Guo, Y., Shi, L.X., Chen, J., Finn, C.: Ctrl-world: A controllable generative world model for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10125 (2025) 11. Ha, D., Schmidhuber, J.: World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 2(3), 440 (2018) 12. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J., Norouzi, M.: Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603 (2019) 13. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., Davidson, J.: Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 2555–2565. PMLR (2019) 14. Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., Lillicrap, T.: Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 (2023) 15. Ho, J., Chan, W., Saharia, C., Whang, J., Gao, R., Gritsenko, A., Kingma, D.P., Poole, B., Norouzi, M., Fleet, D.J., et al.: Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303 (2022) 16. Ho, J., Salimans, T., Gritsenko, A., Chan, W., Norouzi, M., Fleet, D.J.: Video diffusion models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 , 8633– 8646 (2022) 17. Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W.: Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models (2021), https://arxiv. org/abs/2106.09685 

18. Hu, Y., Guo, Y., Wang, P., Chen, X., Wang, Y.J., Zhang, J., Sreenath, K., Lu, C., Chen, J.: Video prediction policy: A generalist robot policy with predictive visual representations (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14803 

19. Huynh-Thu, Q., Ghanbari, M.: Scope of validity of psnr in image/video quality assessment. Electronics letters 44 (13), 800–801 (2008) 20. Jordan, K., Jin, Y., Boza, V., You, J., Cesista, F., Newhouse, L., Bernstein, J.: Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks (2024), https: //kellerjordan.github.io/posts/muon/ 

21. Karras, T., Aittala, M., Aila, T., Laine, S.: Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative models (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00364 

22. Khazatsky, A., Pertsch, K., Nair, S., Balakrishna, A., Dasari, S., Karamcheti, S., Nasiriany, S., Srirama, M.K., Chen, L.Y., Ellis, K., et al.: Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12945 (2024) 23. Ko, P.C., Mao, J., Du, Y., Sun, S.H., Tenenbaum, J.B.: Learning to Act from Actionless Videos through Dense Correspondences. arXiv:2310.08576 (2023) 24. Li, X., Hsu, K., Gu, J., Pertsch, K., Mees, O., Walke, H.R., Fu, C., Lunawat, I., Sieh, I., Kirmani, S., et al.: Evaluating real-world robot manipulation policies in simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05941 (2024) 25. Liu, J., Liu, G., Liang, J., Li, Y., Liu, J., Wang, X., Wan, P., Zhang, D., Ouyang, W.: Flow-grpo: Training flow matching models via online rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05470 (2025) 26. Ning, M., Sangineto, E., Porrello, A., Calderara, S., Cucchiara, R.: Input pertur-bation reduces exposure bias in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11706 (2023) 27. O’Neill, A., Rehman, A., Maddukuri, A., Gupta, A., Padalkar, A., Lee, A., Pooley, A., Gupta, A., Mandlekar, A., Jain, A., et al.: Open x-embodiment: Robotic learn-ing datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 6892–6903. IEEE (2024) PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 17 28. Pertsch, K., Stachowicz, K., Ichter, B., Driess, D., Nair, S., Vuong, Q., Mees, O., Finn, C., Levine, S.: Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747 (2025) 29. Prabhudesai, M., Mendonca, R., Qin, Z., Fragkiadaki, K., Pathak, D.: Vader: Video diffusion alignment via reward gradients 30. Quevedo, J., Sharma, A.K., Sun, Y., Suryavanshi, V., Liang, P., Yang, S.: Worldgym: World model as an environment for policy evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00613 (2025) 31. Ranzato, M., Chopra, S., Auli, M., Zaremba, W.: Sequence level training with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06732 (2015) 32. Ren, A.Z., Lidard, J., Ankile, L.L., Simeonov, A., Agrawal, P., Majumdar, A., Burchfiel, B., Dai, H., Simchowitz, M.: Diffusion policy policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00588 (2024) 33. Rigter, M., Gupta, T., Hilmkil, A., Ma, C.: Avid: Adapting video diffusion models to world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12822 (2024) 34. Singer, U., Polyak, A., Hayes, T., Yin, X., An, J., Zhang, S., Hu, Q., Yang, H., Ashual, O., Gafni, O., et al.: Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792 (2022) 35. Wallace, B., Dang, M., Rafailov, R., Zhou, L., Lou, A., Purushwalkam, S., Ermon, S., Xiong, C., Joty, S., Naik, N.: Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8228–8238 (2024) 36. Wang, Z., Wang, T., Zhang, H., Zuo, X., Wu, J., Wang, H., Sun, W., Wang, Z., Cao, C., Zhao, H., et al.: Worldcompass: Reinforcement learning for long-horizon world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09022 (2026) 37. Wang, Z., Bovik, A.C., Sheikh, H.R., Simoncelli, E.P.: Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing 

13 (4), 600–612 (2004) 38. Wu, J., Yin, S., Feng, N., Long, M.: Rlvr-world: Training world models with rein-forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13934 (2025) 39. Xue, Z., Wu, J., Gao, Y., Kong, F., Zhu, L., Chen, M., Liu, Z., Liu, W., Guo, Q., Huang, W., et al.: Dancegrpo: Unleashing grpo on visual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07818 (2025) 40. Yuan, C., Joshi, S., Zhu, S., Su, H., Zhao, H., Gao, Y.: Roboengine: Plug-and-play robot data augmentation with semantic robot segmentation and background generation (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18738 

41. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., Shechtman, E., Wang, O.: The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 586–595 (2018) 42. Zheng, K., Chen, H., Ye, H., Wang, H., Zhang, Q., Jiang, K., Su, H., Ermon, S., Zhu, J., Liu, M.Y.: Diffusionnft: Online diffusion reinforcement with forward process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16117 (2025) 43. Zhu, C., Yu, R., Feng, S., Burchfiel, B., Shah, P., Gupta, A.: Unified world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02792 (2025) 44. Zhu, F., Wu, H., Guo, S., Liu, Y., Cheang, C., Kong, T.: Irasim: A fine-grained world model for robot manipulation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 9834–9844 (2025) 18 J. Bardhan et al. 

# Appendix 

This appendix provides supplementary material organized into five sections. Section A gives a complete, self-contained derivation of the post-training loss used to train our model, including a formal theoretical analysis showing why minimizing the loss steers the model toward high-reward outputs. Section B presents ablation studies that isolate the contribution of each key design choice, evaluated on the validation split. Section C examines the use of the world model as a policy evaluation tool, measuring task progression rates across three ma-nipulation tasks. Section D details the human preference study — participant qualifications, the two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) interface, and the ELO-based ranking protocol used to aggregate votes. Finally, Section E provides the additional details and full pseudocode for the RL post-training procedure. 

## A Derivation of the Post-Training Objective 

This appendix provides a complete, self-contained derivation of the post-training objective described in section 3.2 in the main paper. We re-derive the objective from scratch in the x0-prediction parameterization used by our model. 

Notation 

We use the following notation throughout this appendix. 

– x0 ∈ Rd: a clean (noiseless) latent video clip — the quantity the model is trained to predict. 

– c ∈ Rdc : the conditioning signal, comprising the robot action sequence to-gether with any visual or text context provided to the model. 

– σ > 0: the noise level. Following the EDM convention [21], a noisy obser-vation is drawn as xσ = x0 + σε where ε ∼ N (0, I) is isotropic Gaussian noise. 

– ˆx0,θ ≡ ˆx0,θ (xσ , σ, c) ∈ Rd: the current model’s estimate of the clean latent 

x0, given noisy input xσ , noise level σ, and conditioning c.

– ˆxold 0 ≡ ˆxold 0 (xσ , σ, c) ∈ Rd: the prediction of the frozen reference model — a copy of the weights fixed at the start of post-training that is never updated, representing the pre-trained baseline. 

– r(x0, c) ∈ [0 , 1] : the normalized reward weight for a generated sample x0

given conditioning c. It is computed from visual quality metrics within a group of candidates; r=1 is the best in the group, r=0 is the worst (see Sec. 3.4). PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 19 

A.1 EDM Preconditioning and the Post-Training Loss 

EDM preconditioning. The world model backbone outputs a corrective term 

mθ (xσ , σ, c) ∈ Rd, which is converted to a clean-latent estimate via the affine EDM preconditioning [21]: 

ˆx0,θ = cout (σ) mθ (xσ , σ, c) + cskip (σ) xσ , (8) where cout (σ)= −σ/ √σ2+1 and cskip (σ)=1 /(σ2+1) are scalar functions of the noise level only. The cskip term adds back a residual of the noisy input xσ ; cout 

scales the network’s corrective output mθ . The identical formula applies to the frozen reference model: 

ˆxold 0 = cout (σ) mold (xσ , σ, c) + cskip (σ) xσ . (9) 

Positive and negative branches. Given the current-model prediction ˆx0,θ and the reference prediction ˆxold 0 , we construct two branch predictions: 

ˆx+0,θ := (1 − β) ˆ xold 0 + β ˆx0,θ , (10) 

ˆx− 

> 0,θ

:= (1 + β) ˆ xold 0 − β ˆx0,θ . (11) The positive branch ˆx+0,θ interpolates from the reference toward the current model: at β=0 it equals the reference exactly; as β grows it moves toward the current model’s own prediction. The negative branch ˆx− 

> 0,θ

is its mirror image: it moves away from the current model in the same direction the current model has moved from the reference. Together, the two branches bracket the reference prediction symmetrically: 

ˆx+0,θ + ˆ x− 

> 0,θ

= 2 ˆ xold 0 , ˆx+0,θ − ˆx− 

> 0,θ

= 2 β (ˆ x0,θ − ˆxold 0 )

| {z }

> current model’s drift from reference

. (12) 

The post-training loss. The post-training objective weights the squared recon-struction errors of the two branches by the reward weight r:

L(θ) = E

h

r ∥ˆx+0,θ − x0∥22 + (1 − r) ∥ˆx− 

> 0,θ

− x0∥22

i

, (13) where the expectation is over (c, σ, xσ , x0) drawn jointly. This is identical to Eq. (2) in the main text. The intuition is direct: for a high -reward sample ( r ≈

1), we minimize the error of the positive branch, which points in the direction the current model has drifted from the reference — thereby reinforcing that drift direction. For a low -reward sample ( r ≈ 0), we minimize the error of the negative branch, which points in the opposite direction — thereby penalizing and reversing that drift. This is the core mechanism by which the loss steers the model toward high-reward outputs. 20 J. Bardhan et al. 

A.2 Theoretical Analysis: Why This Loss Improves the Model 

We now prove that, under standard assumptions, the unique minimizer of L(θ)

is a model that has moved precisely in the direction of high-reward samples relative to the reference. The argument proceeds in four steps: (1) decompose the reference distribution into a high-reward part and a low-reward part; (2) show this decomposition lifts to the posterior over clean latents given a noisy observation; (3) identify the reward-aligned direction; (4) show the loss collapses to a single squared error pointing in that direction. 

Step 1: Decomposing the reference distribution. Let πold (x0|c) denote the dis-tribution over clean latents generated by the frozen reference model given con-ditioning c. We model the reward weight as the conditional probability that a sample x0 is “optimal” given c: introducing a latent binary optimality label 

o ∈ { 0, 1}, we set 

r(x0, c) := P (o = 1 | x0, c) ∈ [0 , 1] . (14) Define the positive distribution π+ (samples conditioned on being optimal) and 

negative distribution π− (samples conditioned on being suboptimal) via Bayes’ rule: 

π+(x0|c) := P (x0 | o=1 , c) = r(x0, c)

Z(c) πold (x0|c), (15) 

π−(x0|c) := P (x0 | o=0 , c) = 1 − r(x0, c)1 − Z(c) πold (x0|c), (16) where 

Z(c) := Eπold (x0|c)[r(x0, c)] ∈ (0 , 1)  (17) is the partition function — the expected reward under the reference model, which normalizes π+ and π− to be valid probability distributions. By the law of total probability, the reference distribution is a weighted mixture of its two parts: 

πold (x0|c) = Z(c) π+(x0|c) + (1 − Z(c)) π−(x0|c). (18) 

Intuition. The reference model generates samples from πold ; a fraction Z(c) of those happen to be high-quality (distributed as π+, up-weighted by their reward 

r) and the rest are low-quality (distributed as π−, up-weighted by 1 − r). The reward simply measures the relative density of π+ with respect to πold .

Step 2: Lifting the decomposition to noisy observations. The forward noising kernel is qσ (xσ |x0) = N (xσ ; x0, σ 2I). Let π⋆(xσ |c) := R qσ (xσ |x0) π⋆(x0|c) d x0

be the marginal distribution of the noisy observation under ⋆ ∈ { old , +, −} , and let π⋆(x0|xσ , c) denote the corresponding posterior over clean latents given a noisy observation xσ .

Lemma 1 (Posterior mixture). The posterior πold (x0|xσ , c) is a mixture of the positive and negative posteriors: 

πold (x0|xσ , c) = α(xσ , c) π+(x0|xσ , c) +  1 − α(xσ , c) π−(x0|xσ , c), (19) PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 21 

where the data-dependent mixing weight (abbreviated α ≡ α(xσ , c) below) is 

α(xσ , c) := Z(c) π+(xσ |c)

πold (xσ |c) ∈ [0 , 1] . (20) 

Proof. Marginalise the prior mixture (Eq. (18)) through qσ . Since qσ does not depend on the optimality label o, it acts identically on each mixture component: 

πold (xσ |c) = Z(c) π+(xσ |c) + (1 − Z(c)) π−(xσ |c). (21) Apply Bayes’ rule to πold (x0|xσ , c) and substitute Eq. (18): 

πold (x0|xσ , c) = qσ (xσ |x0) πold (x0|c)

πold (xσ |c)= qσ (xσ |x0)

πold (xσ |c)

h

Z π +(x0|c) + (1 −Z) π−(x0|c)

i

. (22) For each mixture component, Bayes’ rule gives 

qσ (xσ |x0) π⋆(x0|c) = π⋆(xσ |c) π⋆(x0|xσ , c).

Substituting and grouping terms: 

πold (x0|xσ , c) = Z π +(xσ |c)

πold (xσ |c) π+(x0|xσ , c) + (1 −Z) π−(xσ |c)

πold (xσ |c) π−(x0|xσ , c)= α π +(x0|xσ , c) + (1 − α) π−(x0|xσ , c), (23) The first coefficient is exactly α(xσ , c) as defined in Eq. (20). The second equals 

1 − α: dividing Eq. (21) by πold (xσ |c) gives α + (1 −Z)π−(xσ |c)/π old (xσ |c) = 1 ,so the second weight is indeed 1 − α. Non-negativity of π± and πold ≥ Zπ +

ensure α ∈ [0 , 1] .

Intuition. Given a noisy observation xσ , our uncertainty about the underlying clean latent x0 splits between two competing hypotheses: it came from the high-reward regime ( π+, posterior weight α) or the low-reward regime ( π−, weight 

1−α). The mixing weight α(xσ , c) is the posterior probability that xσ originated from a high-reward sample; it is large when xσ is more likely under π+ than under 

πold .

Step 3: Identifying the reward-aligned improvement direction. For ⋆ ∈ { old , +, −} ,define the posterior mean — the expected clean latent given xσ under distribu-tion π⋆:

μ⋆ ≡ μ⋆(xσ , c, σ ) := Eπ⋆(x0|xσ ,c)[x0], ⋆ ∈ { old , +, −} . (24) Thus μold is the expected clean latent under the reference model, μ+ under the high-reward subset, and μ− under the low-reward subset. Taking expectations of both sides of Eq. (19): 

μold = α μ+ + (1 − α) μ−. (25) 22 J. Bardhan et al. 

Rearranging, the displacement from μold to μ+ and from μ− to μold are parallel and proportional, defining a single improvement direction :

∆x0 := (1 − α) ( μold − μ−) = α (μ+ − μold ). (26) The vector ∆x0 points from the low-reward mean μ− toward the high-reward mean μ+, with μold lying on the segment between them. From Eq. (26) we also read off the inverse relations: 

μ+ = μold + ∆x0

α , μ− = μold − ∆x0

1 − α . (27) 

Step 4: The loss collapses to a squared error in the improvement direction. 

Theorem 1 (Optimal predictor). Under unlimited data and model capacity, the unique minimizer of L(θ) is the predictor that moves from the reference posterior mean by exactly 2/β steps in the improvement direction: 

ˆx0,θ ∗ (xσ , c, σ ) = μold (xσ , c, σ ) + 2

β ∆x0 (xσ , c, σ ). (28) 

Proof. We introduce the shorthand 

d := ˆx0,θ − μold , (29) the current model’s deviation from the reference posterior mean μold . Every θ-dependent quantity in L(θ) can be written in terms of d; the goal is to show the loss is a pure squared error in d centered at the improvement direction 2∆x0 /β .

Algebraic step 1: Rewrite the loss using the distributional decom-position. From Eq. (15), r(x0, c) πold (x0|c) = Z(c) π+(x0|c). Substituting into the inner expectation over πold (x0|xσ , c) and applying Bayes’ rule gives: 

r(x0, c) πold (x0|xσ , c) = α(xσ , c) π+(x0|xσ , c), (30) and analogously (1 −r) πold (x0|xσ , c) = (1 −α) π−(x0|xσ , c). Using Eqs. (30) to rewrite the reward-weighted inner expectation in L(θ):

L(θ) = Ec,σ, xσ

h

α Eπ+(x0|xσ ,c)∥ˆx+0,θ − x0∥22

+ (1 − α) Eπ−(x0|xσ ,c)∥ˆx− 

> 0,θ

− x0∥22

i

. (31) 

Algebraic step 2: Replace the inner expectation with the posterior mean. For any fixed vector ˆf ∈ Rd and any distribution p(y), the variance decomposition gives Ep∥ˆf − y∥22 = ∥ˆf − Ep[y]∥22 + Var p[y], so the squared error is minimized over ˆf by the mean Ep[y], with the residual variance Var p[y] being constant in ˆf . Applying this to each term in Eq. (31) — the first has prediction PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 23 

ˆx+0,θ fixed with respect to x0, and posterior mean μ+; the second has ˆx− 

> 0,θ

and posterior mean μ−:

L(θ) = Ec,σ, xσ

h

α∥ˆx+0,θ − μ+∥22 + (1 − α)∥ˆx− 

> 0,θ

− μ−∥22

i

+ C,  (32) where C = E[α Var π+ [x0|xσ , c] + (1 −α) Var π− [x0|xσ , c] ] does not depend on θ.

Algebraic step 3: Expand in terms of d. Step 2 showed that the MSE 

E∥ ˆf − x0∥22 is minimized by the posterior mean. Applying this to the reference model’s own pre-training loss (i.e. it was trained to minimize MSE against sam-ples from πold ), an unlimited-capacity reference model converges to the posterior mean μold , so ˆxold 0 = μold . Meanwhile, the current model satisfies ˆx0,θ = μold +d

by definition of d (Eq. (29)). Substituting both into Eqs. (10)–(11) and subtract-ing μ± via Eq. (27): 

ˆx+0,θ − μ+ = (1 −β)μold + β(μold +d) − μold + ∆x0

> α

 = βd − ∆x0

α , (33) 

ˆx− 

> 0,θ

− μ− = (1+ β)μold − β(μold +d) − μold − ∆x0

> 1−α

 = −βd + ∆x0

1 − α . (34) Substituting Eqs. (33)–(34) into Eq. (32) and expanding: 

α∥ˆx+0,θ − μ+∥22 + (1 − α)∥ˆx− 

> 0,θ

− μ−∥22

= α

h

β2∥d∥22 − 2βα d⊤∆x0 + ∥∆x0 ∥22

> α2

i

+ (1 −α)

h

β2∥d∥22 − 2β 

> 1−α

d⊤∆x0 + ∥∆x0 ∥22

> (1 −α)2

i

= β2∥d∥22 − 4β d⊤∆x0 + ∥∆x0 ∥22

α(1 − α) , (35) collecting: the ∥d∥22 terms give (α+1 −α)β2∥d∥22 = β2∥d∥22; the cross-terms give 

(−2β−2β)d⊤∆x0 ; the ∥∆x0 ∥22 terms give 1/α + 1 /(1 −α) = 1 /(α(1 −α)) .

Algebraic step 4: Complete the square in d.

β2∥d∥22 − 4β d⊤∆x0 = β2 d − 2∆x0

β

> 22

− 4∥∆x0 ∥22. (36) Substituting into Eq. (35) and then into Eq. (32): 

L(θ) = β2 Ec,σ, xσ ˆx0,θ −



μold + 2

β ∆x0

 22

+ C′, (37) where C′ = C+E[∥∆x0 ∥22/(α(1 −α)) −4∥∆x0 ∥22] is independent of θ. Since β2 > 0,the unique minimizer sets ˆx0,θ = μold + (2 /β )∆x0 pointwise, giving Eq. (28). The optimal model is the reference posterior mean μold shifted by (2 /β )

steps in the reward-aligned direction ∆x0 , which by Eq. (26) points from μ−

(low-reward samples) toward μ+ (high-reward samples). The hyperparameter β

controls how far the model is shifted: larger β produces a stronger per-step signal but also moves the branches farther from the reference, potentially destabilising training. 24 J. Bardhan et al. 

Connection to other parameterisations. For Gaussian noising schedules, velocity predictors vθ used by flow-matching models are related to x0 predictors by a per-noise-level affine transformation that does not depend on θ. Consequently, differences between any two predictors in x0 space are proportional to their differences in velocity space. The improvement direction ∆x0 and the result of Theorem 1 therefore translate directly to velocity-prediction parameterisa-tions up to a σ-dependent scalar, confirming that the theoretical guarantees are parameterisation-agnostic. 

## B Ablation Studies 

We report ablation results for the key design choices of our post-training. Each table isolates one factor while keeping all other hyperparameters fixed to the default configuration used in the main experiments. Metrics are evaluated on the DROID validation split over 10 -step autoregressive rollouts; higher SSIM and PSNR and lower LPIPS indicate better visual quality. Spcifically, we report the performance after the same number of gradient updates (training steps) have been performed on the model. Notably, this is different from other RL literature which report performance after the same number of outer iterations (ignoring the number of gradient updates performed during the inner iterations). The ablations collectively justify design choices made in the main paper.                                                          

> Table 3: Ablation of the post-training learning rate. Learning Rate External Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> 3×10 −40.865 25 .02 0.1230 0.706 19 .95 0.3603 1×10 −4(Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0 .721 20 .40 0.3387
> Table 4: Ablation of the reward signal used during DiffusionNFT post-training. Reward External Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> LPIPS only 0.868 25 .17 0.1156 0.708 19 .90 0.3242
> SSIM only 0.872 25 .40 0.1178 0.724 20 .24 0.3516
> PSNR only 0.871 25 .57 0.1189 0.716 20 .45 0.3544
> Combined (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0.721 20 .40 0.3387

Learning rate. The choice of η=1 ×10 −4 is the single most consequential hy-perparameter: the higher rate 3×10 −4 degrades external PSNR by 0.50 dB and PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 25                                                                                     

> Table 5: Ablation of the context-window curriculum. Curriculum is the growing sched-ule from [36]; Random samples uniformly from the specified range each step; Fixed
> keeps a constant window size throughout training. Strategy External Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> Fixed Size 3 0.872 25 .53 0.1170 0.723 20 .51 0.3381
> Size 6 0.871 25 .41 0.1174 0.719 20 .33 0.3423
> Curriculum [36] 0.871 25 .50 0.1169 0.721 20 .43 0.3412
> Random Size 0–9 (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0.721 20 .40 0.3387
> Size 0–4 0.873 25 .52 0.1161 0.722 20 .44 0.3391
> Table 6: Ablation of the GRPO group size and the number of candidates retained via best-of-Nfiltering (evaluated at group size 16). Config External Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> Group Size 4 0.875 25 .62 0.1142 0.724 20 .56 0.3379
> Group Size 8 0.873 25 .61 0.1176 0.721 20 .45 0.3471
> Group Size 16 No best of N0.874 25 .69 0.1127 0.725 20 .64 0.3255
> Best of 5 (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0.721 20 .40 0.3387
> Best of 2 0.876 25 .79 0.1107 0 .727 20 .69 0.3212

LPIPS by 0.007 , confirming that conservative fine-tuning is essential to avoid destabilizing the pretrained backbone (see Table 3). 

Combined reward. Using all three perceptual signals jointly (SSIM, PSNR, LPIPS) is the only configuration that is competitive across all six reported met-rics. Each single-metric variant wins on its own axis but regresses elsewhere — optimizing for LPIPS alone, for example, produces the best LPIPS yet the lowest SSIM among all reward configurations. The combined reward therefore functions as a necessary regularizer, preventing the model from collapsing to a solution that sacrifices overall image quality for any single perceptual dimension (see Table 4). 

Prefix sampling strategy. Uniform random sampling over the full prefix range (P ∼ Unif {0, . . . , 9}) matches or exceeds every fixed-window baseline and, cru-cially, outperforms the growing curriculum introduced by [36] on five of six met-rics. This is a meaningful finding: the added complexity of a structured curricu-lum schedule does not translate into improved visual quality in our setting; a simple uniform draw over the full rollout-depth spectrum is both sufficient and preferable. The marginal additional gain from restricting the range to {0, . . . , 4}26 J. Bardhan et al.                                                  

> Table 7: Ablation of the future prediction horizon H(number of frames generated per autoregressive step) used during post-training. Horizon HExternal Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> H= 3 0.872 25 .41 0.1169 0.719 20 .31 0.3424
> H= 1 (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0 .721 20 .40 0.3387
> Table 8: Ablation of the wrist-camera loss weight wwrist relative to the external cam-eras (weight 1).
> wwrist
> External Wrist SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> wwrist = 2 0.872 25 .45 0.1169 0.722 20 .47 0.3357
> wwrist = 1 (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0.721 20 .40 0.3387

is below 0.001 SSIM and 0.01 dB PSNR, confirming that exposing training to deeper rollout positions (higher P ) does not hurt, while better covering the error regimes encountered at inference (see Table 5). 

Group size and best-of-N filtering. We had found that best-of-2 yields fur-ther metric gains on every axis (e.g., +0 .27 dB external PSNR, −0.006 external LPIPS, −0.018 wrist LPIPS), suggesting that more aggressive output filtering is a straightforward avenue for future improvement — achievable without any change to the training objective or model architecture. However, for our large-scale training we stuck to a more moderate best-of-5 instead of the extremes to balance efficiency and prioritising stable and consistent reward signal across training batches (see Table 6). 

Prediction horizon. H=1 consistently outperforms H=3 across both camera views. Single-step post-training provides a tighter, lower-variance gradient signal that more directly targets the per-step generation quality evaluated at test time; multi-step rollout objectives introduce compounding errors that appear to add noise to the update without providing a commensurate benefit (see Table 7). 

View-Specific Weighting. The view weighting performed as expected – as-signing higher weight to the wrist view resulted in a post-trained model that better generates the wrist view camera. However, the practical improvement is not significant compared to case of wwrist = 1 , and resulted in considerable de-crease in the performance of the external cameras. Therefore, we stuck to the standard setting of wwrist = 1 (see Table 8). 

KL regularization. Adding KL regularization improves five of six metrics, with the most consistent gains on the wrist camera. The regularization term prevents the fine-tuned policy from drifting too far from the pretrained reference, acting PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 27 

Table 9: Effect of KL regularisation applied to the post-training objective. KL Reg. External Wrist SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

Without 0.873 25 .50 0.1163 0.720 20 .38 0.3392 

With (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0 .721 20 .40 0.3387 

Table 10: Effect of applying a warming EMA schedule to the frozen reference (old) policy, which gradually interpolates it toward the learning policy during training. Reference Policy EMA External Wrist SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

No EMA schedule 0.872 25 .51 0.1162 0 .722 20 .46 0.3390 

EMA rising to 0.5 (Ours) 0.872 25 .52 0.1162 0.721 20 .40 0.3387 

Table 11: Effect of applying an exponential moving average (EMA) to the learning (fine-tuned) policy weights during post-training. Policy EMA External Wrist SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓

EMA = 0 .9 0.876 25 .81 0.1105 0.726 20 .68 0.3215 

No EMA (Group Size 16, BoN 2) 0.876 25 .79 0.1107 0.727 20 .69 0.3212 

as an implicit constraint that preserves the model’s generalization while allowing reward-directed improvement (see Table 9). 

Old-policy EMA schedule. The EMA schedule of the old policy rising to 

0.5 is marginally better than a copy reference across most metrics. The EMA value rises to 0.5 until 500 training steps, and then remains fixed at this value. Although the absolute differences are within measurement noise, the schedule provides a principled mechanism to prevent the on-policy sampling model from drifting too far from the original model and introducing instability early on in the training (see Table 10). 

EMA on the learning policy. Similar to [42], we test with using a EMA of the weights of the policy being learned. However, we found that this does not lead to any significant improvements for the additional machinery (see Table 11). 

## C World Model For Policy Evaluation 

We test whether world model can be used for policy evaluation by rolling out the learned policy in the world model and calculating the task progression rates for the different policies. We perform a set of 3 tasks: 28 J. Bardhan et al. 

> (a) Put Banana in Box
> (b) Put Green Block in Bowl
> (c) Rotate Marker

Fig. 7: Initial Conditions for the WM-to-Real Correlation. We run rollouts in the world models given these starting conditions for the three tasks. For the policy rollout, the middle view (external camera) and the wrist view are provided as inputs. 

– Put Banana in Box: In this task, the robot must pick up a banana and place it inside a box. The task is successful if the banana is fully contained within the box (see Fig. 7a). 

– Put Green Block in Bowl: In this task, the robot must pick up a green block and place it inside a bowl. The task is successful if the green block is fully contained within the bowl (see Fig. 7b). 

– Rotate Marker: In this task, the robot must pick up a marker and rotate it by at least 45 degrees. The task is successful if the marker is rotated by the required amount (see Fig. 7c). 

Table 12: Partial Progress of the Different Tasks .Skill Task Progression 

Put Put Banana in Box Reach → Grasp → Lift → Move Close → IsInside Put Green Block in Bowl 

Rotate Rotate Marker Reach → Grasp → Rotate 45 ◦PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 29 

For each task, we collect real-rollouts for three policies: π0 [3], π0-FAST [28] and GROOT N 1.5 [2]. For each task and policy we collect 5 real rollouts, and 

11 simulated rollouts in the world model. For each rollout, we record the partial progress according to Table 12. The total progress is divided into N steps and completing a particular step in order would grant 1/N towards the total progress. We then average the partial progress over the multiple rollouts to obtain an estimate of the policy’s performance on the particular task. We report the Pearson Correlation r and MMRV [24]. Higher pearson correla-tion implies that the world model more closely follows the trend in real progress rates amongst the policies. MMRV, on the other hand, penalizes policy rank violations between the simulated setup (world model) and the real setup. Our world model produces higher correlation and lower MMRV than baseline [10]. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                 

> Task progression (Real)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Task progression (World Model)
> Ours
> r= 0.822 MMRV = 0.006 p= 0.007
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Task progression (Real)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Task progression (World Model)
> Baseline
> r= 0.796 MMRV = 0.053 p= 0.010
> Line
> Best-fit line Perfect agreement
> Model
> GR00T N1.5 00-FAST
> Task
> Put Banana
> Put Block in Bowl
> Rotate Marker

Fig. 8: WM to Real comparison: While both the world models tend to make the task easier for the policies (shown by the higher values task performance on the WM), our post-trained model maintains better correlation and MMRV amongst the policies compared to the baseline [10]. 30 J. Bardhan et al. 

## D Human Preference Study Details 

Study design. We conduct a human preference study to evaluate the visual quality of the rollouts generated by the original and post-trained Ctrl-World models. The study was conducted in-house on our custom-created platform. The study comprised of 8 users who are experts in computer vision, machine learning and robotics with papers in these fields. Each user also additionally had a masters qualification, with some users also having a PhD qualification. We believe that the users were sufficiently capable of discerning differences and alignment to the reference rollout video. To provide high quality signal, users were also allowed to choose which video they would like to rate. We find an inter-rater kappa κ ∼ 0.4, which points to moderate agreement on rating. However, we find that the binomial test gives us a p-value of p = 3 .5 · 10 −20 , which means essentially zero chance that our post-trained model could have won purely by random chance. The 95% CI comes out to be [72% , 100%] which is significantly higher than 50% .

UI Design. Each user first went through an onboarding phase, where the task description and potential hints for rating the videos were provided (see, Fig. 9). On the comparison webpage, the users were shown the reference video and two generated videos (one from each checkpoint). Each video was generated using 

14 autoregressive interaction steps (approx. 11 seconds). Only the reference video was labeled and the other videos’ labels were masked. The users had the ability to scrub through the frames to view them individually or watch the entire video. Below the videos, users were provided two options “A” or “B”, and were asked to choose between one of them (see, Fig. 10). The position of the generated videos were always randomized so as to remove any position bias. 

ELO Score Design. We adopt a chess-style ELO rating system [8] to rank mod-els from pairwise preference votes. Each model is initialised with a rating of 800 .For every vote submitted by a user, the two models shown in that comparison are treated as opponents in a single ELO match. Prior to updating their rat-ings, the system computes each model’s expected score via the standard logistic function, 

Ei = 11 + 10 (Rj −Ri)/400 , (38) where Ri and Rj are the current ratings of model i and its opponent j, respec-tively. Ei ∈ (0 , 1) maps the rating gap to a win probability: a model rated 400 

points above its opponent is expected to win ≈ 91% of the time. The actual score is Si = 1 for the preferred model and Si = 0 for the other. Ratings are then updated symmetrically, 

Ri ← Ri + K (Si − Ei), (39) with a fixed gain factor K = 32 . Because Si − Ei is small when the outcome matches the prior expectation, a model that was already the clear favourite gains little from an expected victory; conversely, an upset win produces a large positive PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 31 

Fig. 9: 2AFC Website Onboarding: We provide a small description of the task and potential hints to look at when judging the quality of the generated rollouts compared to the reference. 32 J. Bardhan et al. 

Fig. 10: 2AFC Website Comparison UI: On the comparison webpage, the users are provided with the reference video on the top and the two generated videos below it. The users can use the scrubber to move through the frames or watch the entire video. After which, the user needs to choose between Option A or Option B. PersistWorld: Persistent Robot World Models via RL 33 0 10 20 30 40 50           

> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> LPIPS
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained) 010 20 30 40 50
> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 22
> 24
> 26
> 28
> 30
> 32
> 34
> PSNR
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained) 010 20 30 40 50
> Rollout Horizon [Frames]
> 0.82
> 0.84
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> 0.96
> SSIM
> Baseline
> Ours (Post-Trained)

Fig. 11: Temporal evolution of external camera metrics. While both models exhibit natural degradation over longer horizons (x-axis), our post-trained model, Per-sistWorld (green), consistently maintains higher fidelity and slower error accumulation compared to the baseline (orange). Specifically, our method preserves a higher PSNR and SSIM while suppressing LPIPS drift, effectively extending the stable prediction horizon for complex, fine-grained interactions. 

update. In practice, with only two models, ELO converges quickly to reflect the empirical preference rate — a model preferred 70% of the time will accumulate a rating roughly 100 -150 points above the other. 

## E Additional Details 

E.1 Inference Details 

We run inference using the Euler Sampler, and run the sampling for 50 steps. Following [42], we do not use CFG while sampling the generated video. 

E.2 Additional Results 

We present in Fig. 11 the temporal evolution of the all the metrics for the external camera view. We find that the post-trained model has a better performance on all frames. This suggests that the post-training procedure is effective at improving the long-term consistency of the generated videos. 

E.3 Post-Training Algorithm 

We present the Post-Training algorithm in Alg. 1. We describe the four steps S1

to S4.34 J. Bardhan et al. 

Algorithm 1 RL Post-Training for Autoregressive Video World Models 

Require: Pretrained world model θ; frozen reference policy ˆxold 0 (EMA copy of θ); dataset D; group size K=16 ; branch length F ; mixing coefficient β; reward weights 

wLPIPS , w SSIM , w PSNR 

1: for each training step do 

2: – Stage S 1: Generate shared prefix – 

3: Sample initial ground-truth observation (x0, e0) from D

4: Sample prefix length P ∼ Unif {0, 1, . . . , 9}

5: Initialise history buffer h0 by replicating the encoded latent of x0

6: for p = 1 to P do  ▷ closed-loop autoregressive rollout 7: Sample xp ∼ θ(· | hp−1, ep−1: p+L)

8: hp ← append Enc( xp) to hp−1 ▷ history buffer update 9: end for 

10: – Stage S 2: Branch K candidate continuations – 

11: for k = 1 to K do  ▷ independent samples from shared context 12: Initialise private buffer h(k) ← hP ▷ frozen copy of prefix 13: for f = 1 to F do 

14: Sample x(k)  

> P+f

∼ θ · | h(k), eP +f :P +f +L



15: h(k) ← append Enc  x(k) 

> P+f

 to h(k)

16: end for 

17: end for 

18: – Stage S 3: Score, rank, and group-normalise – 

19: for k = 1 to K do 

20: Compute per-view, per-frame LPIPS, SSIM, PSNR against ground-truth frames 21: R(k) ← − wLPIPS LPIPS (k) + wSSIM SSIM (k) + wPSNR PSNR (k)

22: end for 

23: μR ← 1

> K

P 

> k

R(k), σR ← std k (R(k))

24: for k = 1 to K do 

25: A(k) ←  R(k) − μR

 / (σR + ϵ) ▷ z-score normalisation 26: r(k) ←  clip( A(k), −1, 1) + 1  / 2 ▷ rescale to [0 , 1] 

27: end for 

28: – Stage S 4: Contrastive denoising update – 

29: L ← 0

30: for k = 1 to K do 

31: Sample σ ∼ p(σ), ε ∼ N (0, I)

32: x(k) 

> σ

← x(k)0 + σε ▷ forward noising 33: ˆx(k)0,θ ← current model prediction from x(k)

> σ

34: ˆx(k)0,old ← reference model prediction from x(k) 

> σ

▷ frozen 35: ˆx(k)+ 0 ← (1 − β) ˆ x(k)0,old + β ˆx(k)0,θ 

36: ˆx(k)− 

> 0

← (1 + β) ˆ x(k)0,old − β ˆx(k)0,θ 

37: L += r(k) ∥ˆx(k)+ 0 − x(k)0 ∥22 + (1 − r(k)) ∥ˆx(k)− 

> 0

− x(k)0 ∥22

38: end for 

39: Update θ (LoRA adapters + action encoder only) via gradient descent on L

40: ˆxold 0 ← EMA(ˆ xold 0 , θ ) ▷ update reference policy 41: end for