Title: SMASH: Mastering Scalable Whole-Body Skills for Humanoid Ping-Pong with Egocentric Vision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01158v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:22:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> 1

# SMASH: Mastering Scalable Whole-Body Skills for Humanoid Ping-Pong with Egocentric Vision 

Junli Ren †,∗, Yinghui Li †,∗, Kai Zhang ∗, Penglin Fu ∗, Haoran Jiang, Yixuan Pan, Guangjun Zeng, Tao Huang, Weizhong Guo, Peng Lu, Tianyu Li, Jingbo Wang, Li Chen, Hongyang Li, Ping Luo ‡

The University of Hong Kong Kinetix AI 

> ∗

Co-first author †Project lead ‡Corresponding author 

https://mmlab.hk/Smash/ 

Fig. 1: SMASH : Our system enables the first outdoor humanoid ping-pong player and the first whole-body smash on a humanoid robot. Through scalable motion generation and whole-body motion matching, the robot achieves expressive and agile ball interaction across a wide hitting workspace. 

Abstract —Existing humanoid table tennis systems remain limited by their reliance on external sensing and their inability to achieve agile whole-body coordination for precise task execution. These limitations stem from two core challenges: achieving low-latency and robust onboard egocentric perception under fast robot motion, and obtaining sufficiently diverse task-aligned strike motions for learning precise yet natural whole-body behaviors. In this work, we present SMASH, a modular system for agile humanoid table tennis that unifies scalable whole-body skill learning with onboard egocentric perception, eliminating the need for external cameras during deployment. Our work advances prior humanoid table-tennis systems in three key aspects. First, we achieve agile and precise ball interaction with tightly coordinated whole-body control, rather than relying on decoupled upper- and lower-body behaviors. This enables the system to exhibit diverse strike motions, including explosive whole-body smashes and low crouching shots. Second, by augmenting and diversifying strike motions with a generative model, our framework benefits from scalable motion priors and produces natural, robust striking behaviors across a wide workspace. Third, to the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate the first humanoid table-tennis system capable of consecutive strikes using onboard sensing alone, despite the challenges of low-latency perception, ego-motion-induced instability, and limited field of view. Extensive real-world experiments demonstrate stable and precise ball exchanges under high-speed conditions, validating scalable, perception-driven whole-body skill learning for dynamic humanoid interaction tasks. 

Index Terms —Whole-Body Control, Motion Generation, Ego-centric Vision, Humanoid-Object-Interaction 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

How do humans play table tennis? We track the ball with our own eyes, anticipate its future trajectory, and coordinate the whole body to strike at the right position, time, and velocity. Through observation and repeated practice, we also develop a diverse repertoire of strike motions and the prior experience needed for agile response. Endowing humanoid robots with comparable capabilities, however, remains highly challenging, as it requires both agile whole-body striking skills and real-time egocentric onboard perception [ 1 ], [ 2], [ 3]. Achieving this would bring humanoid robots closer to natural and autonomous interaction in dynamic open-world environments. We present SMASH, a humanoid table tennis system built around three methodological advances: First, we develop an egocentric onboard perception pipeline for real-time humanoid table tennis. Using only onboard cameras, the system jointly estimates the ball state and the robot pose at over 50 Hz . This setting is particularly challenging 

> arXiv:2604.01158v1 [cs.RO] 1 Apr 2026 2

because the ping-pong ball is small, fast, and easily blurred [ 4 ], [ 5], while the robot must perceive and react within a narrow time window under continuous whole-body motion. Second, we introduce a task-aligned whole-body control framework based on motion priors. Rather than relying on decoupled upper- and lower-body behaviors [ 6 ], [ 7], [ 8] or a small set of pre-defined motions [ 9], [ 10 ], [ 11 ], the framework learns coordinated whole-body striking behaviors that remain both task-effective and physically natural. Third, we propose a scalable motion generation and matching framework for whole-body striking. To address the difficulty of acquiring sufficiently diverse task-aligned strike motions [ 12 ], [ 13 ], [ 14 ], we augment motion-capture demonstrations with motions generated by a motion model, yielding a motion library with broad coverage of the reachable hitting workspace. We further adopt a simple task-conditioned motion matching scheme to retrieve references aligned with the desired strike target, tightly coupling motion priors with the ball-interaction objective during policy learning. Taken together, these components establish a new level of capability for humanoid table tennis. We demonstrate the first outdoor consecutive humanoid table-tennis striking without external cameras or motion-capture systems [ 6], [ 9], [13 ], enabled entirely by egocentric onboard perception. Our system further realizes highly dynamic and diverse whole-body behaviors, including smashes, low crouching shots, and large coordinated lateral movements with accurate ball interaction. Beyond these system-level results, we show that motion generation provides an effective way to transform sparse and incomplete motion-capture demonstrations into a workspace-covering strike library, substantially improving task– motion matching, training efficiency, and the naturalness of the resulting robot behavior. Extensive simulation and real-world experiments validate the proposed approach and demonstrate its robustness, efficiency, and versatility across a wide range of striking scenarios. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Whole-body Control for Robotic Sports 

Recent progress in robotics has moved from basic locomotion [ 15 ], [ 16 ] toward agile whole-body behaviors that require rapid contact transitions, dynamic balance recovery, and tight upper- and lower-body coordination [ 17 ], [ 18 ], [ 19 ], [ 20 ], [ 21 ], [22 ], with growing attention to interactive ball sports such as basketball [ 9], soccer [ 23 ], [ 24 ], tennis [ 13 ], badminton [ 2], [25 ] and table tennis [ 6 ], [ 26 ], [ 27 ], [ 28 ], [ 29 ]. Among these interactive ball sports, humanoid table tennis is a representative benchmark that requires coordinated whole-body striking, rapid repositioning, and reliable recovery within extremely limited reaction time. In humanoid table tennis, HITTER [ 6 ] and PACE [ 26 ] exemplify two common design choices: hierarchical planning with upper-body-centered imitation, and end-to-end reinforcement learning with predictive augmentation and physics-guided task rewards, without explicit human motion references or imitation objectives. SMASH instead combines full-body strike tracking from human motion with task-driven reinforcement learning, enabling more human-like whole-body coordination and diverse striking styles. 

B. Onboard Perception for Dynamic Humanoid Interaction 

Perception remains a major bottleneck for deployable hu-manoid systems in dynamic interaction tasks. Recent work has begun to couple onboard perception with humanoid or legged control in scene interaction [ 30 ], [ 31 ], [ 32 ], [ 33 ], parkour [ 34 ], [35 ], [ 36 ], and sports, demonstrating closed-loop visuomotor behavior beyond static settings [ 24 ], [ 11 ]. In ball sports, legged badminton [ 2 ] further shows that autonomous visual perception can be integrated with whole-body control through shuttlecock prediction under real camera noise. However, in the more demanding setting of table tennis, prior systems still mainly rely on external sensing, including specialized high-speed vision setups [ 4], [ 29 ] or motion-capture infrastructure [ 6 ], [ 26 ]. This difference is significant because table tennis involves a smaller ball, shorter interaction distances, and tighter reaction windows. SMASH fills this gap by enabling continuous humanoid table-tennis interaction using only ego-centric onboard visual sensing and online state estimation. 

C. Motion Task Alignment 

Aligning motion priors with task objectives remains a cen-tral challenge in imitation- and reinforcement-learning-based whole-body control. Existing approaches address this problem from several perspectives, but still exhibit notable limitations. Adversarial Motion Priors (AMP) [ 11 ], [ 30 ] typically rely on a single motion distribution and enforce motion realism through adversarial rewards, often resulting in loose task alignment and limited motion diversity. Other works attempt to improve data coverage through motion augmentation or retargeting [ 9], [ 37 ], [38 ], [ 39 ], [ 6], but these approaches are often constrained by the need to preserve motion tracking fidelity, leading to limited task generalization. Another alternative is two-stage frameworks, where a high-level policy generates task-aligned reference motion and a low-level controller tracks reference motions [ 14 ], [ 13 ]. However, such decoupled designs introduce additional training complexity, and instability in high-level outputs can degrade motion quality and increase the sim-to-real gap. Recent work explores motion matching as a way to leverage large motion datasets by retrieving reference motions based on state or motion similarity [ 34 ]. Different from this formulation, our approach performs motion retrieval conditioned on the desired strike target, allowing the selected references to be directly aligned with the ball-interaction objective during policy learning. To address the limited coverage and uneven distribution of motion-capture data, we further augment demonstrations with a generative motion model, yielding a strike-motion library with broad coverage of the reachable hitting workspace. This combination enables task-aligned motion priors for precise, natural, and diverse whole-body striking. III. SMASH O VERVIEW 

SMASH (Fig. 2) is a modular system that achieves agile table tennis behaviour on humanoid robots. It distinguishes itself from prior work in two key aspects: task-aligned imitation learning for precise strike control, and egocentric onboard perception for real-time interaction. 3Data        

> Strike Motions Motion Reference
> Strike time & pos
> Avatar Collection Motion VAE Full-Area Strike Motion Dataset
> Sparse Task Rewards Dense Tracking Rewards
> Strike episode
> Nearest Matching
> Motion sets
> Racket Target
> Strike time
> !(Asymmetric RL)
> Success rate Sample probability
> Strike Area
> Policy Deploy
> Perception
> Toros pos (120Hz) Ball pos (60Hz)
> SMASH-Perception dual-egocentric camera MoCap (120Hz) 27-external camera
> Planning
> Racket Target
> Racket Vel
> Matching
> Motion Target
> Torso Pose
> Proprioception IMU
> !
> Whole-body actions (50Hz)
> Strike Time
> Control
> Model-based planner*
> Kalman filter
> Predict trajectory Racket Target Back point
> Motion Target Proprioception Task Target Whole-body actions

Fig. 2: Overview of SMASH . Our system connects scalable motion generation, task-aligned policy learning, and egocentric onboard perception into a unified pipeline for humanoid table tennis. Data : Motion-capture demonstrations are augmented with a motion VAE to build a strike-motion dataset that covers the reachable hitting workspace. Policy : A whole-body policy is trained via reinforcement learning, where task commands are tightly coupled with motion priors through nearest motion matching, enabling the selection and execution of appropriate strike behaviors. Deploy : At test time, egocentric onboard perception provides real-time estimates of ball and robot states, which are used by a planner and matching module to generate closed-loop whole-body actions. This pipeline enables precise and natural ball interaction without relying on external sensing infrastructure. First, we construct a strike motion dataset that covers the reachable hitting workspace. The dataset combines motion capture demonstrations with motions augmented by a motion variational autoencoder (VAE), expanding strike coverage and enabling scalable motion references. Second, we train a whole-body control policy that integrates reinforcement learning with large-scale motion constraints. The workspace-covering strike dataset enables motion matching with references aligned with the desired strike target. This allows the policy to achieve accurate ball interaction while preserving natural whole-body coordination. Third, we build a robust egocentric onboard perception system for real-time ball observation during play. The estimated ball state supports downstream planning and control for strike execution. Together, these components enable agile whole-body table tennis on humanoid robots using onboard sensing. The robot is no longer limited to simple forehand and backhand strokes, but can execute diverse whole-body strikes such as smashes and low crouching shots. Moreover, the system can operate without external cameras, enabling the first outdoor humanoid table tennis interactions. 

Preliminaries 

a) Motion tracking with reinforcement learning: Recent humanoid control methods commonly combine reinforcement learning with motion imitation to train policies for robust whole-body motion tracking in simulation and transfer to real hardware [ 20 ], [ 17 ], [ 40 ]. They are typically formulated as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), where the actor observes deployment-feasible inputs such as motion commands and proprioception, the critic uses additional privileged information during training, and domain randomization is applied to reduce the sim-to-real gap. The policy is then optimized with PPO. Building on this paradigm, we further introduce task objectives on top of motion-prior tracking. The central challenge is therefore to ensure that the selected motion prior matches the current task target. 

b) Model-based strike target planning: For humanoid ping-pong, a common design is to first estimate the ball state from perception, then predict the future ball trajectory, and finally determine a feasible strike target for the whole-body controller [ 6], [ 41 ], [ 42 ]. In particular, the observed ball positions are used to estimate the ball velocity, the predicted trajectory determines the desired hitting point and hitting time, and the desired return target is used to plan the racket velocity at contact. In our setting, the return objective is chosen as the center of the opponent-side table. Accordingly, we represent the strike command by 

yhit = ( phit , vhit , τ ) , (1) where phit is the desired hitting position, vhit is the desired hitting velocity, and τ is the time-to-strike. These task-space quantities form the interface between ball-trajectory planning and whole-body policy control in our system. IV. L EARNING SCALABLE WHOLE -BODY SKILLS 

A central challenge in humanoid table tennis is that whole-body strike priors must cover a broad hitting workspace, yet motion-capture data are inherently difficult to scale to this requirement. The limitation is not merely collection cost: dynamic whole-body strikes are hard to reproduce consistently, the feasible hitting space is large, and many target regions 4

Fig. 3: Motion-VAE for scalable strike motion generation. are rarely observed even after substantial data collection. Consequently, the recorded strike motions remain sparse and unevenly distributed across the table. When used directly as motion priors, such incomplete coverage leaves many feasible strike targets without suitable references, which degrades motion matching and ultimately limits policy performance. To address this limitation, we construct a scalable strike motion library by augmenting the captured motions with a task-aligned generative model. Our goal is not to synthesize arbitrary full-body motions, but to generate strike motions that preserve human-like coordination and timing while expanding coverage of the table-wide hitting workspace. To this end, as shown in Fig. 3, we train a conditional autoregressive Motion-VAE on strike-centered motion clips, and then convert the generated motions into physically executable references through tracker-based rollout and filtering. 

A. Task-aligned Strike Motion Generation 

We begin by collecting 400 motion-capture recordings of whole-body strike demonstrations. During data collection, we annotate only the strike instant for each demonstration. Around this instant, we extract a motion segment of 1.08,s, spanning 0.54,s before and 0.54,s after contact, so that each clip contains a complete strike cycle including preparation, acceleration, contact, and recovery. These human demonstrations are then retargeted to the Unitree G1 kinematics via GMR [ 43 ]. For each retargeted motion, we further compute a strike target feature defined as the relative position of the racket link at the strike instant (t = 0 .54 s) with respect to the torso link at the initial frame (t = 0 s). This process yields a dataset of 400 whole-body strike motions, each paired with its corresponding strike target at contact. Although these demonstrations are natural and high-quality, their associated strike points cover only a limited subset of the reachable hitting workspace. We therefore train a task-aligned Motion-VAE to synthesize additional strike motions and improve the coverage of the resulting motion prior. Let st ∈ Rds denote the motion state at time step t,where st includes the kinematic features used to represent the reference motion. Given a conditioning context and a latent variable z ∈ Rdz , the Motion-VAE predicts future motion states autoregressively. Specifically, the encoder defines an approximate posterior 

qϕ(z | st:t+H ) , (2) where the latent variable z is obtained via the reparameteri-zation trick: z = μϕ + σϕ ⊙ ϵ, where ϵ ∼ N (0, I). And the decoder models future motion generation as 

pθ

 ˆst+1: t+H | scond  

> t

, z , (3) where scond  

> t

denotes the conditioning state and H is the rollout horizon. Following the standard Motion-VAE formulation [ 44 ], [ 45 ], we first optimize a base generative objective that combines motion reconstruction and latent regularization. Specifically, the Motion-VAE loss is defined as 

LVAE = Lrec + β(t)LKL , (4) where Lrec is the multi-step motion reconstruction loss and 

LKL regularizes the approximate posterior toward a Gaussian prior. To prevent posterior collapse throughout VAE training, we adopt a cyclical annealing schedule for the KL weight β(t).This allows model to focus on reconstruction in early phase of each cycle while progressively regularizing the latent space as β(t) increases. While this base objective is sufficient for generic motion modeling, it does not explicitly enforce the temporal structure and physical plausibility required by table-tennis strike motions. We therefore augment it with three task-aligned regularization terms. First, we introduce a phase reconstruction loss to preserve the strike-cycle structure. Each frame is annotated with a cyclic phase representation 

ct =

sin φt

cos φt



, (5) where φt denotes the strike phase. The predicted phase is supervised by 

Lphase =

> H

X

> h=1

∥ˆct+h − ct+h∥22 +

> H−1

X

> h=1

∥∆ˆ ct+h − ∆ct+h∥22 ,

(6) where ∆ct+h = ct+h+1 − ct+h denotes the phase velocity at time step t + h. Second, we impose a temporal smoothness loss at the generation boundary: 

Lsmooth = ˆst+1 − scond  

> t
> 22

. (7) Third, we add a foot ground penetration penalty to discourage physically implausible foot placements. Let F denote the set of tracked foot points, and let z(j) 

> t+h

be the vertical coordinate of foot point j ∈ F at time t + h. We penalize penetration below a small ground threshold zg using 

Lfoot =

> H

X

> h=1

X

> j∈F

ReLU 



zg − z(j)

> t+h



, zg = 0 .035 . (8) The final training objective is 

Lgen = LVAE + λ1Lphase + λ2Lsmooth + λ3Lfoot . (9) 5

Optimizing this objective yields a generative strike prior that not only reconstructs the captured motions, but also produces temporally structured and physically more plausible strike motions for downstream execution and policy learning. 

Task noise and domain randomization. 

Not all generated motions are suitable for downstream policy learning. Even when a synthesized motion is kinematically plausible, it may still be dynamically difficult to execute on the humanoid robot. We therefore introduce a tracker-based filtering stage to convert generated strike motions into physically executable motion references. Given a generated motion sequence ˆτ = {ˆs1, ˆs2, . . . , ˆsT },

we feed it into a motion-tracking policy trained in simulation. The tracker attempts to follow the generated whole-body reference under robot dynamics and produces a physically realized rollout. We retain only those generated motions that can be stably tracked in simulation. This step removes samples that are plausible in motion space but incompatible with the robot’s actuation limits or contact dynamics. After tracker rollout, we further filter the retained motions using strike-event and phase consistency. First, we require the racket-ball contact event to lie near the temporal center of the motion clip, so that each motion contains both a sufficient preparation phase before contact and a meaningful recovery phase after contact. Second, we discard motions whose phase trajectory {ˆct}Tt=1 deviates significantly from the expected strike-cycle pattern. These criteria remove motions with distorted timing, premature termination, or inconsistent strike ordering. The final augmented strike library is constructed by merging the retained tracker-executable motions with the original motion-capture dataset. Compared with the raw mocap set, the resulting library provides substantially better coverage of strike points over the full table, while preserving the temporal structure and physical executability required for downstream whole-body policy learning. 

B. Policy: Task-oriented Motion Matching 

Integrating large-scale primitive motions into task-oriented policy learning remains a key challenge at the intersection of imitation and reinforcement learning. Instead of adopting a hierarchical controller or distilling motion primitives into a latent skill model, we use a simple motion matching scheme over our enhanced strike motion library. Specifically, we retrieve the reference motion by nearest-neighbor search in a task-conditioned feature space defined by the relative strike target. 

prel hit = phit + ϵ − panchor ,i∗ = arg min  

> i∈M

prel hit − pi  

> target 2

, (10) where ϵ is a small random perturbation that simulates target prediction errors during real-world deployment, panchor is the anchor position, and pi 

> target

is the strike target associated with the i-th motion. The matched motion is subsequently provided to the policy as part of the motion command observations, so that the current strike behavior is optimized toward the task TABLE I: Asymmetric observation design for actor and critic.                                        

> Observation Actor Critic
> Task Targets
> Strike time ( τt; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Racket Target Vel ( vhit
> t; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Racket Target Pos ( phit
> t; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Current time step –✓
> Racket position –✓
> Racket velocity –✓
> Racket orientation error –✓
> Motion Targets
> Motion anchor position ( panchor ; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Robot anchor position ✓✓
> Robot anchor orientation ( Ranchor ; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Motion dof pos/vel ✓✓
> Motion body pos/orienation –✓
> Proprioception
> Base angular velocity ( ωb; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Base linear velocity –✓
> Joint positions ( q; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Joint velocities ( ˙q; noisy / clean) ✓✓
> Previous action ( at−1)✓✓

objective while remaining consistent with the selected motion prior. Our whole-body controller is trained with PPO under an asymmetric actor–critic framework. Importantly, the policy is not designed as a pure motion-tracking controller. Instead, it is optimized to satisfy task-level table-tennis objectives while being regularized by a matched reference motion prior. This formulation encourages the policy to produce task-effective yet natural whole-body behaviors, rather than merely replaying reference clips. To support this objective, the policy observations are orga-nized into three groups: motion commands , which encode the selected reference motion and its phase-related cues; task com-mands , which specify the desired strike target, strike velocity, and timing; and proprioceptive observations , which describe the current robot state for closed-loop control. Following the asymmetric learning paradigm, the actor receives noisy and history-stacked observations to improve robustness, whereas the critic has access to cleaner and more privileged information for value estimation. The observation organization is summarized in Table I. Given these observations, the controller is trained with rewards that balance task execution, motion consistency, and control regularity. Among them, the task reward is the primary driver of ball-interaction quality, while the motion and regularization terms serve to preserve coordinated whole-body behavior and stable control. We first detail the task reward. Since successful striking is governed primarily by the racket state near impact, we supervise the racket position and velocity errors only around the strike event, rather than enforcing rigid tracking throughout the motion. In addition, we define an orientation error to encourage alignment between the racket face normal and the desired strike velocity direction: 

eori (t) = arccos   nracket  

> t

· ˆvhit 

> t

 , (11) 6

where nracket  

> t

denotes the racket-face normal in the world frame and ˆvhit  

> t

is the normalized desired strike velocity. The absolute value makes the reward symmetric with respect to the two opposite face directions, allowing both forehand and backhand strikes without imposing an explicit hand-specific constraint. We do not provide this orientation error as an explicit actor observation; instead, it is implicitly determined by the target strike velocity and the current robot state, and is learned through the motion-constrained policy optimization. To concentrate supervision around the decisive contact phase without imposing rigid tracking throughout the motion, each term is shaped by a gated exponential reward: 

rj (t) = exp 



− ej (t)

σj (t)



I[τt ∈ W j ] , j ∈ { pos , ori , vel },

(12) where τt denotes the time-to-strike and Wj is the active supervision window. We use a tighter window for positional accuracy (0.02 s ) and slightly wider windows (0.1 s ) for orientation and velocity. This design enforces precise contact location near impact, while allowing a broader temporal margin for swing direction and speed, which we find helpful for avoiding overly sharp wrist accelerations and reducing the sim-to-real gap in task tracking. The final task reward is defined as 

rtask  

> t

= wpos rpos (t) + wori rori (t) + wvel rvel (t) + rsucc  

> t

, (13) where rsucc  

> t

is a sparse success bonus activated when all strike constraints are simultaneously satisfied within the impact window. Beyond task execution, the motion and regularization rewards serve to preserve coordinated whole-body behavior and stable control. Importantly, the wrist joints are excluded from the motion-tracking terms, preventing the reference motion from over-constraining the racket during ball interaction. This design decouples fine-grained strike execution from global motion regularization, allowing the wrist to adapt to task demands while the rest of the body remains consistent with the whole-body motion prior. 

Task noise and domain randomization. To improve robustness under dynamic interaction and mimic the gradual reduction of planning uncertainty near impact, we inject phase-dependent noise into the task commands. Denoting a generic task command by ct, we use 

˜ct = ct + ξt, ∥ξt∥ ∝ s(τt), (14) where s(τt) is a decreasing function of the time-to-strike τt,and ξt ∼ N (0 , σ 2(τt)) is a Gaussian noise term whose scale is determined by s(τt). As a result, task perturbations are larger when the strike is still far away and gradually diminish near contact, reflecting the practical fact that target estimation and strike planning become more accurate as the ball approaches the hitting moment. In addition, we inject random IMU noise into proprioceptive observations and apply standard domain randomization, in-cluding external push perturbations and friction randomization. These perturbations improve the policy’s robustness to sensing uncertainty and sim-to-real discrepancies. 

Adaptive Training Techniques. To improve both workspace coverage and strike precision during training, we adopt an adaptive learning strategy with two components: adaptive region sampling and adaptive task tracking . The former reallocates training samples toward underperforming regions of the strike workspace, while the latter progressively sharpens the task-tracking reward as the policy improves. For adaptive region sampling, we partition the target workspace into predefined regions and maintain a rolling success rate for each region based on recent trials. During training, the region with the lowest success rate is sampled with a higher probability, while the remaining regions are sampled uniformly. A strike target is then drawn within the selected region bounds. This simple strategy continuously reallocates training toward underperforming workspace zones, while still preserving exploration over the full strike space. In addition, we employ adaptive task tracking by updating the reward scale σj from running tracking errors. As tracking improves, σj becomes smaller, yielding sharper reward shaping and progressively stricter strike constraints. This allows the policy to first acquire coarse task feasibility and then refine contact precision as learning proceeds. V. E GOCENTRIC ONBOARD PERCEPTION SYSTEM 

We present an egocentric onboard perception system (Fig. 4) that enables the first outdoor consecutive humanoid table-tennis rallies. Closing the perception–action loop under highly dynamic conditions is inherently challenging. To address this, we adopt a dual-modality perception framework (Fig. 2) with two complementary operating modes. A MoCap-based pipeline provides high-accuracy, high-frequency sensing for rapid validation of the full perception–control stack in laboratory settings, while the same pipeline is deployed with ego-view onboard sensing for real-world operation. In both modes, the perception system estimates two key quantities: the ping-pong ball position in the table frame pT

> ball

,and the robot torso pose in the origin frame O, represented by O TTorso , where O denotes the reference world frame used during policy training. 

a) Motion Capture (MoCap) mode: For controlled ex-periments, a professional optical MoCap system operates at 120 Hz. The ball is coated with retro-reflective markers and tracked directly from the MoCap stream. The robot torso pose is obtained via a rigid-body tracker mounted on the torso, which is registered within the system to localize the robot in the origin frame. 

b) Ego-view camera mode: For in-the-wild deployment, a dual-camera setup is used. A head-mounted ZED X performs long-range ball detection at 60 Hz, while a downward-tilted ZED X Mini provides robot localization at 120 Hz. The ball position is obtained via stereo triangulation in the camera frame, while the table pose is estimated via AprilTag detection. Through pre-calibrated extrinsic transformations, the ball position in T and the torso pose in O are computed, where O

is rigidly defined relative to T .Both modalities share an identical processing pipeline —com-prising an Adaptive Extended Kalman Filter (AEKF), a physics-based trajectory predictor, and a racket strike planner—and 7

Fig. 4: Egocentric onboard perception system. Our perception pipeline combines YOLO-based ball detection, AprilTag-based robot localization, and adaptive Kalman filtering for state estimation. The resulting system provides robust real-time ball trajectory prediction and strike-target estimation using only onboard sensing. TABLE II: Reference frames used in the perception system.                     

> Frame Symbol Description
> World (MoCap) WGlobal MoCap coordinate frame Table TOrigin at table centre; xtoward opponent, zupward Origin OOn the floor, with axes aligned with T;the offset from the robot-side table edge is a fixed scalar dorig set per deployment or task. Camera (ZED X) C1Left-eye frame of the head-mounted ZED X stereo pair (ball triangulation) Camera (ZED X Mini) C2Left-eye frame of the ZED X Mini (AprilTag-based ego-localization)

differ only in modality-specific hyperparameters. This unified design ensures consistent state estimation across sensing modes and allows MoCap to serve as a reference for tuning the ego-view system. 

A. Coordinate Frame Definitions 

We define five reference frames used throughout the system (Table II). The rigid transformations between frames are pre-calibrated:  

> W

TT , W TO , C2 TC1 , Torso TC2 . (15) All transformations are represented as 4 × 4 homogeneous matrices. The table and origin frames are fixed relative to each other: O TT = W T −1 

> O

· W TT ,

and are calibrated once prior to each session. 

B. MoCap-Based Sensing Pipeline 

Ball localization. The ball is uniformly coated with retroreflec-tive material, allowing the MoCap system to treat it as a single marker. The system reports its 3D position pW 

> ball

at 120 Hz, which is transformed into the table frame as: 

pT 

> ball

= W T −1 

> T

· ˜pW

> ball

. (16) 

Robot self-localization. A rigid-body tracker mounted on the robot provides W TTracker . With the pre-calibrated extrinsic 

> Tracker

TTorso , the torso pose in O is computed as:  

> O

TTorso = W T −1 

> O

· W TTracker · Tracker T −1Torso . (17) The result is streamed to the low-level controller at 120 Hz. 

C. Ego-View Camera Sensing Pipeline 

Hardware. A ZED X stereo camera mounted on the robot head detects the ball at 60 Hz via stereo triangulation. A ZED X Mini, mounted with a downward tilt, provides ego-localization at 120 Hz using AprilTag detection from its left camera stream. 

Ball Detection and 3-D Localization. Ball detection is implemented as a three-stage pipeline on a Jetson Orin: 1) Coarse detection via YOLO. A YOLO detector trained on standard yellow balls predicts bounding boxes in the left and right RGB images, providing a reliable spatial prior. 2) Sub-pixel refinement via HSV segmentation. Within each bounding box, HSV-based color segmentation isolates the ball region, offering improved robustness to illumination changes. The centroid of the resulting mask defines the ball center (u, v ).3) Stereo triangulation. Corresponding pixel coordinates 

(uL, u R) are used to triangulate the 3D position pC1

> ball

in the camera frame. 

Robot Self-Localisation via AprilTag. AprilTag-based lo-calization is performed using the ZED X Mini’s left camera. Seven tags with known positions {T Pji } are placed on the table. Detected tag corners are aggregated into a unified Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem, and C2 TT is estimated using RANSAC-PnP. 8

To maintain 120 Hz performance, detection is restricted to a dynamically updated region of interest (ROI), defined by projecting table corners using the previous pose estimate. 

Torso pose derivation. Given T TC2 and Torso TC2 : 

> O

TTorso = O TT · T TC2 ·  Torso TC2

−1. (18) 

Ball position in the table frame.  

> T

pball = T TC2 · C2 TC1 · C1 ˜pball . (19) 

D. Ball State Estimation: Adaptive Extended Kalman Filter 

Raw ball position measurements are noisy and exhibit dis-continuities at table bounces. We design an Adaptive Extended Kalman Filter (AEKF) that fuses position observations with a physics-based motion model to jointly estimate ball position and velocity, while robustly handling bounce events. The process is illustrated in Algorithm 1. 

State Space. The filter state stacks position and velocity in Table coordinates, 

x = px, p y , p z , v x, v y , v z

⊤ ∈ R6. (20) The observation model is position-only, 

zk = H x k + nk, nk ∼ N (0, R(dk)) .

H =  I3 03×3

 ∈ R3×6. (21) Here 03×3 denotes the 3 × 3 zero matrix; R(dk) is specified below. 

Physics-Based Prediction Model. The ball’s flight dynamics follow a quadratic aerodynamic drag model: 

a = −k ∥v∥ v − g ˆz. (22) where k is the drag coefficient, ˆz is the upward vertical unit vector, and g is the gravitational acceleration magnitude. The state x = [ p⊤, v⊤]⊤ is advanced over ∆t by 

fdrag :

(pk = pk−1 + vk−1 ∆t + 12 a(vk−1) ∆ t2,

vk = vk−1 + a(vk−1) ∆ t. (23) After the free-flight update, a table collision is applied when the ball lies inside the table rectangle |px| < L x, |py | < L y ,is at or below the collision height pz ≤ zc, and is moving downward ( vz < 0). The post-impact state uses horizontal restitution Ch and vertical restitution Cv :

v ← diag( Ch, C h, −Cv ) v, pz ← 2zc − pz . (24) The process noise Qk = diag( qpos , q pos , q pos , q vel , q vel , q vel )

is normalised by the nominal time step ∆t0 = 1 /f s:

qpos = Qbase pos 

 ∆t

∆t0

2

, qvel = Qbase vel 

∆t

∆t0

. (25) where 1/f s is the capture frequency of the camera 

Adaptive Observation Noise. Let dk denote the camera– ball distance at time k. The measurement noise covariance is isotropic and grows with dk,

R(dk) = r(dk) I3, r(d) = Rbase 

 1 + β d . (26) 

Algorithm 1: Adaptive Extended Kalman Filter  

> 1

if not initialised then  

> 2

x ← [z⊤ 

> k

, v⊤

> init

]⊤, P ← Pinit , tlast ← tk; 

> 3

return ; 

> 4

∆t ← tk − tlast ; 

> 5

if ∆t > ∆tmax then  

> 6

re-init from (zk, t k); 

> 7

return ; 

> 8

read (p, v) from x; 

> 9

F ← ∂f drag /∂ x at this (p, v); 

> 10

a ← − k ∥v∥ v − g ˆz; 

> 11

p ← p + v ∆t + 12 a ∆t2; v ← v + a ∆t; 

> 12

if |px| < L x and |py | < L y and pz ≤ zc and vz < 0

then  

> 13

vx ← Chvx, vy ← Chvy , vz ← − Cv vz ,

pz ← 2zc − pz ; 

> 14

write (p, v) to x; 

> 15

qpos ← Qbase pos (∆ t/ ∆t0)2, qvel ← Qbase vel (∆ t/ ∆t0); 

> 16

Q ← diag( qpos , q pos , q pos , q vel , q vel , q vel ); 

> 17

P ← FPF ⊤ + Q; 

> 18

if ˆpx − zk,x > τ x and ˆvx > 0 then  

> 19

re-init from (zk, t k); 

> 20

return ; 

> 21

R(dk) = r(dk) I3, r(d) = Rbase 

 1 + β d ; 

> 22

standard Kalman measurement update on (x, P); 

> 23

tlast ← tk; 

> 24

return (p, v);where Rbase is the baseline variance (in m2) on each position axis and β > 0 is a tunable distance-sensitivity gain. Closer range yields smaller r(d) and tighter fusion of zk; larger d

inflates R to reflect weaker confidence in triangulation. 

Initialisation and Resets. At initialization, the position is set to the first measurement z0, while the velocity is initialized with a fixed prior. The initial covariance P0|0 is chosen as a diagonal matrix with large entries. The filter is reset using the current measurement if no observation is received for longer than ∆tmax , or if a return is detected, indicated by the observed 

px falling below the predicted value by more than τx.

E. Ball Trajectory Prediction 

Given the current filtered ball state in table coordinates, 

(ˆ pt, ˆvt), the future trajectory is propagated using the same flight model as in state estimation, including quadratic air drag, gravity, and table impacts with restitution coefficients (Ch, C v ),using a fixed small time step. Candidate arrival times τ are determined in two stages. 1) Initial search. When the ball is approaching (e.g., based on along-table velocity and position gating), candidate times are sampled over [T min det , T max det ] with a coarse step (e.g., 0.01 s ). For each τ , the state is propagated in T and mapped to the origin frame O. Samples are retained only 9

if the predicted position lies within the admissible strike volume 

S = (x, y, z ) : x ∈ [xmin , x max ],y ∈ [ymin , y max ],z ∈ [zmin , z max ] (m, in O).

(27) Among feasible candidates, τ is selected to minimise 

ˆp(o) 

> x

(τ ) − cs,x , where cs,x denotes the strike-plane location in O.2) Online refinement. Once a strike phase is active, τ is refined over a local window τ ∈ [τcur − Wτ , τ cur + Wτ ]

with step ∆τ , while τ > 0 and the ball remains on the incoming side of the strike plane ( p(o) 

> x

> c s,x ). The minimiser of ˆp(o) 

> x

(τ ) − cs,x is selected without enforcing 

ˆp(o)(τ ) ∈ S .The outputs are the time-to-strike τ , and the predicted position and velocity at τ in O, optionally clipped to S and velocity bounds prior to racket planning. If no new observation is available, τ is decremented at the control rate and clamped to [τmin , τ max ]. When τ becomes negative, the strike phase terminates and the system waits for the next incoming ball. 

F. Racket Strike Planning 

Given the predicted impact position phit and incoming velocity vin , we compute the required racket velocity Vr

and surface normal ˆn.

Desired outgoing velocity. For a target landing position ptarget 

and flight time Tf , the required outgoing ball velocity vout 

is obtained analytically under a linearised drag model ˙v =

−kv + g:

vout ,i =

 ptarget ,i − phit ,i 

 k

1 − e−kT f , i ∈ { x, y }, (28) 

vout ,z = gz

k +

 ptarget ,z − phit ,z 

 − gz Tf /k 

 1 − e−kT f

/k . (29) 

Racket motion via collision model. Assuming the racket velocity is aligned with its surface normal, Vr = Vn ˆn, a frictionless normal collision yields 

vout ,n = vin ,n − (1 + e) ( vin ,n − Vn), (30) where e is the restitution coefficient. Since the velocity change is along ˆn,

ˆn = vout − vin 

∥vout − vin ∥ , (31) 

Vn = vin ,n − vin ,n − vout ,n 

1 + e . (32) The resulting ˆn and Vr = Vn ˆn are sent to the low-level controller in the O frame. VI. E VALUATIONS 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed SMASH system from three perspectives. First, we examine its overall performance on humanoid table tennis and compare it with representative baselines from reinforcement TABLE III: Evaluation metrics.                                          

> Metric Definition
> EpRacket position error, ∥pracket −phit ∥2(cm).
> EvRacket velocity error, ∥vracket −vhit ∥2.
> EoRacket orient error, 100 ∗arccos  nracket ·ˆvhit .
> Epredpos Mean predicted strike position error (cm).
> Epredvel Mean predicted strike velocity error (m/s).
> SR Ep(cm) <0.04 m ,Eo<0.05 , and Ev<0.5.
> SR det Successful detection of the incoming ball.
> SR hit Successful racket–ball contact.
> SR return Successful returns to the opponent side.
> Empjpe [40 ]MPJPE with respect to the reference motion.
> Eorientation Body Orientation error to the reference motion.
> Esmoothness Mean joint acceleration per step, 1
> N
> P
> i|¨qi|.
> Etorque Mean applied torque per step, 1
> N
> P
> i|τi|.
> SR balance The robot maintains stable posture during the trail.

learning, motion imitation, and prior system-level solutions. Second, we evaluate the proposed motion-VAE-based data augmentation scheme and analyze how the expanded strike dataset benefits policy learning. Third, we investigate the proposed perception system through extensive ablation studies on its key modules. The evaluation metrics are summarized in Table III, we choose the following methods as baselines:  

> •

PPO [46 ]: We directly train the policy using vanilla PPO with only task rewards, without introducing any motion prior. This baseline evaluates task performance without motion guidance.  

> •

Mimic : We adopt BeyondMimic [ 20 ] as a representative motion-imitation baseline. In this setting, we sample strike targets and matched motions, but do not introduce task rewards; the policy is trained only to track reference motions. This baseline evaluates the pure motion-imitation capability of the policy without task constraints.  

> •

HITTER [6]: We adopt the training paradigm of HITTER, a state-of-the-art humanoid table-tennis system, where the robot imitates only forehand and backhand swing motions without lower-body tracking. This serves as a system-level baseline for comparison. 

A. Policy Performance Evaluation a) Baseline Comparisons: Table IV provides a com-prehensive evaluation of the learned policies in simulation, from three perspectives: task performance , motion tracking accuracy , and motion smoothness . Overall, the results show that 

SMASH achieves the best trade-off between task execution and motion quality. Compared with the task-only PPO 

baseline, our method improves the success rate and reduces the position tracking error, indicating that motion guidance is beneficial rather than restrictive. Although PPO does not suffer from potential conflicts between motion imitation and task objectives, the lack of structured motion priors makes policy learning less effective and leads to inferior overall task performance. Compared with HITTER , SMASH achieves comparable task success while significantly improving motion tracking accuracy and reducing torque. This is because HITTER only imitates upper-body forehand and backhand swings 10 

TABLE IV: Policy evaluations in simulation. 

Metrics Task Tracking Motion Tracking Regularization 

SR ↑ Ep(cm) ↓ Ev ↓ Eo ↓ Empjpe ↓ Eorientation ↓ Esmoothness ↓ Etorque ↓

Baseline Comparisons 

Mimic N/A N/A N/A N/A 38 .23 ±0.099 0.15 ±0.000 16 .60 ±0.075 5.96 ±0.006 

PPO [46] 75 .28 ±0.536 4.63 ±0.015 0.34 ±0.006 3.12 ±0.025 146 .49 ±0.215 0.88 ±0.000 24 .25 ±0.059 5.83 ±0.006 

HITTER [6] 86 .63 ±0.260 4.69 ±0.017 0.33 ±0.000 3.02 ±0.015 100 .05 ±0.156 0.47 ±0.000 20 .77 ±0.040 5.79 ±0.000 

SMASH (Ours) 86 .38 ±0.078 4.42 ±0.029 0.35 ±0.000 4.17 ±0.118 75 .01 ±0.038 0.32 ±0.006 20 .99 ±0.010 5.58 ±0.000 

Ablation Data Scale 

64 mocap clips 73 .61 ±0.602 4.97 ±0.055 0.46 ±0.006 7.77 ±0.050 84 .54 ±0.161 0.35 ±0.000 20 .83 ±0.021 5.38 ±0.010 

200 mocap clips 76 .86 ±0.140 4.98 ±0.110 0.39 ±0.000 4.50 ±0.072 81 .90 ±0.025 0.35 ±0.000 21 .01 ±0.035 5.56 ±0.010 

400 mocap clips 76 .55 ±0.191 4.83 ±0.055 0.39 ±0.000 4.77 ±0.271 84 .00 ±0.086 0.35 ±0.000 20 .57 ±0.012 5.42 ±0.006 

400-2k-gen 82 .32 ±0.471 4.49 ±0.032 0.39 ±0.006 3.96 ±0.067 74 .57 ±0.283 0.32 ±0.000 21 .33 ±0.045 5.62 ±0.010 

60-5k-gen 83 .06 ±0.594 4.47 ±0.066 0.36 ±0.000 4.44 ±0.165 68 .70 ±0.075 0.30 ±0.006 21 .27 ±0.055 5.67 ±0.006 

200-5k-gen 85 .29 ±0.070 4.20 ±0.026 0.34 ±0.000 4.02 ±0.132 76 .52 ±0.122 0.33 ±0.006 21 .54 ±0.015 5.60 ±0.000 

400-5k-gen (SMASH) 86 .38 ±0.078 4.42 ±0.029 0.35 ±0.000 4.17 ±0.118 75 .01 ±0.038 0.32 ±0.006 20 .99 ±0.010 5.58 ±0.000 

400-5k-gen (w/o tracker) 85 .53 ±0.379 4.51 ±0.135 0.34 ±0.000 3.70 ±0.130 91 .02 ±0.275 0.37 ±0.006 21 .05 ±0.058 5.29 ±0.006 

400-10k-gen 85 .88 ±0.199 4.35 ±0.038 0.36 ±0.000 4.25 ±0.162 76 .21 ±0.178 0.32 ±0.000 21 .32 ±0.021 5.63 ±0.012 

Ablation training techniques 

w/o region adaptive sampling 82 .72 ±0.321 4.70 ±0.055 0.35 ±0.000 4.08 ±0.096 74 .22 ±0.065 0.31 ±0.006 20 .87 ±0.035 5.70 ±0.000 

w/o adaptive tracking sigma 22 .60 ±0.800 11 .94 ±0.222 0.62 ±0.006 35 .49 ±0.410 62 .21 ±0.176 0.25 ±0.000 18 .73 ±0.025 5.44 ±0.010 

Fig. 5: Motion-VAE expands strike-space coverage. Compared with the original mocap dataset, Motion-VAE-generated motions produce a much broader distribution of strike targets over the reachable hitting workspace, substantially improving data coverage for downstream policy learning. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0       

> Training Step ×10 5
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> Feet Tracking Reward
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> Training Step ×10 5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> Task Success Reward

Impact of Dataset Scale on Training Performance 

> 64 mocap clips
> 400 mocap clips
> 400-5k-gen(w/o tracker)
> 400-5k-gen(SMASH)

Fig. 6: Impact of dataset scale on training performance. without lower-body tracking, so its motion space is limited and its whole-body motion consistency remains relatively poor despite the simplified motion setting. Finally, Mimic achieves the lowest motion tracking and smoothness errors as a pure imitation baseline, verifying the accuracy of our motion tracking formulation while also showing that motion imitation alone is insufficient for solving the table-tennis task. This observation may also provide useful guidance for improving the motion-

Fig. 7: Comparison between physically implausible strike motions (top) and motions corrected by Tracker Filter (bottom). VAE module with additional dynamic constraints. 

b) Impact of MVAE Data Scaling on Policy Performance: 

Fig. 5 provides a direct visualization of the strike-target distribution over the table under different data scales. After motion-VAE augmentation, the strike targets become much 11 smash Lateral move   

> Lateral move Low-crouching
> ego-centric vision ego-centric vision ego-centric vision

Fig. 8: Hardware experiment snapshots. Representative real-world snapshots of our humanoid table-tennis system, showing diverse whole-body skills such as smash, low-crouching shots, lateral movements, and ego-centric onboard strikes. more broadly distributed, indicating that the augmented dataset covers the hitting workspace more effectively than the original mocap set. The data-scale ablation in Table IV further studies how the amount of motion data affects policy learning under the same training setting. The results show that enlarging the dataset significantly improves policy performance, confirming the importance of broad strike-motion coverage. 

In particular, the policies trained with only 64, 200, or 400 mocap clips achieve substantially lower success rates than those trained with motion-VAE-generated datasets. This trend is also consistent with Fig. 6, where 400-5k-gen exhibits a clearly faster increase in success reward than the models trained with only 64 or 400 mocap clips. We also observe that when the initial motion set is too small, the final policy remains weaker, as shown by the lower performance of 60-5k-gen compared with 200-5k-gen and 400-5k-gen . Moreover, 400-5k-gen (w/o tracker) yields substantially worse motion tracking accuracy, especially in MPJPE, suggesting that motions generated without tracker guidance are less compatible with the robot dynamics (Fig. 7 ) and therefore harder for the robot to follow. This is also reflected in the lower feet-tracking reward in Fig. 6. On the other hand, the improvement from 400-5k-gen to 400-10k-gen is limited, indicating that once the generated motions are already broadly distributed over the reachable hitting space, further increasing the data scale brings only marginal gains. 

c) Detailed Training Techniques: We further study two training techniques: adaptive region sampling and adaptive tracking sigma. Removing adaptive region sampling causes a moderate drop in success rate, mainly due to poor performance on high strike targets above 1.2 m. We attribute this to the scarcity of such motions in the original dataset, since the size mismatch between human demonstrations and the humanoid robot tends to shift retargeted strike targets downward. Adaptive region sampling mitigates this issue by increasing the sampling probability of underperforming regions, thereby improving policy accuracy in these harder parts of the workspace. Adaptive tracking sigma plays a critical role in policy training. Removing this component leads to a substantial reduction in success rate and significantly degrades task-tracking performance. The reason is that an overly strict tracking sigma at the beginning makes task rewards difficult to obtain, which prevents effective task learning. 

d) Hardware Performance: The first two rows of Fig. 8 illustrate the performance of the proposed policy on real hardware under motion-capture-based perception. Given near-ground-truth estimates of both the robot body state and the ball state from the mocap system, the policy is able to execute diverse whole-body behaviors, including smashes, crouching saves for low balls, and large-range lateral movements with coordinated whole-body motion. These results demonstrate that the proposed whole-body motion-matching mechanism can be successfully transferred to the real robot and significantly enriches the expressiveness of the robot’s behaviors. We further observe that the policy can accommodate motions with substantially different styles. For example, the crouching-save behavior is learned by training jointly on a small set of crouching motions (20 clips) together with a large set of regular striking motions (5000 clips). The robot is able to perform both crouching and regular standing returns without sacrificing either behavior. We attribute this to the fact that the motion style is implicitly specified by the target ball position: when the ball arrives at significantly different locations, the policy naturally selects the corresponding motion pattern. Since smashes require a longer execution horizon, we train a separate policy with dedicated motion data for that behavior. Nevertheless, all of these results consistently show that our framework enables the humanoid robot to realize diverse whole-body motions for strikes across the full reachable workspace. 

B. Analysis of the Egocentric Perception System 

We first provide a qualitative overview of the egocentric perception pipeline during a representative striking sequence 12 HSV Segmentation    

> Ball State Estimation Trajectory Prediction
> Yolo Detection

Fig. 9: Perception snapshots. Real-time examples of onboard ball detection, HSV segmentation, ball-state estimation, and trajectory prediction during play. 

Fig. 10: Egocentric Perception Noise. The plots show the error distribution of position (left), velocity (center), and temporal estimation (right) as a function of remaining time to strike. The horizontal axis represents the ground-truth time-to-strike, while the vertical axis denotes the magnitude of the respective estimation errors. The solid lines represent the mean error, and the shaded areas indicate the standard deviation. TABLE V: Evaluations against various perception settings. 

Metrics SR hit ↑ SR return ↑ Ep(cm) ↓ Eo ↓ Ev ↓ Empjpe ↓ Etorque ↓

Simulation (Virtual Ball) N/A N/A 4.30 ±0.02 4.26 ±0.07 0.33 ±0.00 71 .40 ±0.27 5.51 ±0.07 

Hardware (Virtual Ball) N/A N/A 6.63 ±2.09 10 .91 ±3.47 0.92 ±0.39 95 .89 ±4.41 6.44 ±0.32 

Hardware (MoCap) 20 /20 18 /20 6.20 ±1.91 8.70 ±4.16 1.19 ±0.31 91 .19 ±8.79 6.29 ±0.37 

Hardware (Ego Camera) 19/20 12/20 6.49 ±2.26 11 .17 ±4.82 1.55 ±0.54 107 .64 ±5.06 6.89 ±0.36 

(Fig. 9). The figure visualizes the system evolution over time within a single strike, excluding the recovery phase where ball perception is not involved. The process can be divided into two stages: perception and planning. The first two rows correspond to the perception stage. The first row shows the left-eye images from the head-mounted ZED X camera together with YOLO-based detections, which provide coarse localization of the incoming ball. The second row illustrates the subsequent HSV-based refinement within each bounding box, enabling more accurate pixel-level localization under varying illumination and motion blur. The third row corresponds to the planning stage. Based on the triangulated 3D ball positions from stereo observations, the system performs state estimation and trajectory prediction. As new observations are incorporated, the AEKF progressively refines the ball state, leading to a converging prediction of the strike point as the ball approaches the robot. 

a) Evaluations against Various Perception Settings: We begin by evaluating the system under different perception settings, as summarized in Table V. Four configurations are considered. The first two, Simulation (Virtual Ball) and 

Hardware (Virtual Ball) , evaluate the striking policy using virtual ball targets, where the desired strike position and velocity are directly provided without perception noise; accordingly, 

SR hit and SR return are not applicable in these settings. The latter two, Hardware (MoCap) and Hardware (Ego Camera) ,evaluate the full real-world striking process with physical ball interaction. The metrics can be grouped into three categories. SR hit 

and SR return evaluate task-level striking performance. Ep,

Eangle , and Ev quantify racket execution accuracy at the strike instant, measuring the deviation of racket position, orientation, and velocity from the planned contact state. In hardware experiments, the racket pose is obtained using a rigid-body 13 

TABLE VI: Perception module ablation study.                                                             

> Setting SR det ↑SR hit ↑SR return ↑Epredpos ↓Epredvel ↓SR balance ↑
> w/o YOLO (no large yellow distractor) 19 /20 18 /20 10 /20 3.66 ±4.20 0.64 ±1.14 20 /20
> w/o YOLO (with large yellow distractor) 0/20 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
> w/o HSV 20 /20 16 /20 9/20 3.82 ±3.19 0.54 ±1.03 20 /20
> w/o collision detection (AKF) 19 /20 17 /20 12 /20 12 .7±7.14 3.37 ±1.81 20 /20
> w/o adaptive noise (AKF) 18 /20 16 /20 7/20 4.35 ±4.64 0.61 ±1.07 20 /20
> Zero initialization (AKF) 20 /20 18 /20 12 /20 6.07 ±8.61 0.88 ±1.06 20 /20
> ZED X pose (instead of ZED X Mini) 19 /20 18 /20 8/20 4.70 ±5.30 0.86 ±1.54 19 /20
> Full Model 20 /20 19 /20 13 /20 3.49 ±2.94 0.53 ±0.91 20 /20

tracker mounted on the striking hand and tracked by the MoCap system. Empjpe and Etorque assess motion tracking quality and control effort during execution. In simulation, the system achieves the lowest execution errors due to idealized state information and the absence of real-world sensing and hardware effects. When transferred to hardware with virtual balls, all execution metrics degrade noticeably, revealing a clear sim-to-real gap. For real-ball experiments on hardware, MoCap-based perception yields higher SR return and lower execution errors than the ego-view setting. Nevertheless, the ego-view system still maintains a high SR hit and a nontrivial 

SR return , demonstrating that the onboard perception pipeline provides sufficient accuracy for closed-loop striking in real-world conditions. Despite the increase in both position- and velocity-related errors under ego-view perception, the policy retains reasonable task success across settings. This indicates that the task perturbations injection used during training is effective, enabling the policy to generalize across different perception conditions and tolerate sensing uncertainty. Finally, the motion tracking metrics, Empjpe and Etorque ,remain relatively stable across perception settings. This suggests that perception noise primarily affects strike accuracy rather than the stability of whole-body motion execution. Overall, these results reveal a clear sim-to-real gap in execution accuracy, while also showing that the proposed policy and perception design remain robust enough to support reliable real-world humanoid table-tennis interaction. 

b) Egocentric Perception Noise: Fig. 10 illustrates the real-world error distribution of the egocentric perception system—specifically in terms of position, velocity, and temporal estimation—as a function of the remaining time to strike. The horizontal axis represents the ground-truth time remaining until the strike event, while the vertical axis denotes the magnitude of the estimation error. Due to the limited field of view and the absence of full-trajectory ground truth, we adopt the final observed ball state prior to its exit from the camera’s FOV as the reference. This serves as a reliable proxy given the significantly reduced sensing uncertainty at close range. A consistent convergent trend is observed across all metrics: as the time to strike decreases, the estimation errors for position, velocity, and timing progressively diminish. Crucially, both the mean error and the standard deviation (indicated by the shaded areas) narrow significantly as the ball approaches the robot. This reduction in both magnitude and variance indicates that the perception system’s predictions become increasingly precise and certain as the impact moment nears. This behavior aligns with the physical nature of onboard sensing, where proximity to the target enhances the signal-to-noise ratio and minimizes cumulative tracking drift, ensuring highly reliable state estimation for the final striking execution. 

c) Module Ablation Study: We conduct a module-wise ablation study to quantify the contribution of each perception component to the overall system performance. All experiments are performed on the ego-view pipeline with 20 trials per setting, and the results are summarized in Table VI. We evaluate the system using both task-level and state-estimation metrics, as summarized in Table III. SR det , SR hit ,and SR return capture end-to-end task performance, correspond-ing to successful detection, strike, and valid return, respectively. 

SR balance further evaluates post-strike stability, reflecting the sensitivity of whole-body control to perception reliability. Estimation accuracy is quantified by Epred pos and Epred v el ,defined as the mean error of the predicted strike position and velocity over all prediction steps within a single strike. Following the previous analysis, we use the last observed ball state before leaving the camera view as the reference. The full pipeline, comprising YOLO-based coarse detection, HSV-based refinement, and the AEKF with collision handling and adaptive observation noise, achieves the best overall perfor-mance across all metrics. Removing the YOLO detector exposes the system to severe degradation under visual ambiguity. Without distractors, the system maintains a high SR det (19 /20 )and reasonable SR hit , while SR return drops to 10 /20 , indicating reduced robustness. Under large yellow distractors, detection fails completely ( 0/20 ), rendering the pipeline inoperable. This confirms that YOLO serves as a critical gating module for reliable candidate generation in cluttered environments. Disabling HSV refinement preserves detection performance (20 /20 ), but degrades downstream accuracy, with reduced SR hit 

and SR return (16 /20 and 9/20 ) and increased estimation errors. This indicates that coarse bounding boxes alone are insufficient, and that pixel-level refinement is necessary to suppress spatial jitter and improve measurement consistency. Removing collision handling in the AEKF leads to the most significant degradation, with large increases in position and velocity errors ( Epred pos ≈ 12 .7 cm, Epred v el ≈ 3.37 m/s). This demonstrates the necessity of explicitly modeling table impacts, as bounce events introduce discontinuities that cannot be captured by smooth motion models. Similarly, disabling adaptive observation noise reduces both estimation accuracy and task success, particularly for long-range observations. This validates the distance-aware uncertainty model, which 14 

Fig. 11: Strike-point distribution and return performance. Forehand and backhand strike points are visualized together with the corresponding hit-and-return statistics across the reachable hitting workspace. mitigates overconfident updates under noisy stereo triangulation. Using zero initialization instead of informed priors increases both temporal and state estimation errors, highlighting the importance of proper initialization for stable filtering. Finally, replacing the ZED X Mini with the ZED X for pose estimation results in reduced SR return and degraded SR balance .This is primarily because the head-mounted ZED X prioritizes long-range ball observation, leading to frequent loss of AprilTag visibility on the table and reduced pose update frequency, which can fall below the control rate. In contrast, the dedicated downward-facing ZED X Mini provides stable, high-frequency localization, thereby improving both motion stability and overall system robustness. Overall, these results demonstrate that the perception pipeline is hierarchically structured and tightly coupled: coarse detection ensures robustness, fine localization improves measurement quality, and model-based filtering stabilizes state estimation un-der highly dynamic conditions. SR balance further highlights the importance of decoupled sensing, validating the effectiveness of the dual-camera design. 

d) Robustness Analysis: To evaluate long-term stability, we conduct a continuous 50-minute hardware experiment consisting of 642 consecutive ball launches with randomized landing locations. This setup stresses the perception system under diverse trajectories, distances, and interaction patterns. Across the entire dataset ( N = 642 ), the system achieves a total contact rate of 93.7% (comprising a 34.0% contact-only rate and a 59.7% successful return rate), while only 1.2% of trials failed due to lack of observation. Further analysis reveals a performance asymmetry between forehand and backhand strikes. The forehand achieves a return rate of 66.7%, significantly outperforming the backhand’s 38.9%. Moreover, the backhand exhibits a notably higher miss rate (9.0% vs. 4.1%) and a high proportion of "contact without return" (52.1%), indicating degraded strike quality. This gap is primarily attributed to two factors. First, backhand motions more frequently occlude the camera field of view, leading to intermittent perception loss. Second, backhand strikes often require extended reach through aggressive posture adjustments, which introduce additional control instability and velocity tracking errors. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we presented SMASH, a comprehensive system for humanoid table tennis that integrates egocentric onboard perception, scalable motion generation, and task-aligned whole-body policy learning. Our approach enables agile and precise ball interaction with coordinated whole-body behaviors, and achieves, to the best of our knowledge, the first outdoor humanoid table-tennis demonstrations without relying on external cameras or motion-capture systems. These results mark a significant step toward open-world humanoid–object interaction with humanoid robots. Despite these advances, several limitations remain. First, the current egocentric perception system is constrained by the limited field of view of onboard cameras. As a result, highly dynamic motions such as low-crouching shots and explosive smashes are difficult to deploy reliably in the egocentric setting, highlighting the need for active perception that adapt the viewpoint during interaction. Second, our system does not explicitly model ball spin, which is difficult to observe from visual input alone. Handling spin and complex serves therefore requires reactive strategies based on opponent behavior, and remains an open challenge for future work. 15 

REFERENCES [1] J. Yu, Y. Shentu, D. Wu, P. Abbeel, K. Goldberg, and P. Wu, “Egomi: Learning active vision and whole-body manipulation from egocentric human demonstrations,” ArXiv , 2025. [2] Y. Ma, A. Cramariuc, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Learning coordinated badminton skills for legged manipulators,” Science robotics , vol. 10, no. 102, p. eadu3922, 2025. [3] D. Kim, M. Srouji, C. Chen, and J. Zhang, “Armor: Egocentric perception for bimanual robot collision avoidance and motion planning,” 2025 IEEE 21st International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) , 2025. [4] H. Wang, C. Hou, X. Li, Y. Fu, C. Li, N. Chen, G. Dai, J. Liu, T. Huang, and S. Zhang, “Spikepingpong: High-frequency spike vision-based robot learning for precise striking in table tennis game,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06690 , 2025. [5] J. A. David B. D’Ambrosio and e. a. Saminda Abeyruwan, “Robotic table tennis: A case study into a high speed learning system,” in RSS: Robotics Science and Systems , 2023. [6] Z. Su, B. Zhang, N. Rahmanian, Y. Gao, Q. Liao, C. Regan, K. Sreenath, and S. S. Sastry, “Hitter: A humanoid table tennis robot via hierarchical planning and learning,” Arxiv , 2025. [7] Q. Ben, F. Jia, J. Zeng, J. Dong, D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Homie: Humanoid loco-manipulation with isomorphic exoskeleton cockpit,” in RSS: Robotics Science and Systems , 2025. [8] H. Jiang, J. Chen, Q. Bu, L. Chen, M. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. L. Li, C. Suo, C. Wang, Z. Peng, and H. Li, “WholeBodyVLA: Towards unified latent VLA for whole-body loco-manipulation control,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [9] Y. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. F. Lau, R. Yu, H. W. Tsui, Q. Chen, J. Wang, J. Pang, and P. Tan, “Humanx: Toward agile and generalizable humanoid interaction skills from human videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02473 ,2026. [10] J. Han, D. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Liu, P. Luo, C. Bai, and X. Li, “Husky: Humanoid skateboarding system via physics-aware whole-body control,” 

ArXiv , 2026. [11] J. Ren, J. Long, T. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Jia, W. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Luo, and J. Pang, “Humanoid goalkeeper: Learning from position conditioned task-motion constraints,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.18002 ,2025. [12] J. Wang, J. Hodgins, and J. Won, “Strategy and skill learning for physics-based table tennis animation,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024. [13] Z. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Lian, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Lin, H. Xue, Z. Zeng, Z. Qi, S. Zheng et al. , “Learning athletic humanoid tennis skills from imperfect human motion data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12686 , 2026. [14] Y. Yuan, V. Makoviychuk, Y. Guo, S. Fidler, X. Peng, and K. Fatahalian, “Learning physically simulated tennis skills from broadcast videos,” ACM Trans. Graph , vol. 42, no. 4, p. 66, 2023. [15] T. Huang, J. Ren et al. , “Learning humanoid standing-up control across diverse postures,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08378 , 2025. [16] X. Gu, Y.-J. Wang, X. Zhu et al. , “Advancing humanoid locomotion: Mastering challenging terrains with denoising world model learning,” in 

RSS , 2024. [17] T. He, J. Gao, W. Xiao et al. , “ASAP: Aligning simulation and real-world physics for learning agile humanoid whole-body skills,” in RSS , 2025. [18] W. Xie, J. Han, J. Zheng et al. , “KungfuBot: Physics-based humanoid whole-body control for learning highly-dynamic skills,” in IROS , 2025. [19] C. Zhang, W. Xiao, T. He, and G. Shi, “Wococo: Learning whole-body humanoid control with sequential contacts,” in CoRL , 2024. [20] Q. Liao, T. E. Truong, X. Huang, G. Tevet, K. Sreenath, and C. K. Liu, “Beyondmimic: From motion tracking to versatile humanoid control via guided diffusion,” ArXiv , 2025. [21] Z. Luo, Y. Yuan, T. Wang, C. Li, S. Chen, F. Castaneda, Z.-A. Cao, J. Li, D. Minor, Q. Ben et al. , “Sonic: Supersizing motion tracking for natural humanoid whole-body control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07820 , 2025. [22] Y. Pan, R. Qiao, L. Chen, K. Chitta, L. Pan, H. Mai, Q. Bu, C. Zheng, H. Zhao, P. Luo, and H. Li, “Agility meets stability: Versatile humanoid control with heterogeneous data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17373 , 2025. [23] J. Kong, X. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Han, S. Schwertfeger, C. Bai, and X. Li, “Learning soccer skills for humanoid robots: A progressive perception-action framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05310 , 2026. [24] Y. Wang, C. Luo, P. Chen, J. Liu, W. Sun, T. Guo, K. Yang, B. Hu, Y. Zhang, and M. Zhao, “Learning vision-driven reactive soccer skills for humanoid robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03996 , 2025. [25] Y. Chen, S. Dong, X. Ji, J. Sun, Z. Luo, L. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Li, J. Ma, B. Xu, Y. Han, Y. Zhao, and P. Lu, “Learning human-like badminton skills for humanoid robots,” ArXiv , 2026. [26] M. Hu, W. Chen, W. Li, F. Mandali, Z. He, R. Zhang, P. Krisna, K. Christian, L. Benaharon, D. Ma et al. , “Pace: Physics augmentation for coordinated end-to-end reinforcement learning toward versatile humanoid table tennis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21690 , 2025. [27] S. Guist, J. Schneider, H. Ma, V. Berenz, J. Martus, F. Gruninger, M. J. Muhlebach, J. Fiene, B. Scholkopf, and D. Buchler, “Safe & accurate at speed with tendons: A robot arm for exploring dynamic motion,” in 

RSS: Robotics Science and Systems , 2023. [28] D. Büchler, S. Guist, R. Calandra, V. Berenz, B. Scholkopf, and J. Peters, “Learning to play table tennis from scratch using muscular robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2020. [29] D. B. DAmbrosio, S. Abeyruwan, L. Graesser, A. Iscen, H. B. Amor, A. Bewley, B. J. Reed, K. Reymann, L. Takayama, Y. Tassa et al. ,“Achieving human level competitive robot table tennis,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 74–82. [30] H. Wang, W. Zhang, R. Yu, T. Huang, J. Ren, F. Jia, Z. Wang, X. Niu, X. Chen, J. Chen et al. , “Physhsi: Towards a real-world generalizable and natural humanoid-scene interaction system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11072 , 2025. [31] A. Allshire, H. Choi, J. Zhang, D. McAllister, A. Zhang, C. M. Kim, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and A. Kanazawa, “Visual imitation enables contextual humanoid control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03729 ,2025. [32] J. Ren, T. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Ben, J. Pang, and P. Luo, “Vb-com: Learning vision-blind composite humanoid locomotion against deficient perception,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2026. [33] H. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Ren, Q. Ben, T. Huang, W. Zhang, and J. Pang, “Beamdojo: Learning agile humanoid locomotion on sparse footholds,” in RSS: Robotics Science and Systems , 2025. [34] Z. Wu, X. Huang, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, K. Sreenath, X. Chen, P. Abbeel, R. Duan, A. Kanazawa, C. Sferrazza et al. , “Perceptive humanoid parkour: Chaining dynamic human skills via motion matching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15827 , 2026. [35] Z. Zhuang, S. Zhu, M. Zhao, and H. Zhao, “Deep whole-body parkour,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07701 , 2026. [36] J. Long, J. Ren, M. Shi, Z. Wang, T. Huang, P. Luo, and J. Pang, “Learning humanoid locomotion with perceptive internal model,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. [37] H. Weng, Y. Li, N. Sobanbabu, Z. Wang, Z. Luo, T. He, D. Ramanan, and G. Shi, “Hdmi: Learning interactive humanoid whole-body control from human videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16757 , 2025. [38] T. Huang, H. Wang, J. Ren, K. Yin, Z. Wang, X. Chen, F. Jia, W. Zhang, J. Long, J. Wang, and J. Pang, “Towards adaptable humanoid control via adaptive motion tracking,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. [39] L. Yang, X. Huang, Z. Wu, A. Kanazawa, P. Abbeel, C. Sferrazza, C. K. Liu, R. Duan, and G. Shi, “Omniretarget: Interaction-preserving data generation for humanoid whole-body loco-manipulation and scene interaction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26633 , 2025. [40] T. He, Z. Luo, X. He, W. Xiao, C. Zhang, W. Zhang, K. Kitani, C. Liu, and G. Shi, “Omnih2o: Universal and dexterous human-to-humanoid whole-body teleoperation and learning,” 2024. [41] O. Koç, G. J. Maeda, and J. Peters, “Online optimal trajectory generation for robot table tennis,” Robotics Auton. Syst. , 2018. [42] Y. Huang, D. Buchler, O. Koç, B. Scholkopf, and J. Peters, “Jointly learning trajectory generation and hitting point prediction in robot table tennis,” 2016 IEEE-RAS 16th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2016. [43] J. P. Araujo, Y. Ze, P. Xu, J. Wu, and C. K. Liu, “Retargeting matters: General motion retargeting for humanoid motion tracking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02252 , 2025. [44] H. Y. Ling, F. Zinno, G. Cheng, and M. Van De Panne, “Character controllers using motion vaes,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) ,2020. [45] Y. Yuan, V. Makoviychuk, Y. Guo, S. Fidler, X. Peng, and K. Fatahalian, “Learning physically simulated tennis skills from broadcast videos,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 2023. [46] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 ,2017.