Title: BiDexGrasp: Coordinated Bimanual Dexterous Grasps across Object Geometries and Sizes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.06589v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:31:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# BiDexGrasp: Coordinated Bimanual Dexterous Grasps across Object Geometries and Sizes 

Mu Lin 1,∗, Yi-Lin Wei 1,∗, Jiaxuan Chen 1, Yuhao Lin 1, Shuoyu Chen 1,

Jiangran Lyu 2, Jiayi Chen 2, Yansong Tang 3, He Wang 2, Wei-Shi Zheng 1,†

1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University 

2 School of Computer Science, Peking University 

3 Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 

https://frenkielm.github.io/BiDexGrasp.github.io/ (a) Simulation Dataset 

(b) IK Configuration 

(c) Real -World Deployment 

Fig. 1: Overview of BiDexGrasp. We construct a large-scale, high-quality bimanual dataset with diverse object geometries and sizes. Based on this dataset, we propose a novel framework to generate physically feasible dexterous grasps in the real world. 

Abstract —Bimanual dexterous grasping is a fundamental and promising area in robotics, yet its progress is constrained by the lack of comprehensive datasets and powerful generation models. In this work, we propose BiDexGrasp, consists of a large-scale bimanual dexterous grasp dataset and a novel generation model. For dataset, we propose a novel biman-ual grasp synthesis pipeline to efficiently annotate physically feasible data for dataset construction. This pipeline addresses the challenges of high-dimensional bimanual grasping through a two-stage synthesis strategy of efficient region-based grasp initialization and decoupled force-closure grasp optimization. Powered by this pipeline, we construct a large-scale bimanual 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. 

dexterous grasp dataset, comprising 6351 diverse objects with sizes ranging from 30 to 80 cm, along with 9.7 million anno-tated grasp data. Based on this dataset, we further introduce a bimanual-coordinated and geometry-size-adaptive dexterous grasping generation framework. The framework lies in two key designs: a bimanual coordination module and a geometry-size-adaptive grasp generation strategy to generate coordinated and high-quality grasps on unseen objects. Extensive experiments conducted in both simulation and real world demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed data synthesis pipeline and learned generative framework. 

> arXiv:2604.06589v1 [cs.RO] 8 Apr 2026

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robotic dexterous grasping enables robots to interact with real-world objects in a human-like manner and plays a cru-cial role in robotic system [40, 42, 5, 16, 28, 33, 38, 18]. Recently, data-driven methods have achieved impressive per-formance, highlighting the necessity of large-scale and high-quality robotics datasets and strong generation models [8, 30, 41, 10, 37]. Previous works primarily focus on single-hand dexterous grasping, including grasp synthesis [20, 19] by force-closure, and grasp generation by data-driven generative models [36, 13, 25]. However, objects in the real world span diverse sizes and geometries, imposing limitations on single-hand grasping and highlighting the critical role of bimanual dexterous grasping. Currently, several recent studies have explored data syn-thesis for bimanual dexterous grasping [26, 17], primarily by extending single-hand grasp pipelines to the bimanual setting. However, these dataset still focus on objects of limited size ranges and fail to fully leverage the advantages of biman-ual manipulation for handling objects with diverse scales. Meanwhile, we observe that both directly transferring state-of-the-art single-hand methods or applying existing bimanual methods perform poorly on objects with diverse geometries and scales. We attribute this to the dual challenges of varied object sizes and enlarged bimanual search spaces: the number of initialization candidates grows quadratically, and the subse-quent force-closure optimization occurs in a high-dimensional space, significantly reducing both efficiency and grasp quality. In this work, we introduce BiDexGrasp for coordinated bimanual dexterous grasping of objects with diverse sizes and geometries. First, we construct a large-scale, high-quality bimanual dexterous grasp dataset using a novel and effec-tive two-stage data synthesis pipeline. Second, we propose a bimanual-coordinated and geometry-size-adaptive grasp gen-eration framework that learns from this dataset, capable of producing high-quality grasp poses for diverse unseen objects. For the dataset construction, we propose a novel bimanual dexterous grasp synthesis pipeline for effective and high-quality dataset construction. The motivation is to tackle the challenges: the larger action space leads to increased com-plexity and reduced efficiency. To improve the efficiency, we introduce an efficient bimanual region-constraint grasp initial-ization strategy to obtain coordinated bi-grasp initializations with physically feasible potential. To improve the quality, we propose a decoupled force-closure grasp optimization strategy, which separates the force-closure of each hand. This decou-pling not only reduces the overall optimization complexity, but also ensures that both hands achieve high-quality local grasps. Compared with previous bimanual grasp synthesis pipelines, our method achieves more than 2.8x the success rate and over 30× faster synthesis speed. Using this pipeline, we construct a large-scale and high-quality bimanual dexterous grasp dataset containing 6,351 objects with diverse geometries and scales and 9.7 million grasps, as shown in Tab. I. Based on the dataset, we propose data-driven model, BiDex-Grasp framework, for high-quality grasp generation on diverse unseen objects. The key motivation of this framework is how to achieve bimanual coordination and how to generalize across diverse geometries and sizes. To achieve coordination, we in-troduce a bimanual coordination module to predict coordinated grasp views, to guide the feature extraction and grasp poses generation. To achieve adaptation, we propose a geometry-size-adaptive grasp strategy that generates relative grasp poses conditioned on a size-adaptive grasp anchor and geometry-aware object features. This design reduces the action space and encourages the model to focus on local structures, thereby improving robustness to geometric and scale variations. Extensive simulation and real-world experiments validate our data synthesis pipeline and learned grasp generation framework. The data collection experiments show high quality and good efficiency of our synthesis pipeline. And the model generation experiments in on simulation dataset and physical robots show good performance of our framework. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Bimanul Dexterous Grasp 

Bimanual dexterous grasping is a promising research di-rection that extends grasping to large and heavy objects, yet remains underexplored due to the high dimension of the com-bined degrees of freedom (DOF). Some previous works [39, 3] rely on reinforcement learning, which face challenges in scal-ability and depends on well designed reward functions. Other methods[26, 17] adopt data-driven frameworks by extend-ing single-hand dexterous grasping models to the bimanual setting. However, these approaches are often limited by the availability of high-quality datasets and suboptimal generative architectures. In this work, we address these challenges by constructing a large-scale dataset with high diversity, quality, and practical relevance, and proposing a novel generative framework tailored for bimanual dexterous grasping. 

B. Dexterous Grasp Dataset 

The availability of large-scale and high-quality datasets is crucial for the development of robotic [8, 41, 37, 23]. Previ-ous research on single-hand dexterous grasping has explored energy-based optimization methods [2, 30, 20, 19, 44], en-abling the parallel synthesis of large-scale simulated dexterous grasping data. However, in bimanual scenarios, optimization becomes challenging due to the expanded action space and complex coordination. Current bimanual optimization frame-works [26, 17] struggle with low efficiency and reliance on single-hand demonstrations, resulting in datasets with limited diversity on object geometries and sizes. To overcome these, we introduce a novel pipeline for bimanual dexterous grasp synthesis and present a large-scale dataset that prioritizes diversity, quality, and real-world applicability. 

C. Data-Driven Dexterous Grasp Framework 

Data-driven dexterous grasping frameworks have shown strong generalization to unseen objects [9, 4, 12]. Most exist-ing methods rely on generative models [36, 15, 34], improving TABLE I: Comparison of Dexterous Grasping Datasets                                                       

> Dataset Bimanual Objects Grasp Max Size Size Range Table Arm IK Pre-Grasps Data Indep.
> DexGraspNet [30] ×5355 1.32M 30cm 28cm ×××✓
> BODex [2] ×2397 3.08M 24cm 12cm ✓✓✓✓
> DHAGrasp [17] ✓802 1.30M 30cm 20cm ××××
> BimanGrasp [26] ✓900 0.15M 40cm 20cm ×××✓
> BiDexGrasp ✓6351 9.53M 80cm 50cm ✓✓✓✓

grasp success via richer conditional inputs [32], dedicated training objectives and strategy [22, 31], physical-guided sam-pling [43] and bimanual grasping [26, 28]. However, they limit in the adaptation to diverse object geometries and sizes. In this paper, our framework explicitly models bimanual coordination and object geometry and scale, enabling robust and physically consistent bimanual grasps. III. P RELIMINARIES 

Contact model characterizes the resultant wrench exerted by a grasp on an object. Considering an object O with m

contact points, the local contact mechanics at each point i ∈{1, . . . , m } are modeled as follows: 

Fi = {fi ∈ R3 | 0 ≤ fi, 1 ≤ 1,

q

f 2 

> i, 2

+ f 2 

> i, 3

≤ μf i, 1},

Gi =

 ni di ei

pi × ni pi × di pi × ei



∈ R6×3,

(1) where pi ∈ R3 denotes the contact position and ni ∈ R3

represents the inward-pointing unit surface normal. The vec-tors di, ei ∈ R3 are orthogonal unit tangent vectors such that 

ni = di × ei, and μ is the friction coefficient. For each contact point, Fi represents the discretized friction cone and Gi is the grasp matrix. The local contact force 

fi ∈ F i is mapped to a 6D wrench wi ∈ R6 in the object’s coordinate frame via wi = Gifi and the total wrench w

generated by the grasp is the sum of the individual wrenches from all m contact points, i.e., w = Pmi=1 wi.

Grasp Wrench Space (GWS) , denoted as W, encompasses the set of all possible resultant wrenches that can be exerted on the object. For each contact point i, we define the individual wrench space as Wi = {Gifi | fi ∈ F i}. The aggregate GWS is then constructed via the Minkowski sum of these per-contact wrench spaces W = Lmi=1 Wi.

QP-energy is a differentiable metric designed to evaluate the capability of the current contact state to resist exter-nal disturbances {tj }6 

> j=1

along six orthogonal axes, e.g., 

[±1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0] ⊤. For a fixed contact system {Gi} and dis-turbances {tj }, the QP-Energy Q is calculated as: 

Q ≜

> 6

X

> j=1

min 

> fj, 1,..., fj,m

βtj −

> m

X

> i=1

Gifj,i 

> 2

,

s.t. fj,i ∈ F i,

> m

X

> i=1

fi, 1 ≥ γ, 

(2) where β and γ are two positive hyperparameters. IV. B IDEX GRASP DATASET 

A. Overview 

Problem Definition . Given the object mesh Omash , the goal of grasp data synthesis is to obtain bimanual dexterous grasp poses Gbi = ( Glef t , Gright ) = (( tr , r r , q r ), (tl, r l, q l)) , where 

r and t refer to the rotation and translation of hand wrist, and 

q refers to the joint poses of dexterous hand. 

Object Preparation . For the preparation of objects with sufficient shape and scale diversity, we collect 3D objects from the Objaverse [6] and DexGraspNet [30] datasets. The objects are filtered to remove excessively flat objects that are unsuitable for tabletop grasping. This results in a 6,351 object final set of 2,397 objects from DexGraspNet and 3,954 objects from Objaverse. To expand the scale variation of the experimental objects, each individual object is scaled to 11 discrete sizes, with the size range set from 30 cm to 80 cm. 

Synthesis Pipeline Overview . The pipeline consists of three stages: initialization, optimization, and filtering. First, we employ a fast bimanual constraint–aware grasp initialization strategy to generate grasp candidates with the potential to satisfy physical feasibility of bimanual grasping. Next, adecoupled force-closure–based optimization is performed to optimize the initial candidates into physically valid bimanual grasps. Finally, we provide an arm-reachability analysis to derive kinematically feasible configurations. The synthesis pipeline is built upon the advanced framework proposed in [2], which is implemented on top of cuRobo [29] to enable efficient GPU-parallelized grasp synthesis. 

B. Bimanual region-constraint Grasp Initialization 

Challenges for Bimanual Grasp Initialization . Extending single grasp initialization, which samples uniformly within the object’s convex hull, results in quadratic growth in sampling complexity. We find that most of the random sampled pairs fail to satisfy the bimanual kinematic and coordination constraints of the bimanual system. To address these, we propose a bimanual region-constraint grasp initialization strategy. First, grasping region candidates are efficiently selected based on the grasp wrench space (GWS). Second, initial grasp poses are sampled from the selected regions, enabling both efficient and reliable initialization for subsequent optimization. 

GWS-based Bimanual Grasping Region Selection. This module aims to identify bimanual regions of an object that exhibit the potential to generate stable and physically feasible Object Sets  Region Pairs Candidates            

> IK Filter
> Reachable
> Not Reachable
> Region -based Initialization Decoupled Grasping Optimization
> 𝑸 𝒍𝒆𝒇𝒕 𝑸 𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒉𝒕
> Decoupled
> 𝑬 =𝑸 𝒍𝒆𝒇𝒕 +𝑸 𝒓𝒊𝒈𝒉𝒕 +𝑬 𝒅𝒊𝒔 +𝑬 𝒓𝒆𝒈𝒊𝒐𝒏
> s.t. no collision
> GWS -based Region Selector

Fig. 2: The data synthesis pipeline for bimanual grasping. The GWS-based region selection and region-based grasp initialization aims to obtain grasp candidates with the potential to satisfy physical feasibility. And the decoupled force-closure-based optimization is to refine these initial candidates into physically valid bimanual grasps. bimanual grasps. By leveraging grasp wrench space (GWS) energy, it efficiently filters promising region candidates, sig-nificantly improving the efficiency of the overall pipeline. Specifically, the region selection process consists of four steps. (1) We first apply farthest point sampling (FPS) to select 

Ka = 200 anchors and sample k = 256 points within an 8 cm neighborhood around each anchor to define candidate grasping regions. (2) We exclude concave regions as they are unfavorable for stable grasping and discard region pairs with insufficient inter-region distance to ensure geometric feasibility. (3) For each remaining region pair, we evaluate its grasp stability using the Grasp Wrench Boundary (GWB) estimated by the TDG estimator [1]. Specifically, N = 5 

contact points are sampled per region, and the resulting GWB is represented by a set of boundary wrenches {wk}Mk=1 with 

M = 1000 . To assess robustness against external disturbances, we adopt the same set of six orthogonal disturbance wrenches 

{tj }6 

> j=1

defined in the preliminaries. The stability score is computed as the minimum projection of the GWB onto these disturbance directions: 

s = min  

> 1≤j≤6

max  

> 1≤k≤M

t⊤ 

> j

wk. (3) (4) Finally, we rank region pairs by stability score, and the top Kr = 40 are retained as candidates for grasp initialization. 

Region-based Grasp Initialization. 

Given the selected grasping regions, we generate initial grasp configurations Ginitial for subsequent optimization. Each hand pose is represented by the palm position, orientation, and an in-plane rotation about the palm normal. The palm position is chosen as the point on the dilated object convex hull closest to the grasping region, with the opposite surface normal defining the orientation. The in-plane rotation is determined by a predefined ideal direction for each hand. Finger joint angles are initialized based on local surface curvature, starting from a fully open posture and slightly closing to conform to the object surface. 

Bimanual Feasibility Verification. As a final step, we verify the physical and kinematic feasibility of all initialized bimanual grasp configurations. We first perform collision checking to prevent self-collisions between the two hands as well as collisions with the object and the environment. We then solve inverse kinematics (IK) for both arms to evaluate collision-free reachability. Grasp initializations that fail the above feasibility checks are discarded. 

C. Decoupled Grasping Optimization 

Challenges for Bimanual Grasp Optimization. Biman-ual grasp optimization is inherently challenging due to the increased complexity of the optimization space, leading to a tightly coupled objective that hinders stable and efficient opti-mization. And such coupled objectives may yield unbalanced solutions, in which one hand dominates grasp stability while the other contributes marginally, causing the optimization to converge to suboptimal local minima. 

Decoupled Force Closure To obtain high-quality and physically feasible bimanual grasps, we propose a decoupled optimization strategy based on grasping energy. The key idea is to decompose the bimanual grasp optimization into single-hand energy terms, allowing each hand to focus on establishing stable local contacts with the object. This decoupling not only reduces the optimization complexity, but also discourages imbalanced solutions dominated by a single hand, resulting in improved bimanual grasp quality and convergence stability. Specifically, given an object mesh O, we formulate the over-all optimization problem as follows to optimize the dexterous poses Gbi by minimizing the QP-Energy decoupled into two single-hand energy terms: 

min 

> Gbi

(wQ−lef t Q(Glef t ) + wQ−right Q(Gright )+ 

wdis Edis + wregion Eregion ),

s.t. Gbi  

> min

≤ G bi ≤ G bi 

> max

,

ci,w = FK( Gbi , ci,l ) ∈ O ,

No collision. (4) 

ci,l and ci,w denote the positions of the predefined hand contact point i expressed in the local hand frame and the world frame. In the QP formulation, the grasp matrix is constructed by associating each ci,w with its closest point pi on the object surface, while feasibility is ensured through joint-limit and collision-avoidance constraints covering self-collisions, inter-hand collisions, and hand–object collisions. And we define 

Edis to encourage the contact points on the hands to be close 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 best view 

> 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔 single -view

0 3.1  0 1.1  … 1.9  0 3 0 1 … 2𝐯 𝟏  …𝐯 𝟐  𝐯 𝟑  𝐯 𝟒  𝐯 𝐤 

> 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 single

0 0.1  0 0 … 0

1.1  0 0 2.1  … 0

0 0 0 0 … 0.2 

0.1  0 0.8  0 … 0

> …

0 0.9  0 0 … 1.1 

> ……………

0 0 0 0 … 0

1 0 0 2 … 0

0 0 0 0 … 0

0 0 1 0 … 0

> …

0 1 0 0 … 1                    

> ……………
> 𝑳𝒐𝒔𝒔 bi -view
> 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 𝑏𝑖
> 𝐯 𝟏 ,𝟏 𝐯 𝟏 ,𝟐 𝐯 𝟏 ,𝟑 𝐯 𝟏 ,𝟒 𝐯 𝟏 ,𝐤
> 𝐯 𝟐 ,𝟏 𝐯 𝟐 ,𝟐 𝐯 𝟐 ,𝟑 𝐯 𝟐 ,𝟒 𝐯 𝟐 ,𝐤
> 𝐯 𝟑 ,𝟏 𝐯 𝟑 ,𝟐 𝐯 𝟑 ,𝟑 𝐯 𝟑 ,𝟒 𝐯 𝟑 ,𝐤
> 𝐯 𝟒 ,𝟏 𝐯 𝟒 ,𝟐 𝐯 𝟒 ,𝟑 𝐯 𝟒 ,𝟒 𝐯 𝟒 ,𝐤
> 𝐯 𝐤 ,𝟏 𝐯 𝐤 ,𝟐 𝐯 𝐤 ,𝟑 𝐯 𝐤 ,𝟒 𝐯 𝐤 ,𝐤

…

…

…

…

…

… ……………    

> 𝒗 𝒊 ,𝒋 =𝒇 (𝒗 𝒊 ,𝒗 𝒋 )
> Point Filter
> 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 coordinated bi -views
> 𝒗 𝟐
> 𝒗 𝟒
> 𝒗 𝟐
> 𝒗 𝟒

Point Filter 

Relative Dexterous 

Grasp Diffusion 

> 𝑥 1
> 𝑦 1
> 𝑧 1
> 𝑥 2
> 𝑦 2
> 𝑧 2
> 𝑥 3
> 𝑦 3
> 𝑧 3
> 𝑥 4
> 𝑦 4
> 𝑧 4
> 𝑥 5
> 𝑦 5
> 𝑧 5
> 𝑥 6
> 𝑦 6
> 𝑧 6
> 𝑥 𝑘
> 𝑦 𝑘
> 𝑧 𝑘
> …

Grasp View 

Object Point Cloud 

Noise Hand Pose    

> View Feature Extractor
> view 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝐯 𝟐 𝐯 𝟒

Bimanual Coordination Module 

Geometry -Adaptive Feature 

Grasp based on Scale -Adaptive Anchor   

> global
> 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠 local 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠

Fig. 3: BiDexGrasp Framework. Given the input object point cloud and pre-defined grasp view, the framework first predicts a pair of coordinated grasp views for the two hands by bimanual coordination module. Based on this view, we extract geometry-adaptive object feature and determine the scale-adaptive grasp. Then the relative dexterous grasp diffusion is employed to predict relative dexterous grasp form the grasp anchor. to the corresponding points on the object surface: 

Edis =

> m

X

> i=1

(|| ci,w − pi|| )2. (5) We further introduce a region consistency term Eregion to keep the contact points close to the contact regions identified during initialization, thereby promoting coordinated bimanual grasping: 

Eregion =

> m

X

> i=1

ϕ(di), (6) where the effective distance di from the i-th hand contact point to the contact region R is defined as 

di = min 

> r∈R

∥ci,w − r∥, (7) and ϕ(·) is a piecewise penalty function given by 

ϕ(d) = 



0, d ≤ a, H

 d − ab − a



(d − a), a < d ≤ b, d − a, d > b, 

(8) with a denoting a distance threshold, b = 2 a defining the transition bandwidth, and H(t) = 3 t2 − 2t3 being a cubic Hermite interpolation function. 

D. Kinematics-Aware Arm-Hand Configuration Synthesis 

To demonstrate the practical feasibility of the synthesized grasps, our framework supports solving the inverse kinematics (IK) for wrist poses, enabling a smooth transition from floating grasps to reachable tabletop configurations. To avoid collisions and facilitate force application, we first synthesize a pre-grasp pose Gbi pre , maintaining a contact distance of 1cm, following [2]. Subsequently, we compute a squeeze pose as the execution target: Gbi squ = 2 ·G bi −G bi 

> pre

. Finally, we generate the arm joint trajectories from pre-grasp to squeeze and lift. V. B IDEX GRASP FRAMEWORK 

Problem definition. To learn the generable bi-manual dexterous grasp, we design a data-driven generation model. Specifically, given the object point cloud Opc , the framework aims to generate the bi-manual dexterous grasp poses Gbi .

Challenge in bimanual grasping. Bimanual grasp genera-tion introduces two key challenges. (1) Bimanual coordination :Bimanual hands must collaboratively target optimal grasp view to ensure global stability while avoiding inter-hand collisions. (2) Adaptation across object geometries and sizes : The vast diversity in object sizes and geometries greatly hinders effi-cient model learning, increasing the difficulty of object feature extraction and expanding the action space simultaneously. 

Model overview. To address these challenges, we pro-pose BiDexGrasp as shown in Fig. 5, to achieve bimanual-coordinated and geometry-size-adaptive grasp generation: (1) bimanual coordination module that explicitly models biman-ual hand relationships via coordinated-view prediction; (2) 

geometry-size-adaptive grasp generation strategy to improve the generation ability across object geometries and sizes by adaptive grasp anchors. Specifically, the bimanual coordination module first predicts coordinated grasp views. Based on these views, the model then determines the adaptive grasp base on the object’s bounding sphere and generates relative dexterous poses from the grasp anchor. 

A. Bimanual Coordination Module. 

To explicitly model bimanual coordination, we first estimate coordination-aware grasping views to guide subsequent grasp prediction. The module first predicts the most promising view as the primary grasping view, and predicts the second view that is most compatible with the primary view. Specifically, we uniformly sample K discrete approach di-rections on the object-centered bounding sphere to construct a candidate view set V = {vi}Ki=1 , which allows view estimation to be formulated as a view probabilistic regression. To predict the primary view, we introduce K learnable view embeddings 

vemb i to extract view features Fview by cross-attention: vi =Attn( vemb i , Fo, Fo), where Fglobal are point features extracting by PointNet++ [24]. To predict the second view, we model interactions between the primary view and the remaining candidate views to construct bi-view features by a MLPs layer: 

vbi i,j = MLP  cat (vemb i , vemb j , vemb i − vemb j , vemb i ⊙ vemb j ).

These features are used to predict single view and bi-view probabilistic pi and pbi i,j , which is trained by the L2 losses: 

Lsingle-view = 1

K

> K

X

> i=1

(pi − yi)2, (9) 

Lbi-view = 1

K2

> K

X

> i,j K

X

> j=1

(pbi i,j − ybi i,j )2. (10) The probabilities ground-truth yi and ybi i,j are computed from the distribution of successful grasps for each object in dataset. For single-view, we assign each grasp to the nearest predefined candidate view, then count the number of grasps associated with each view and normalize these counts to form a probability. Similarly, the bi-view ground-truth probabilities are obtained by considering pairs of grasps. Each grasp pair is mapped to the nearest candidate view pair, and the counts are normalized over all candidate pairs to produce a probability ground-truth. 

B. Geometry-size-adaptive grasp generation strategy 

Scale-Adaptive Grasp Anchor To improve adaptability to object size, we formulate the grasp wrist prediction as a relative pose (∆ t, ∆r) prediction with respect to a grasp anchor ganchor = ( tanchor , r ancho ), which is adapted to the size of the object. 

tpred = tanchor + ∆ t, rpred = ranchor ⊕ ∆r. (11) 

Fig. 4: The visualization of grasp view. And scale-adaptive anchor can be determined on the minimal bounding sphere. The adaptive grasp anchor is determine dynamically according to the grasp view and object point cloud. Specifically, each pre-dicted view intersects with minimum bounding sphere surface, producing an grasp anchor. This anchor-based formulation converts the original absolute pose prediction problem into a relative regression task, significantly reducing the search space of grasps and improve the adaptation to object scale. 

Geometry-Adaptive Object Feature To improve adaptabil-ity to object geometry, we extract local geometric features around each predicted grasp anchor, as global features may be dominated by irrelevant structures. Specifically, the global point cloud is first upsampled into Kp representative points using farthest point sampling (FPS). For each predicted grasp anchor, features are then aggregated from its Kc-nearest neigh-bors (KNN). This local feature Flocal captures fine-grained surface geometry around potential contact regions while filter-ing out distant or grasp-irrelevant structures, which facilitates geometry-adaptive grasp generation. Finally, the local features, view features, and global features are concatenated along the token dimension to form the final object feature representation. 

Fga −obj = Concat  Flocal , Fview , Fglobal 

. (12) 

Relative Dexterous Grasp Diffusion We propose a relative dexterous grasp diffusion to generate bimanual relative wrist poses (∆ tbi , ∆rbi ) and dexterous joint poses qbi , based on the scale-adaptive grasp anchor ganchor = ( tanchor , r anchor )

and geometry-adaptive object feature Fga −obj . We adopt the DDPM sampling process [11], which can be formalized as follows: 

pθ (Gbi,rela  

> 0: T

| Fga-obj ) = p(Gbi,rela  

> T

)

×

> T

Y

> t=1

pθ



Gbi,rela  

> t−1

Gbi,rela  

> t

, Fga-obj 



, (13) where Gbi,rela = (∆ tbi , ∆rbi , q bi ), and p(Gbi,rela ) is modeled as a Gaussian distribution. During training, we apply L2 losses separately to the translation, rotation, and joint parameter regressions. In addition, we incorporate a Chamfer loss [7] to explicitly supervise the hand geometry. We further introduce a physics-based loss to penalize hand–object penetration as well as intra- and inter-hand self-penetration, while encour-aging non-penetrating contact. All details could be found in Fig. 5: The visualization of our datasets, demonstrating stable bimanual grasping of objects with varying geometries and sizes. TABLE II: Performance comparison of dual-arm grasping on DexGraspNet and Objaverse datasets.                                                          

> Method SUC ↑S↑PD ↓SPD ↓CDC ↓D↓
> SUC-F SUC-L SUC-A
> DexGraspNet
> BimanGrasp [26] 26.8 ––0.16 1.52 0.26 1.87 0.150
> Ours(Float) 75.84 ––6.73 0.17 0.02 0.59 0.190 Ours(TableTop) 77.11 80.83 71.34 6.87 0.15 0.02 0.52 0.165
> Objaverse
> BimanGrasp [26] 30.21 ––0.16 0.87 0.23 1.38 0.156
> Ours(Float) 70.82 ––4.55 0.20 0.04 0.67 0.180 Ours(TableTop) 62.41 70.41 62.40 5.10 0.20 0.05 0.67 0.158

supplementary. 

L = λsingle-view Lsingle-view + λbi-view Lbi-view + λpara Lpara 

+ λchamfer Lchamfer + λphysic Lphysic . (14) VI. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experiment settings 

Data synthesis. Data synthesis evaluation is conducted in MuJoCo simulation using the Shadow Hand. The tangential and torsional friction coefficients are set to 0.6 and 0.02, respectively, with gravity fixed at 9.8 m /s2 and object den-sity at 2.5 kg /m3. We randomly sample 1,000 objects from DexGraspNet and Objaverse, respectively, which is evaluated under six scaling factors (0.15 to 0.40 with a step size of 0.05), resulting in 12,000 unique scaled instances. For each instance, we synthesize five grasps, yielding a total of 60,000 grasps per method. To ensure consistency, the pre-grasp and squeeze poses for BimanGrasp are derived by translating the palm by ±1, cm and perturbing the finger joints (excluding lateral abduction) by ±0.1, rad .

Generation framework . The generation framework evalu-ation is conduct on the subset of our tabletop dataset, which contains only objects from DexGraspNet. The dataset consists of 2,397 objects, which are randomly split into training and test sets with a 4:1 ratio, resulting in 3,112,117 training grasps. During evaluation, for each test object, we generate three grasps for every object pose and scale, yielding a total of 139,956 grasps, which are evaluated under the same simulator settings as the data generation pipeline. 

B. Implements details 

Data synthesis. 

We set wQ-left = 1000 , wQ-right = 1000 , wdis = 100 and 

wregion = 50 .Our dataset is generated with eight NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs, with 40 parallel worlds per GPU, each containing 20 grasps for a given tabletop pose of a scaled object. 

Generation Framework. 

We set K = 16 , Kp = 256 and Kc = 16 . For the comparison experiments, we train models on the training dataset for 5 epochs. For the ablation studies, models are trained for 20 epochs on a subset that includes all object scales but only a single tabletop pose per object. Throughout training, we optimize the model using the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 128 and a weight decay of 1.0×

10 −4. The initial learning rate is set to 1.0×10 −4 and decayed to 1.0 × 10 −5 following a cosine learning rate schedule [21]. All experiments are implemented in PyTorch and conducted on a single RTX 4090 GPU. TABLE III: Ablation study of our data synthesis pipeline.                          

> Method SUC-L SUC-A SGS PD SPD Baseline 28.33 12.89 2.06 0.18 0.08 + R 44.43 39.79 2.80 0.13 0.03 + R + Dc 57.66 49.52 3.96 0.15 0.03
> + R + Dc + Ps 80.83 71.34 5.55 0.15 0.03

TABLE IV: Performance comparison of our generation frame-work with State-of-the-art methods.                          

> Method SUC-L ↑PD ↓SPD ↓CDC ↓D↓
> SceneDiffuser [13] 15.17 3.29 0.11 3.79 0.174 DGTR [35] 41.45 2.24 0.13 3.02 0.201
> Ours 66.78 1.53 0.01 2.32 0.197

C. Evaluation metrics 

Following [2], we use these metrics to evaluate the data synthesis pipeline and generation framework. 

Grasp Success Rate (SUC) (%) measures the percentage of successful grasps in simulation. The hand executes a grasp from the pre-grasp pose Gbi pre to the squeeze pose Gbi squ . A grasp is considered successful if the object’s translation and rotation remain within 5 cm and 15° for at least 3s after execution. SUC is evaluated under three settings: 

SUC-F : force-closure success under external disturbances along six orthogonal directions; SUC-L : lift success in a tabletop scenario with a floating hand; SUC-A : lift success in a tabletop scenario with an arm-controlled hand. 

Speed (S) and Success Generation Speed (SGS) (grasps/s) measures the number of raw grasps and successful grasps syn-thesized per second, which is evaluated on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU, while the baseline speeds are cited from their original reports. 

Penetration Depth (PD) (unit: cm) measures the maximum intersection distance between the object and the hand. 

Self-Penetration Depth (SPD) (unit: cm) is defined as the maximum penetration distance among all hand collision meshes, including both intra- and inter-hand self-penetrations, while ignoring collisions between neighboring links. 

Contact Distance Consistency (CDC) (unit: cm) measures the range between the maximum and minimum signed con-tact distances across all fingers, reflecting the uniformity of finger–object contacts and being invariant to penetration. 

First Variance Ratio (D) (%) is the explained variance ratio of the first principal component from PCA, quantifying the concentration of bimanual grasp distributions. 

D. Data synthesis experiments 

Comparison results. We compare our approach with Bi-manGrasp, the only publicly available open-source biman-ual grasp synthesis pipeline. As BimanGrasp is restricted to floating-base grasp generation, we evaluate our method in both floating and tabletop settings to ensure a fair comparison while demonstrating practical feasibility. TABLE V: Ablation study of Our Generation Framework.                                

> Configs Metrics
> BCM GAF SAGA SUC-L ↑PD ↓SPD ↓CDC ↓×××41.17 2.25 0.01 2.87
> ×✓✓44.68 2.28 0.01 2.96
> ✓✓×52.74 2.05 0.02 2.82
> ✓✓✓61.93 1.73 0.02 2.56

Fig. 6: The visualization of dexterous grasping generated by our framework in simulation dataset. Tab. II shows that our bimanual data synthesis pipeline significantly outperforms prior work in both grasp success rate (SUC) and synthesis speed ( S). On DexGraspNet, our method increases the success rate by roughly 2.8× under both floating-hand and tabletop settings, regardless of whether robot arms are considered, while achieving a 40× speedup in synthesis. On Objaverse, which features more complex object geometries, our method similarly demonstrates strong grasp success rates alongside high synthesis efficiency. 

Ablation Study. Tab. III shows the ablation study for each component of our synthesis pipeline. The baseline is a straightforward extension of BoDex [2] from the single-hand setting to a bimanual setup. The results show that R (Region initialization), Dc (decoupled force-closure) and Ps (pre-grasp strategies) all contribute to improving the grasp success rate (SUC-L and SUC-A) and synthesis speed (SGS). 

E. Generation framework experiments 

Comparison results. Tab. IV reports the performance of our method against recent state-of-the-art approaches. Our approach achieves the highest grasp success rate (SUC) while maintaining the lowest object penetration (PD) and self-penetration (SPD), demonstrating precise and stable grasps. Although the grasp diversity (D) is slightly lower, this is a trade-off can be accepted since our task primarily emphasizes grasp success. Overall, our method consistently outperforms existing methods in generating physically feasible and reliable grasps, and the visualization in Fig. 6 also supports it. 

Ablation study. Tab. V shows the effectiveness of each component in our framework. The baseline (first row) is a straightforward DDPM-based bimanual grasp generation baseline. Incorporating the Bimanual Coordination Module (BCM) significantly improves grasp success rate, highlight-ing its importance for coordinated dual-hand grasps. The Geometry-Adaptive Feature (GAF) enhances adaptation to local object geometry, while the Scale-Adaptive Grasp Anchor TABLE VI: Inference time comparison. Our method achieves a good balance between model performance and efficiency.           

> Method Average Inference Time (s) Success Rate-Lift(%) Baseline 1.21 ±0.03 41.17 Ours 1.67 ±0.05 61.93

TABLE VII: The grasp success rate of our framework in the real world experiments.           

> Suc. 100.0 100.0 100.0 66.7 50.0
> Suc. 100.0 83.3 66.7 66.7 33.3

(SAGA) improves adaptation to object scale, together boosting SUC and stabilizing grasps (lower SPD and CDC). The full configuration achieves the best performance, demonstrating the complementary contributions of each component. 

F. Efficiency analysis of Framework 

To further evaluate our generation framework, we conduct ablation studies on inference time. We measure the inference time of a single batch with batch size 64 and compare our method against the DDPM-Baseline (removes the BCM, GAF and SAGA component). To reduce measurement variance, we run each experiment for five epochs and report the mean and standard deviation. As shown in Table VI, and the results indicate that our method significantly improves the success rate at the cost of only a modest increase in inference time. 

G. Visualization of other dexterous hands 

Our data synthesis pipeline is not limited to a specific hand model and can be naturally extended to other dexterous hands. Fig. 8 visualizes grasp samples generated by applying our pipeline to the Leap Hand [27], demonstrating the general-ity of the proposed method across different dexterous hand embodiments. 

H. Failure Case Analysis 

As illustrated in Fig. 7 , failure cases primarily manifest as physical instability. Minor object penetration or floating grasps may occur when the generative model fails to perfectly balance the penetration penalty and contact supervision. Furthermore, as demonstrated in the rightmost case, a small number of objects undergo lateral sliding due to insufficient force closure, resulting in grasp failure. 

I. Real-World Experiments 

In real world experiments, the robot hardware is set in two different hands, Briainco hand with Piper arm and Inspire hand with Untree G1 robots as shown in Figure 9. We use a Realsense depth camera to capture RGB-D observations. Then the object mesh is reconstructed using Hyper3D [14], 

Fig. 7: The visualization of failure cases in the generation results of our framework. We find that the common failure cases are caused by object-hand penetration and non-contact. 

Fig. 8: The visualization of the LeapHand grasp poses synthe-sized by our data synthesis pipeline, showing that our synthesis pipeline can be used for different dexterous hands. RealSense D435     

> Inspire Hands
> BrainCo Hands
> Piper Arms
> Unitree G1
> RealSense L515 Object Set

Fig. 9: The visualization of real world hardware platform and the objects used in experiments. with its scale determined by aligning the bounding box of the partial object point clouds. The reconstructed mesh is then sampled to obtain the object point cloud, which is fed into our generation framework to produce Shadow Hand poses. These poses are subsequently retargeted to the Briainco or Inspire hand using a hand-object consistent retargeting scheme. The robotic arms reach the dexterous wrists 6-DoF poses via motion planning. Further implementation details are provided in the supplementary material. The experiment results in conducted on unseen real-world objects of various sizes and geometries, performing six grasp attempts for each object under different dexterous hands. The experimental results in Table VII show that, by learning from the proposed dataset, our framework can generate high-quality bimanual dexterous grasps. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we propose BiDexGrasp, a comprehensive solution to advance bimanual dexterous grasping through both large-scale dataset and learning-based framework. The proposed bimanual grasp synthesis pipeline can effectively produces physically feasible and high-quality grasp anno-tations via region-based initialization and decoupled force-closure optimization. Using this pipeline, we build a large-scale dataset containing 6,351 diverse objects and 9.7 mil-lion annotated bimanual grasps. Based upon this dataset, we proposed a bimanual-coordinated and geometry-size-adaptive grasp generation framework that explicitly models inter-hand coordination and improves adaptability to object geometry and scale. Extensive experiments in simulation and real-world settings demonstrate that our data synthesis pipeline significantly improves efficiency and quality, while our gen-eration framework achieves coordinated and high-success-rate bimanual dexterous grasps across diverse objects. We hope BiDexGrasp will promote future research on scalable, generalizable, and physically grounded bimanual dexterous grasping and manipulation. REFERENCES 

[1] Jiayi Chen, Yuxing Chen, Jialiang Zhang, and He Wang. Task-oriented dexterous grasp synthesis via differen-tiable grasp wrench boundary estimator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13586 , 2023. [2] Jiayi Chen, Yubin Ke, and He Wang. Bodex: Scalable and efficient robotic dexterous grasp synthesis using bilevel optimization. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 01–08. IEEE, 2025. [3] Yuanpei Chen, Yiran Geng, Fangwei Zhong, Jiaming Ji, Jiechuang Jiang, Zongqing Lu, Hao Dong, and Yaodong Yang. Bi-dexhands: Towards human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(5):2804–2818, 2023. [4] Zeyuan Chen, Qiyang Yan, Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Jiyao Zhang, Zihan Ding, Jinzhou Li, Yaodong Yang, and Hao Dong. Clutterdexgrasp: A sim-to-real system for general dexterous grasping in cluttered scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14317 , 2025. [5] Yu Cui, Yujian Zhang, Lina Tao, Yang Li, Xinyu Yi, and Zhibin Li. End-to-end dexterous arm-hand vla policies via shared autonomy: Vr teleoperation augmented by autonomous hand vla policy for efficient data collection. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00139 , 2025. [6] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 13142–13153, 2023. [7] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. A point set generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 605– 613, 2017. [8] Hao-Shu Fang, Chenxi Wang, Minghao Gou, and Cewu Lu. Graspnet-1billion: A large-scale benchmark for general object grasping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 11444–11453, 2020. [9] Hao-Shu Fang, Hengxu Yan, Zhenyu Tang, Hongjie Fang, Chenxi Wang, and Cewu Lu. Anydex-grasp: General dexterous grasping for different hands with human-level learning efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16420 , 2025. [10] Jiawei He, Danshi Li, Xinqiang Yu, Zekun Qi, Wenyao Zhang, Jiayi Chen, Zhaoxiang Zhang, Zhizheng Zhang, Li Yi, and He Wang. Dexvlg: Dexterous vision-language-grasp model at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02747 ,2025. [11] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [12] Linyi Huang, Hui Zhang, Zijian Wu, Sammy Christen, and Jie Song. Fungrasp: functional grasping for diverse dexterous hands. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,2025. [13] Siyuan Huang, Zan Wang, Puhao Li, Baoxiong Jia, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, Wei Liang, and Song-Chun Zhu. Diffusion-based generation, optimization, and planning in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16750–16761, 2023. [14] Hyper3D. Hyper3d: Ai-powered 3d model generator, 2024. URL https://hyper3d.ai/. [15] Hanwen Jiang, Shaowei Liu, Jiashun Wang, and Xiao-long Wang. Hand-object contact consistency reasoning for human grasps generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 11107–11116, 2021. [16] Kailin Li, Puhao Li, Tengyu Liu, Yuyang Li, and Siyuan Huang. Maniptrans: Efficient dexterous bimanual ma-nipulation transfer via residual learning. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Confer-ence , pages 6991–7003, 2025. [17] Quanzhou Li, Zhonghua Wu, Jingbo Wang, Chen Change Loy, and Bo Dai. Dhagrasp: Synthesizing affordance-aware dual-hand grasps with text instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22175 , 2025. [18] Yuhao Lin, Yi-Lin Wei, Haoran Liao, Mu Lin, Chengyi Xing, Hao Li, Dandan Zhang, Mark Cutkosky, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Typetele: Releasing dexterity in teleoper-ation by dexterous manipulation types. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01857 , 2025. [19] Min Liu, Zherong Pan, Kai Xu, Kanishka Ganguly, and Dinesh Manocha. Deep differentiable grasp planner for high-dof grippers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.01530 ,2020. [20] Tengyu Liu, Zeyu Liu, Ziyuan Jiao, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Synthesizing diverse and physically stable grasps with arbitrary hand structures using differentiable force closure estimator. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(1):470–477, 2021. [21] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983 , 2016. [22] Jiaxin Lu, Hao Kang, Haoxiang Li, Bo Liu, Yiding Yang, Qixing Huang, and Gang Hua. Ugg: Unified generative grasping. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 414–433. Springer, 2024. [23] Yao Mu, Tianxing Chen, Shijia Peng, Zanxin Chen, Zeyu Gao, Yude Zou, Lunkai Lin, Zhiqiang Xie, and Ping Luo. Robotwin: Dual-arm robot benchmark with generative digital twins (early version). In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 264–273. Springer, 2024. [24] Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [25] Lin Shao, Fabio Ferreira, Mikael Jorda, Varun Nambiar, Jianlan Luo, Eugen Solowjow, Juan Aparicio Ojea, Ous-sama Khatib, and Jeannette Bohg. Unigrasp: Learning a unified model to grasp with multifingered robotic hands. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 5(2):2286–2293, 2020. [26] Yanming Shao and Chenxi Xiao. Bimanual grasp syn-thesis for dexterous robot hands. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [27] Kenneth Shaw, Ananye Agarwal, and Deepak Pathak. Leap hand: Low-cost, efficient, and anthropomor-phic hand for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06440 , 2023. [28] Kenneth Shaw, Yulong Li, Jiahui Yang, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Ray Liu, Haoyu Xiong, Russell Mendonca, and Deepak Pathak. Bimanual dexterity for complex tasks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13677 , 2024. [29] Balakumar Sundaralingam, Siva Kumar Sastry Hari, Adam Fishman, Caelan Garrett, Karl Van Wyk, Valts Blukis, Alexander Millane, Helen Oleynikova, Ankur Handa, Fabio Ramos, et al. curobo: Parallelized collision-free minimum-jerk robot motion generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17274 , 2023. [30] Ruicheng Wang, Jialiang Zhang, Jiayi Chen, Yinzhen Xu, Puhao Li, Tengyu Liu, and He Wang. Dexgrasp-net: A large-scale robotic dexterous grasp dataset for general objects based on simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02697 , 2022. [31] Yi-Lin Wei, Jian-Jian Jiang, Chengyi Xing, Xian-Tuo Tan, Xiao-Ming Wu, Hao Li, Mark Cutkosky, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Grasp as you say: Language-guided dexter-ous grasp generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:46881–46907, 2024. [32] Yi-Lin Wei, Mu Lin, Yuhao Lin, Jian-Jian Jiang, Xiao-Ming Wu, Ling-An Zeng, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Af-forddexgrasp: Open-set language-guided dexterous grasp with generalizable-instructive affordance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07360 , 2025. [33] Yi-Lin Wei, Zhexi Luo, Yuhao Lin, Mu Lin, Zhizhao Liang, Shuoyu Chen, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Om-nidexgrasp: Generalizable dexterous grasping via foun-dation model and force feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23119 , 2025. [34] Zhenyu Wei, Zhixuan Xu, Jingxiang Guo, Yiwen Hou, Chongkai Gao, Zhehao Cai, Jiayu Luo, and Lin Shao. D (r, o) grasp: A unified representation of robot and ob-ject interaction for cross-embodiment dexterous grasping. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01702 , 2024. [35] Guo-Hao Xu, Yi-Lin Wei, Dian Zheng, Xiao-Ming Wu, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Dexterous grasp transformer. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17933–17942, 2024. [36] Yinzhen Xu, Weikang Wan, Jialiang Zhang, Haoran Liu, Zikang Shan, Hao Shen, Ruicheng Wang, Haoran Geng, Yijia Weng, Jiayi Chen, et al. Unidexgrasp: Universal robotic dexterous grasping via learning diverse proposal generation and goal-conditioned policy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4737–4746, 2023. [37] Jianglong Ye, Keyi Wang, Chengjing Yuan, Ruihan Yang, Yiquan Li, Jiyue Zhu, Yuzhe Qin, Xueyan Zou, and Xiaolong Wang. Dex1b: Learning with 1b demon-strations for dexterous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.17198 , 2025. [38] Haoqi Yuan, Ziye Huang, Ye Wang, Chuan Mao, Chaoyi Xu, and Zongqing Lu. Demograsp: Universal dexterous grasping from a single demonstration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22149 , 2025. [39] Hui Zhang, Sammy Christen, Zicong Fan, Luocheng Zheng, Jemin Hwangbo, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Artigrasp: Physically plausible synthesis of bi-manual dexterous grasping and articulation. In 2024 Interna-tional Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , pages 235–246. IEEE, 2024. [40] Hui Zhang, Zijian Wu, Linyi Huang, Sammy Christen, and Jie Song. Robustdexgrasp: Robust dexterous grasp-ing of general objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05287 ,2025. [41] Jialiang Zhang, Haoran Liu, Danshi Li, XinQiang Yu, Haoran Geng, Yufei Ding, Jiayi Chen, and He Wang. Dexgraspnet 2.0: Learning generative dexterous grasping in large-scale synthetic cluttered scenes. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. [42] Yifan Zhong, Xuchuan Huang, Ruochong Li, Ceyao Zhang, Zhang Chen, Tianrui Guan, Fanlian Zeng, Ka Num Lui, Yuyao Ye, Yitao Liang, et al. Dexgraspvla: A vision-language-action framework towards general dexterous grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20900 ,2025. [43] Yiming Zhong, Qi Jiang, Jingyi Yu, and Yuexin Ma. Dexgrasp anything: Towards universal robotic dexterous grasping with physics awareness. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 22584–22594, 2025. [44] Ren´ e Zurbr¨ ugg, Andrei Cramariuc, and Marco Hutter. Graspqp: Differentiable optimization of force closure for diverse and robust dexterous grasping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15002 , 2025.