Title: Practical MCTS-based Query Optimization: A Reproducibility Study and new MCTS algorithm for complex queries

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.16474v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 01:24:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# PRACTICAL MCTS-BASED QUERY OPTIMIZATION : A REPRODUCIBILITY STUDY AND NEW MCTS ALGORITHM FOR COMPLEX QUERIES 

Vladimir Burlakov 

Lomonosov Moscow State University 

burlakovvs@my.msu.ru 

Alena Rybakina 

Innopolis University 

Sergey Kudashev 

Innopolis University 

Konstantin Gilev 

Novosibirsk State University 

Alexander Demin 

Ershov Institute of Informatics Systems 

Denis Ponomaryov 

Ershov Institute of Informatics Systems 

Yuriy Dorn 

Lomonosov Moscow State University March 18, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has been proposed as a transformative approach to join-order optimization in database query processing, with recent frameworks such as AlphaJoin and HyperQO claiming to outperform traditional methods. However, the fact that these frameworks rely on learned cost models raises concerns related to generalizability and deployment readiness. This paper presents a comprehensive reproducibility study of these methods, revealing that they often fail to support the claimed performance gains when subjected to diverse workloads. Through an ablation study, we diagnose the root cause of this instability: while the MCTS search strategy is effective, the accompanying learned cost models suffer from severe out-of-distribution generalization errors. Addressing this, we propose a novel MCTS framework. Unlike prior methods that rely on unstable learned components, our approach utilizes the database standard internal cost model, augmented by a new Extreme UCT (Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees) selection policy to navigate the search space more robustly. We benchmark our method against the original AlphaJoin and HyperQO, as well as industry-standard baselines including Dynamic Programming (DP) and Genetic Query Optimization (GEQO), using the well-known Join Order Benchmark (JOB) and the new JOB-Complex benchmark. The results demonstrate that our approach outperforms learned MCTS methods and achieves superiority over a SOTA query optimizer in complex join scenarios on real-world data. We release the full implementation and experimental artifacts to support further research. 

# 1 Introduction 

Efficient join query optimization lies at the core of modern information retrieval (IR) systems that rely on structured data, such as knowledge graphs, relational database management systems (DBMS), and hybrid IR-DBMS architectures. As data grows increasingly complex and interconnected, particularly in domains like web search, e-commerce, and semantic retrieval, the ability to compute multi-relation joins efficiently becomes critical to query response time and system scalability. Poor join order choices can lead to query execution times that are orders of magnitude higher, directly impacting the responsiveness of search applications that depend on structured backends. Advances in join query optimization are not just a backend concern. They are fundamental to building faster, smarter, and more adaptive retrieval systems. 

> arXiv:2603.16474v1 [cs.DB] 17 Mar 2026

A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 In this paper, we carefully reconsider learning-based, specifically MCTS-based, approaches to join order selection and we show that while methods like AlphaJoin [ Zhang et al.(2020) ] and similar techniques have shown promising results, their reproducibility is questionable. We discovered that features of existing MCTS-based query optimizers are not easily reproducible: either because source code is unavailable, or they do not work as expected, or reported performance gains cannot be verified. This motivated us to rigorously evaluate these methods and provide a fully reproducible solution. The main contributions of our research are summarized as follows: • Conclusions on the reproducibility of Prior MCTS Optimizers: We provide a detailed reproducibility analysis of MCTS-based query optimization algorithms known in the literature (e.g., AlphaJoin and others). We analyze whether their claimed performance improvements hold on standard benchmarks and identify key reproducibility issues. • Novel MCTS Algorithm: We propose a novel fully reproducible MCTS-based join optimization algorithm that overcomes the shortcomings of prior works. Our method includes integration with the PostgreSQL database engine and is released with complete source code and documentation. This ensures that our results can be independently verified. • Performance Evaluation on Industrial Benchmark: Using the well known Join Order Benchmark [Leis et al.(2015) ] – a suite of 113 complex join queries on real-world data – we demonstrate that our approach achieves superior performance (in terms of query execution time and plan quality) compared to traditional optimizers and prior MCTS methods on complex queries. We report comprehensive results, thereby providing new insights into which techniques work best for query optimization and which prior assumptions hold true in practice. We also use the new benchmark JOB-Complex [ Wehrstein et al.(2025) ], which is designed for the same IMDb database and thus could be used as an out-of-sample test for learned models trained on JOB. 

# 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Join Order Optimization Problem 

Join Order Optimization (JOO) is a fundamental problem in database query processing, formally defined as the task of determining the optimal sequence of join operations for a set of relations R = {R1, R 2, . . . , R n} mentioned in a query such that the estimated query execution cost is minimized. Given a query Q involving these relations and a set of join predicates P , the optimizer must select a join tree T from the space of all semantically equivalent valid join trees T .Formally, let C : T → R+ be a cost function derived from a specific cost model (in practice, it is a query plan cost estimation model implemented in DBMS which accounts for data selectivity, I/O, CPU resource consumption, and other factors). The optimization objective is to find: 

Topt = arg min  

> T∈T

C(T ) (1) This problem is non-trivial due to the combinatorial explosion of the plan search space and the typical inaccuracy of a cost model (low correlation of cost estimation with the actual plan execution latency). The search space for the JOO problem grows factorially with the number of relations. For a query with n relations, the number of possible left-deep join trees is n!, while the number of bushy trees is given by the Catalan number related formula (2 n−2)! (n−1)! [Garcia-Molina(2008) ]. Consequently, determining the existence of a join order with required properties is known to be NP-hard for general join graphs [ Ibaraki and Kameda(1984) ]. While dynamic programming algorithms for plan search are typically used in industrial DB engines for small values of n (typically n ≤ 6 − 12 ), the problem is computationally intractable for queries involving a large number of joins, necessitating the use of heuristics or randomized algorithms. Another aspect is real metrics related to end-to-end (E2E) database performance. For example, a typical business metric for a DBMS from the user’s point of view is the end-to-end query processing time, including planning and execution. This motivates algorithms and heuristics that sometimes provide query plans far from optimal, but whose complexity scales better with respect to n. We discuss them in the next subsection. 

2.2 Related Work on Join Order Optimization Classical Join Order Optimization Algorithms. The foundational framework for solving the JOO problem was established by [ Selinger et al.(1979) ] in the design of the System R optimizer. This approach utilized dynamic 2A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 programming to construct an optimal plan bottom-up, pruning sub-optimal paths based on cost estimates. To keep optimization time manageable, traditional implementations (like early versions of DB2 and PostgreSQL) restricted the search space to left-deep trees (where the right child of a join is always a base table). While this reduces complexity, it misses potentially optimal plans. This dynamic programming approach remains the gold standard for queries with a small number of joins and is implemented in almost all enterprise level database systems. Although effective for smaller queries, it is not scalable to arbitrary queries. To handle complex queries, classical optimizers switch to heuristic or randomized algorithms. Algorithms such as Greedy Operator Ordering (GOO) [ Fegaras(1998) ] select a pair of relations with the lowest immediate join cost (or highest selectivity) to join next. While fast, they often get trapped in local minima because they make locally optimal choices that may prevent globally optimal structures (like specific sort orders) later in the plan. Systems such as PostgreSQL employ GEQO [Steinbrunn et al.(1997)] when the number of tables exceeds a certain threshold (default is 12). As we mentioned before, classical algorithms do not optimize execution time directly; rather, they optimize the estimated plan cost—a mathematical proxy for runtime. The accuracy of the cost model relies entirely on estimating the number of rows (cardinality) output by each operator. Traditional estimators use histograms and Most Common Value (MCV) lists. To simplify calculations, classical optimizers typically assume that the data distribution is uniform and that predicates on different columns are statistically independent (e.g., assuming WHERE author=’Darvin’ and work=’On the Origin of Species’ are two independent events). Despite their maturity, classical DBMS query optimizers suffer from inherent structural weaknesses that motivate the interest to learning-based methods. First, traditional optimizers are “zero-shot” learners. They possess no memory of execution feedback and cannot learn from their mistakes. Next, the independence assumptions mentioned above frequently fail in real-world data (where correlations are high). This leads to big underestimation of intermediate result sizes. A multi-join estimate can easily be off by orders of magnitude (e.g., estimating 1 row when the reality is 1 million), causing the optimizer to select a Nested Loop Join instead of a Hash Join, leading to catastrophically low DBMS performance. Finally, cost models are rigid formulas that may not reflect the current hardware state (I/O and CPU load). They require manual tuning by database administrators to align with reality. 

AI for Join Order Optimization. Applications of AI-based methods in database systems cover almost every low-level system component of DBMS [Liu et al.(2022)]. Techniques applied to JOO vary from Deep Reinforcement Learning [ Yan et al.(2023) , Chen et al.(2022) ] and the Actor-Critic method [ Xiong et al.(2024) , Qiao et al.(2025b) ] to RAG-based [ Liu et al.(2025) ] and LLM-based [Zhou et al.(2025), Yao et al.(2025), Tan et al.(2025)] query optimization. The limitations of classical query optimizers—specifically their reliance on static cost models and simplified data independence assumptions—have catalyzed a paradigm shift toward Learned Query Optimization (LQO) [ Lehmann et al.(2024) , Qiao et al.(2025a) , Tsesmelis and Simitsis(2022) , Anneser et al.(2023) ]. This methodology integrates Machine Learning (ML) techniques directly into the database kernel, aiming to transform the optimizer from a static, rule-based engine into a dynamic system that adapts to the specific data distribution and workload patterns of the database. The core premise of learned optimization is that the relationship between a query plan and its execution performance is a learnable function. By treating historical query executions as training data, learned optimizers attempt to solve the two fundamental problems of classical optimization: estimation error and search space navigation. Early approaches focused on replacing specific, error-prone components of the traditional optimizer with ML models, such as learned indexes [ Kraska et al.(2018) ], learned cardinality estimation [ Hilprecht et al.([n. d.]) , Kipf et al.(2018) ,Yang et al.(2020)] and learned cost models [Marcus and Papaemmanouil([n. d.])]. Other approaches seek to replace the plan enumeration engine itself. By modeling join order selection as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), these systems utilize Reinforcement Learning (RL) to navigate the search space. Systems like ReJoin [ Marcus and Papaemmanouil(2018) ] and Neo [ Marcus et al.([n. d.]) ] employ Deep Q-Networks (DQN) to iteratively select join candidates. The optimizer receives a “reward” (negative latency) after execution, allowing it to learn which join patterns yield the best performance over time. Although promising, learned optimization faces significant hurdles, primarily regarding training overhead and robustness. ML models can suffer from poor generalization on unseen query templates, leading to unpredictable performance regressions. Hybrid systems like Bao [ Marcus et al.(2021) ] attempt to mitigate this by using ML to steer existing classical optimizers rather than replacing them entirely. 3A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 Inspired by the success of AlphaGo [ Silver et al.(2017) ], methods such as AlphaJoin [ Zhang et al.(2020) ] have been proposed. To balance exploration (trying new join orders) and exploitation (using known good sub-plans), recent work has adapted MCTS for join ordering. Unlike greedy heuristics that commit to local optima, MCTS uses lookahead simulations to estimate the long-term value of a join decision, effectively “learning” the shape of the search space. RTOS [ Yu et al.(2020) ] and HybridQO [ Yu et al.(2022) ] also employ RL or MCTS variants to improve join ordering. LOOPLINE [Xiong et al.(2025)] is a parallel version of MCTS for JOO. 

Impact and Reproducibility Challenges. Unfortunately, the above mentioned learned join optimizers suffer from stability and reproducibility issues. Prior studies note that methods like AlphaJoin and similar RL optimizers often suffer from unpredictable performance and regressions in new settings [ Ammerlaan et al.(2021) , Weng et al.(2024) ]. We discover that some of these algorithms are hard to reproduce: for instance, a complete code or required complex training procedures are not published properly, and even when code is available, the achieved results may not match the published claims. We argue that a reproducibility study is needed to verify which improvements are real and to ensure that such research can be validated and extended by others. In the following section, we explain the focus of our study. 

# 3 Reproducibility Study Methodology 

Selected Algorithms for Reproduction. We focus on AlphaJoin and HyperQO algorithms. Unfortunately, we could not find the source code for the MRQO algorithm. As MRQO employs two learned models, the performance of which depends on many factors, such as data and hyperparameters, reproducing the results for MRQO without source code actually requires the development of a new model. Experimental results would always be questionable since one could argue that degradation/improvement is related to specific implementation. The choice of AlphaJoin for the reproducibility study is justified by the fact that it was a pioneering study with a notable performance and influence on subsequent research. HyperQO is even more well-known in the LQO community and has claimed state-of-the-art results. The code for both algorithms was provided by the authors as a supplementary material to the corresponding papers. In both cases, we encountered some problems. Both algorithms are implemented in Python rather than integrated into a DBMS core. The execution plans they produce are submitted to the database as planner directives (e.g., join-order leading hints) via the pg_hint_plan extension. Consequently, the optimizer decides on the final plan selection and can adjust or ignore the provided hints. Moreover, the usage of extension-level mechanisms, especially when patched or version-specific variants are used, introduces reproducibility risks due to potential incompatibilities across DBMS and extension releases. The AlphaJoin code is written for PostgreSQL 12 and needs adaptation to more recent versions of the DBMS. More importantly, the authors do not provide model weights; therefore, we have to perform the learning phase ourselves. HyperQO has another issue. Its implementation includes the forced use of CUDA. We must eliminate this dependence since modern hardware for storage purposes (at least for databases like PostgreSQL) usually does not include a GPU. Also, since it is a hybrid algorithm that tries to improve some base optimization steps, and in case of failure it falls back to the default plan from the base optimizer, one must carefully extract the value added by HyperQO to the base optimizer. Experiments were conducted using PostgreSQL built from the master branch (February 2026). We also mention parameters used for our algorithm (like MCTS simulation count, etc.), which were possibly tuned based on initial experiments or set to reasonable defaults observed from the reproduction study. 

Benchmark. We use JOB [ Leis et al.(2015) ], a well-known publicly available benchmark consisting of 113 queries based on the IMDb dataset. JOB is chosen because it was specifically designed to stress test join order optimizers and has been used in many recent studies. Both AlphaJoin and HyperQO reported their improvements based on the JOB benchmark. Another benchmark that we use is JOB-Complex [ Wehrstein et al.(2025) ], a new benchmark that uses the same IMDb dataset and the original JOB as a base to propose a rich collection of similar queries. This makes this benchmark a perfect choice to re-evaluate and check out-of-sample performance for AlphaJoin and HyperQO. Since the benchmarks use the same database, both algorithms could be used without any changes. Compared to the original JOB, JOB-Complex is even smaller (30 queries), but each query is specifically designed to be hard. 

Configuration and Metrics. We provide details on the modifications needed to integrate MCTS algorithms into database engines (for example, by replacing or bypassing the selection of the join order of the native optimizer with an 4A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 MCTS algorithm). We log metrics such as query execution time, query planning/optimization time, and the cost of chosen plans. Performance is measured by the total execution time of the query plans and by end-to-end time since the ultimate goal is to reduce query latency. We also note any timeout or fallback policies (e.g., if MCTS search exceeds a time budget, the system might revert to the default optimizer plan). 

Reproducibility Artifacts. In accordance with the SIGIR reproducibility track guidelines, we ensure that all code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce our experiments are available as supplementary materials. For reviewers, we provide an anonymized link to the materials which upon acceptance of the paper will be made fully public. These include our implementations of the prior algorithms and scripts for running JOB and JOB-Complex queries on each system. 

Generalization. In our study, we do not simply replicate prior experiments, but we also generalize and test the methods under new conditions. We evaluate them on a new version of PostgreSQL, on both original (JOB) and new (JOB-Complex) benchmarks. In one of the experiments, we also study the MCTS core algorithm separately from the learned plan evaluation model and use a standard database internal cost model with MCTS for comparison. Finally, we specifically check algorithm performance on queries with a large ( ≥ 12) number of tables to evaluate scalability. 

# 4 Reproducing and re-evaluating MCTS-Based Optimizers 

In this section, we discuss reproducibility artifacts for AlphaJoin and HyperQO algorithms. 

4.1 AlphaJoin 

We reconstruct the AlphaJoin pipeline following the available description and the artifacts released. This includes training the neural network components, configuring the MCTS procedure, and integrating the resulting join-order hints into PostgreSQL. We then tried to evaluate AlphaJoin on the JOB and JOB-Complex workloads. We compare the execution performance observed in our experiments with the claims reported in the AlphaJoin paper. The original work states that AlphaJoin consistently outperforms the PostgreSQL optimizer on JOB queries. In our environment, this claim could not be consistently confirmed. While the training metrics occasionally matched the reported accuracy ranges, the resulting execution plans did not reliably yield lower latency than those produced by PostgreSQL. These discrepancies suggest sensitivity to system version and experimental setup. Several challenges were encountered during reproduction: 

Generator instability. The Java-based data generator repeatedly stalled when executed under certain PostgreSQL configurations (notably after introducing an explicit port setting). This required environmental adjustments before training data could be produced. 

Hint enforcement. To evaluate predicted join orders, we exported leading hints and enforced them via SQL rewriting while fixing planner parameters by setting Grand Unified Configuration (GUC) parameters from_collapse_limit 

and join_collapse_limit to prevent optimizer reordering. This diagnostic intervention was necessary to ensure that predicted join orders were actually executed. 

Execution side effects under forced plans. When inefficient join orders predicted by AlphaJoin were executed under forced conditions, substantial temporary file generation occurred, leading to multi-terabyte disk usage and aborted runs. This behavior was observed within our diagnostic pipeline; however, we cannot conclusively attribute identical effects to the authors’ execution workflow, as enforcement mechanisms were not fully specified. 

Hint representation inconsistencies. Bracketed hint formats triggered PostgreSQL parsing errors. We implemented preprocessing to linearize hint expressions, enabling execution but introducing an additional deviation from the original pipeline. 

Repository usability and documentation. The released repository did not contain a proper README or onboarding documentation describing setup, execution order, or configuration requirements. As a result, the experimental pipeline had to be reconstructed by inspecting code and inferring intended usage, increasing uncertainty about adherence to the authors’ workflow. 5A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 

Training configuration ambiguity. Several hyperparameters (e.g., sampling characteristics and data splits) were not explicitly specified. Alternative configurations were explored, including adjusted learning rates and partial dataset splits, which improved training metrics but did not translate into execution-time gains. 

Feature encoding drift. Regeneration of encoded predicate and query representations altered feature dimensionality, causing incompatibility with provided checkpoints. This required retraining and indicates sensitivity of the architecture to dataset construction details. These factors represent deviations from the original experimental conditions and may partially explain the observed performance differences. For example, due to the ambiguity in hyperparameter selection AlphaJoin cannot easily be deployed on JOB-Complex workload in inference mode. Overall, our evaluation does not confirm the general performance claims attributed to AlphaJoin under our reproduction setting. Although training metrics occasionally aligned with reported values, the learned value network did not consistently predict execution behavior accurately enough to guide superior join-order decisions. In multiple cases, the optimizer selected plans that were inferior to those generated by PostgreSQL. Therefore, we conclude that the reported advantages of AlphaJoin appear highly dependent on environmental conditions and configuration choices and could not be robustly reproduced on the JOB workload in our setup. 

4.2 HyperQO 

The implementation enforces a leading length of two relations when generating join-order hints, effectively recom-mending only a single pairwise decision. While this choice is consistent with the guidance provided by the authors, our experiments indicate that such limited guidance is insufficient to produce meaningful performance improvements on the evaluated workload. Although this strategy may have been effective under earlier optimizer behavior, the increased complexity of modern PostgreSQL planning appears to reduce its impact. Attempts to increase the leading length beyond two relations resulted in substantially longer search times and a sharp increase in computational cost, making the approach impractical within reasonable experimental budgets. In default settings, HyperQO did not produce hints for the JOB-Complex workload. Executing this workload required manual normalization of query aliases to match the naming conventions expected by the implementation, suggesting that alias identifiers are effectively hard-coded within the pipeline. This sensitivity reduces portability across benchmark variants and introduces an additional reproducibility burden. The code released also assumes the presence of NVIDIA GPU hardware. Configuration files require specifying a directory for storing trained models, yet the system does not create this directory automatically; it had to be manually created prior to execution. When absent under default settings, the program failed during model serialization rather than handling the condition gracefully. These implicit hardware and configuration assumptions complicate deployment in CPU-only or minimally provisioned environments. In addition, the end-to-end experimental pipeline proved computationally expensive in practice. The complete execution of training and evaluation was time-consuming, reinforcing the sensitivity of the method to resource availability and limiting rapid iteration during reproduction. The observed performance metrics diverge substantially from those reported in the original work. The total runtime measured for HyperQO, corresponded to an improvement of only about 0.03%, far below the reported reduction from 8.54 h to 6.40 h. Additionally, approximately 86.75% of queries fell back to PostgreSQL execution, leaving only 13.25% executed using hints, and these hint-guided executions provided only marginal average benefit. 

# 5 New MCTS-Based Optimization Algorithm 

In this section, we introduce our novel MCTS-based JOO algorithm, which is based on ideas from [ Huang et al.([n. d.]) ]. We begin with a short recap on MCTS (Fig. 1). MCTS is a general purpose tree search algorithm that iterates over four steps: Selection, Expansion, Simulation, and Backpropagation. Starting at the root node (the current state), the algorithm traverses down the tree by choosing child nodes. The search direction (Selection) is guided by node indices UCT, which estimate node value. Unless the leaf node represents a terminal state, one or more child nodes are created and added to the tree in the Expansion step to represent possible next moves from the current state. From the newly added node, the algorithm performs a "playout" or simulation; usually, it follows a random path to a terminal state. Once the simulation is complete, the result is propagated back up through the nodes selected in phase 1. 6A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 

Figure 1: Monte-Carlo Tree Search Process Scheme MCTS attracted even higher attention after the seminal work [ Silver et al.(2016) ], in which AlphaGo was proposed. General implementations of MCTS typically employ learned models that estimate unknown or terminal nodes; a scheme originally proposed for Markov Decision Processes in [Chang et al.(2005)]. In the context of query optimization, each complete path in MCTS represents a query execution plan; terminal nodes correspond to a feasible query execution plan, and the propagated values are estimated plan costs. Algorithms such as AlphaJoin employ learned plan cost estimation models to assign values to the terminal nodes. The main issue that makes query optimization much harder compared to the game of Go (at least for MCTS with a learned model) is that the game of Go has a static search space, albeit huge, while in query optimization, the search space differs for each query. Thus, questionable performance results for MCTS with learned models for query optimization are somewhat expected. Even if one could achieve good results on benchmarks, having enough computational resources for learning, the practical 7A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 value of such an approach would still remain questionable. Real-life databases change over time, and re-training the estimation model, even for small databases, is computationally demanding and cannot be done in a reasonable time. However, this issue is related to the learned estimation model, not MCTS itself. Being a general purpose tree search algorithm, we believe that MCTS is still a powerful technique for query optimization. We formulate a number of ideas on how to make it practical: • Use the default cost model of a database query optimizer instead of the computationally demanding learned model. While less accurate, query cost models adopted in industrial databases are inexpensive and do not require re-training. • As a randomized heuristic (similar to randomized depth-first search), MCTS performance is very sensitive to initial conditions; i.e., having a good starting point can drastically improve MCTS performance. In query optimization, such a starting point could be provided by the computationally cheap GEQO algorithm. Instead of trying to find a good plan from scratch with a single algorithm (or falling back to GEQO in case MCTS fails, as implemented in HyperQO), one can start with GEQO and use the resulting plan as a starting point in MCTS for future improvements. • Original MCTS uses UCT indexes to evaluate nodes. UCT estimates the average value of a node, taking into account estimation confidence, just like UCB in multi-armed bandits. This is a good strategy for games and problems where the main metric represents the average reward in adversarial conditions. On the other hand, in query optimization, we are mostly interested in an optimal execution plan, and there is no adversary. Thus, the UCT metric could be substituted by the UCT-extreme index [Huang et al.([n. d.])]. We base our work on these insights to construct a practical new version of the MCTS for join optimization (Algorithm 1). One of the key modifications is about the selection policy. In classical MCTS, we can use the standard UCT criterion: UCT j = ¯Xj + c

s

2 ln Nnj

, (2) where ¯Xj is the empirical mean reward of child j, N is the total number of visits to the current node and nj is the number of times child action j has been selected. Instead of this mean-based form, we adopt an UCT-extreme variant: UCT ext  

> j

= ˆQj + 2 c

 ln Nnj

γ

, (3) where ˆQj = max 1≤t≤nj Xj,t and γ – the exploration exponent controlling how aggressively under-visited arms are explored; larger γ means less exploration. Equation (3) replaces the standard mean-based UCB with an extreme variant: instead of the empirical mean ¯Xj , it uses maximum observed reward ˆQj from child j and raises the exploration bonus to the power γ that controls exploration intensity. This targets the global maximum reward rather than the best average. The first stage of Algorithm 1 iterates over all join-graph edges to identify the best starting prefix. Within each seed run, MCTS iterations incorporate evolutionary operators such as mutation and crossover borrowed from genetic programming as state-jumping mechanisms that shift the reward distribution toward higher values. These operators are inherited from the MCTS-4-SR framework on which our implementation is based. This hybrid design combines the structured exploration of MCTS with the distributional advantages of evolutionary search, and can be viewed as a generalization of the GEQO strategy used in PostgreSQL. The second stage then concentrates the full simulation budget on refining the best prefix found in stage one, using the same hybrid MCTS procedure. 

Algorithm implementation and DBMS integration. The prototype implementation is written in Python and interacts with PostgreSQL through the psycopg2 client interface. The algorithm operates as an external control loop: candidate join orders are generated outside the DBMS and injected back into query execution through query rewriting. Specifically, the system constructs optimizer hints with leading directives that encode the proposed join order. These hints are embedded into rewritten SQL statements prior to submission to the database engine. As a result, the PostgreSQL executor is forced to follow the suggested join sequence rather than relying on the search result of the native optimizer. This design allows experimentation with alternative join strategies without modifying the internal optimizer or executor codebase, providing a lightweight and reproducible integration path for evaluating learned or heuristic ordering policies. 8A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 

Algorithm 1: Two-Stage Prefix-Guided MCTS for Left-Deep Join Ordering 

Input :SQL query q, # of pair iterations Tpair , # of main iterations Tmain 

Output : Best left-deep leading expression e∗

Extract aliases A and join edges E from q;Define reward R(e) ← − Cost( e), where Cost( e) is PostgreSQL EXPLAIN total cost after rewriting q to follow leading expression e with join-order forcing; 

bestCost ← +∞, p∗ ← ∅ ;

foreach edge p ∈ E do 

Initialize state s0 ← partial order with prefix p;Initialize MCTS with parameters (gp _rate, mutation _rate, exploration _rate, K, c, γ );

for t ← 1 to Tpair do 

Run one MCTS iteration from s0;

cp ← best cost found from this run; 

if cp < bestCost then 

bestCost ← cp, p∗ ← p;Initialize state s0 ← partial order with prefix p∗;Initialize MCTS with the same parameters; 

for t ← 1 to Tmain do 

Run one MCTS iteration from s0;

e∗ ← best leading expression in the MCTS queue; 

return e∗;

# 6 Experimental Evaluation and Performance Results 

In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of our proposed MCTS optimizer against relevant baselines, focusing on performance on the JOB and JOB-Complex benchmarks. 

6.1 Experimental Setup 

All experiments were conducted on a compute node equipped with an AMD EPYC 9654 (Zen 4) processor providing 96 vCPUs at a base frequency of 2.4 GHz with 192 GB of RAM on Ubuntu24.04 LTS OS. Experiments were conducted using PostgreSQL built from the master branch (February 2026). We also mention any parameters used for our algorithm (like MCTS simulation count, etc.), which were possibly tuned based on initial experiments or set to reasonable defaults observed from the reproduction study. The PostgreSQL-native optimizer (a traditional cost-based optimizer using dynamic programming or GEQO as applicable) represents the baseline of a mature traditional optimizer. AlphaJoin and HyperQO showcase benchmarking MCTS with learned cost estimation models. The primary metric is the query execution time (latency) for each query in JOB and JOB-Complex. 

6.2 Experimental Evaluation Results 

The summary of the experimental results is shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. In both figures, we use the default PostgreSQL optimizer results as the baseline. The "same" means that the quality of the proposed plan (measured in execution time) is the same as of the default plan provided by the PostgreSQL optimizer. Relative performance gaps across larger join workloads are illustrated in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. These plots highlight the potential of the proposed optimizer compared to PostgreSQL and alternative MCTS-based approaches. The improvements shown in Fig. 4 demonstrate reduced latency for queries with ≥ 12 relations and generally outperform alternative MCTS-based approaches. Fig. 5 illustrates performance beyond the traditional JOB workload and shows consistent gains under extended benchmark conditions. The performance results of AlphaJoin on the JOB benchmark are notably less impressive compared to those originally claimed. Moreover, we could not make it work on the JOB-Complex benchmark. JOB-Complex introduces new query templates with different predicate structures and alias naming conventions, which alter the dimensionality and semantics of the encoded feature vectors. Since the model architecture is tightly coupled to the training-time feature schema, 9A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 AlphaJoin HyperQO MCTS Extreme     

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Share of queries (%)
> 99.1%
> 1.8%
> 44.2%
> 92.0% 11.5%
> 0.9% 6.2%
> 44.2%
> Worse Same Better

Figure 2: Distribution of Query Performance Outcomes on JOB applying it to JOB-Complex queries without retraining would produce undefined or meaningless predictions. Retraining, in turn, was not feasible due to the hyperparameter ambiguity and generator instability issues described above. HyperQO showed much more stable performance on the JOB benchmark. On the other hand, an even larger portion of queries is handled by HyperQO’s default optimizer. Only a small portion of the queries (8%) is handled by their learned model. Still, it overall improves the results compared to the PostgreSQL default optimizer. But what about JOB-Complex, i.e. out-of-sample performance? As we can see, HyperQO returned default plans for all (100%) of the new queries. I.e., it failed to show any improvement over the default optimizers. As we can see, our algorithm does not show a stable improvement on the JOB benchmark. For some queries, it performs better, while for others it loses to the default optimizer. However, the results presented in Fig. 5 demonstrate that our algorithm could provide a stable improvement if we implement the same rule that is used in PostgreSQL for the GEQO algorithm. Namely, in PostgreSQL, the GEQO algorithm is applied to large complex queries when the number of tables exceeds the threshold, which corresponds to a barrier when dynamic programming becomes too costly to use. Our algorithm works in the same way. It accelerates queries with ≥ 12 relations and generally outperforms both default optimizers and MCTS-based approaches. This is explained by the fact that our algorithm takes the plan from GEQO (which is a default optimizer for complex queries) as a starting point and improves it. Rare degradation cases are attributed to errors in the default cost model of the PostgreSQL optimizer. Notably, in JOB-Complex, there is a single query for which HyperQO shows a better plan compared to the default optimizer, while it degrades all other queries. 

# 7 Discussion and Lessons Learned 

We have pointed to issues with the reproducibility of methods in learned query optimization which are related to MCTS-based algorithms with learned models. The main issue is that there is no code provided for most of the articles, with only a few exceptions (such as AlphaJoin and HyperQO), which still require efforts to make them run and consistently tune for experimentation. 10 A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 HyperQO MCTS Extreme   

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Share of queries (%)
> 26.7%
> 100.0%
> 13.3%
> 60.0%
> Worse Same Better

Figure 3: Distribution of Query Performance Outcomes on JOB-Complex Typically, the algorithms are implemented out of the DBMS kernel, and proposed plans are fed via query "hints". Thus, it is hard to estimate how practical those algorithms are because, without efficient implementation inside a DBMS core, their overhead may override any possible benefits. Another issue is learning. Our experimental results show that problems could arise for out-of-sample queries even within the same database setup (JOB-Complex vs JOB). However, the currently available benchmarks for query optimization are very small, so there is a possibility that this issue could be mitigated by learning on larger datasets. As we can see, employing learning models instead of default cost models leads to performance degradation. MCTS as a search heuristic for plan optimization could still be valuable if used in the right place. As we show, combining MCTS with default optimizers, when GEQO finds the initial execution plan and MCTS refines it, looks promising, especially for complex queries. As we show in JOB-Complex experiments for queries with ≥ 12 tables, this setup could lead to stable query performance improvement. 

Generality and Limitations. While JOB and JOB-Complex are standard benchmarks for query optimization tasks, they are limited to only a few query samples. This makes our benchmark study both standard from the DBMS community perspective, but also limited (since it includes only one database, i.e., IMDb). Another limitation is that all algorithms are implemented outside the DBMS core. This allows for obtaining query execution time metrics (with forced query hints), but does not allow for consistently measuring E2E time. We acknowledge that our reproduction efforts may not have exhausted all possible configurations and recovery strategies for the evaluated algorithms. It remains possible that, under specific environmental conditions or with additional implementation adjustments not explored in our study, the originally reported results could be reproduced more closely. However, this observation reinforces rather than diminishes the central concern: if reproducing an algorithm’s results requires extensive reverse-engineering of undocumented setup procedures, the scientific value of the contribution is significantly reduced. We therefore urge the community to treat reproducibility not as an afterthought, but as a first-class deliverable. Publishing complete, well-documented, and executable code alongside research papers lowers the barrier for independent verification and ultimately accelerates collective progress in the field. 11 A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 27b 28a 28b 30a 33c 26b 26a 30b 24a 28c 30c 27a 27c 33a 33b 29b 29c 26c 29a 24b 

> Query index
> 60
> 40
> 20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Gap (%)
> -333.1
> -560.5
> -2991.8
> -580.4
> -1539.4
> -3304.2
> -6043.6
> -1856.2
> -5966.5
> -2681.8
> -536.2
> -693.9
> -1199.7
> -1332.1
> -3555.4
> -107.4
> -374.4
> -1114.5
> -696.3
> -634.4
> -55.0
> -161.2
> (PG-AJ)/PG * 100%
> (PG-MCTS Extreme)/PG * 100%

Figure 4: Relative Performance Gap vs PostgreSQL (JOB, ≥ 12 Relations). Abbreviations used throughout the figure: AJ — AlphaJoin latency, PG — PostgreSQL optimizer latency 

# 8 Reproducing our results 

All code needed to reproduce our results is provided in an anonymized git repository https://open-science. anonymous-github.xyz/r/mcts_extreme_query_opt-F855/ .

# 9 Conclusion 

Our study revealed that the claimed benefits of the learned optimizers with MCTS could not be reproduced. The out-of-sample performance of learned query optimizers shows that they do not provide a significant improvement over standard approaches. This is especially true for complex queries. On the other hand, we show that MCTS, as a general randomized search heuristic, could improve execution plan quality when used in collaboration with standard optimizers such as GEQO, especially for hard planning tasks that involve joining 12+ tables. Our two-stage MCTS algorithm demonstrates that it is possible to achieve a significant improvement in plan quality by applying the MCTS search strategy using the default optimizer cost model. Our code, hardware specifications, data, and experimental scripts are publicly available, allowing anyone to reproduce our results and test our approach in new settings. 

# References 

[Ammerlaan et al.(2021)] Remmelt Ammerlaan, Gilbert Antonius, Marc Friedman, HM Sajjad Hossain, Alekh Jindal, Peter Orenberg, Hiren Patel, Shi Qiao, Vijay Ramani, Lucas Rosenblatt, et al . 2021. PerfGuard: deploying ML-for-systems without performance regressions, almost. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 14, 13 (2021), 3362–3375. [Anneser et al.(2023)] Christoph Anneser, Nesime Tatbul, David Cohen, Zhenggang Xu, Prithviraj Pandian, Nikolay Laptev, and Ryan Marcus. 2023. Autosteer: Learned query optimization for any sql database. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 12 (2023), 3515–3527. [Chang et al.(2005)] Hyeong Soo Chang, Michael C Fu, Jiaqiao Hu, and Steven I Marcus. 2005. An adaptive sampling algorithm for solving Markov decision processes. Operations research 53, 1 (2005), 126–139. 12 A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 20 9 21 16 10 27 15 24 30 28 22 5 19 8 18 14 1 2 6 29 26 13 25 3 11 12 7 4 17 23 

> Query index
> 20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> Gap (%)
> (PG-MCTS Extreme)/PG * 100%

Figure 5: Relative Performance Gap vs PostgreSQL (JOB-Complex). Abbreviations used throughout the figure: PG — PostgreSQL optimizer latency, MCTS Extreme — MCTS Extreme optimizer latency [Chen et al.(2022)] Jin Chen, Guanyu Ye, Yan Zhao, Shuncheng Liu, Liwei Deng, Xu Chen, Rui Zhou, and Kai Zheng. 2022. Efficient join order selection learning with graph-based representation. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining . 97–107. [Fegaras(1998)] Leonidas Fegaras. 1998. A new heuristic for optimizing large queries. In International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications . Springer, 726–735. [Garcia-Molina(2008)] Hector Garcia-Molina. 2008. Database systems: the complete book . Pearson Education India. [Hilprecht et al.([n. d.])] Benjamin Hilprecht, Andreas Schmidt, Moritz Kulessa, Alejandro Molina, Kristian Kersting, and Carsten Binnig. [n. d.]. DeepDB: Learn from Data, not from Queries! Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 

13, 7 ([n. d.]). [Huang et al.([n. d.])] Zhengyao Huang, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, Tiannan Xiao, Dina Ma, Zhenyu Ming, Hao Shi, and Yuanhui Wen. [n. d.]. Improving Monte Carlo Tree Search for Symbolic Regression. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .[Ibaraki and Kameda(1984)] Toshihide Ibaraki and Tiko Kameda. 1984. On the optimal nesting order for computing n-relational joins. ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS) 9, 3 (1984), 482–502. [Kipf et al.(2018)] Andreas Kipf, Thomas Kipf, Bernhard Radke, Viktor Leis, Peter Boncz, and Alfons Kemper. 2018. Learned cardinalities: Estimating correlated joins with deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00677 (2018). [Kraska et al.(2018)] Tim Kraska, Alex Beutel, Ed H Chi, Jeffrey Dean, and Neoklis Polyzotis. 2018. The case for learned index structures. In Proceedings of the 2018 international conference on management of data . 489–504. [Lehmann et al.(2024)] Claude Lehmann, Pavel Sulimov, and Kurt Stockinger. 2024. Is Your Learned Query Optimizer Behaving As You Expect? A Machine Learning Perspective. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 17, 7 (2024), 1565–1577. [Leis et al.(2015)] Viktor Leis, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz, Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neumann. 2015. How good are query optimizers, really? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 9, 3 (2015), 204–215. [Liu et al.(2025)] Hanwen Liu, Qihan Zhang, Ryan Marcus, and Ibrahim Sabek. 2025. SEFRQO: A Self-Evolving Fine-Tuned RAG-Based Query Optimizer. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 3, 6 (2025), 1–27. [Liu et al.(2022)] Yu Liu, Hua Wang, Ke Zhou, ChunHua Li, and Rengeng Wu. 2022. A survey on AI for storage. 

CCF Transactions on High Performance Computing 4, 3 (2022), 233–264. 13 A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 [Marcus et al.(2021)] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Nesime Tatbul, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Tim Kraska. 2021. Bao: Making learned query optimization practical. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data . 1275–1288. [Marcus et al.([n. d.])] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Chi Zhang, Mohammad Alizadeh, Tim Kraska, Olga Papaemmanouil, and Nesime Tatbul23. [n. d.]. Neo: A Learned Query Optimizer. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 12, 11 ([n. d.]). [Marcus and Papaemmanouil([n. d.])] Ryan Marcus and Olga Papaemmanouil. [n. d.]. Plan-Structured Deep Neural Network Models for Query Performance Prediction. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 12, 11 ([n. d.]). [Marcus and Papaemmanouil(2018)] Ryan Marcus and Olga Papaemmanouil. 2018. Deep reinforcement learning for join order enumeration. In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Exploiting Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Data Management . 1–4. [Qiao et al.(2025b)] Shaojie Qiao, Chenxu Liu, Nan Han, Kanglei Xu, Ruiwei Gao, and Xindong Wu. 2025b. ACJoin: a Low-latency Multi-table Join Order Selection Model with Minimum Cost Using Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic. IEEE Transactions on Big Data (2025). [Qiao et al.(2025a)] Shao-Jie Qiao, Han-Lin Fan, Nan Han, Lan Du, Yu-Han Peng, Rong-Min Tang, and Xiao Qin. 2025a. Learning database optimization techniques: the state-of-the-art and prospects. Frontiers of Computer Science 19, 12 (2025), 1912612. [Selinger et al.(1979)] P Griffiths Selinger, Morton M Astrahan, Donald D Chamberlin, Raymond A Lorie, and Thomas G Price. 1979. Access path selection in a relational database management system. In Proceedings of the 1979 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data . 23–34. [Silver et al.(2016)] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driess-che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al . 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature 529, 7587 (2016), 484–489. [Silver et al.(2017)] David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al . 2017. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. nature 550, 7676 (2017), 354–359. [Steinbrunn et al.(1997)] Michael Steinbrunn, Guido Moerkotte, and Alfons Kemper. 1997. Heuristic and randomized optimization for the join ordering problem. The VLDB journal 6, 3 (1997), 191–208. [Tan et al.(2025)] Jie Tan, Kangfei Zhao, Rui Li, Jeffrey Xu Yu, Chengzhi Piao, Hong Cheng, Helen Meng, Deli Zhao, and Yu Rong. 2025. Can large language models be query optimizer for relational databases? Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 3, 6 (2025), 1–28. [Tsesmelis and Simitsis(2022)] Dimitris Tsesmelis and Alkis Simitsis. 2022. Database optimizers in the era of learning. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, 3213–3216. [Wehrstein et al.(2025)] Johannes Wehrstein, Timo Eckmann, Roman Heinrich, and Carsten Binnig. 2025. JOB-Complex: A Challenging Benchmark for Traditional & Learned Query Optimization. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment. ISSN 2150 (2025), 8097. [Weng et al.(2024)] Lianggui Weng, Rong Zhu, Di Wu, Bolin Ding, Bolong Zheng, and Jingren Zhou. 2024. Eraser: Eliminating Performance Regression on Learned Query Optimizer. Proc. VLDB Endow. 17, 5 (Jan. 2024), 926–938. doi: 10.14778/3641204.3641205 

[Xiong et al.(2025)] Xiaoqiao Xiong, Jiong Yu, Dongfang Han, and Xinru Tong. 2025. LOOPLINE: Parallel Monte-Carlo tree search with knowledge constraints and its application in query optimization. Expert Systems with Applications 280 (2025), 127490. [Xiong et al.(2024)] Xiaoqiao Xiong, Jiong Yu, and Zhenzhen He. 2024. AutoQuo: An Adaptive plan optimizer with reinforcement learning for query plan selection. Knowledge-Based Systems 306 (2024), 112664. [Yan et al.(2023)] Zhengtong Yan, Valter Uotila, and Jiaheng Lu. 2023. Join order selection with deep reinforcement learning: fundamentals, techniques, and challenges. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 12 (2023), 3882–3885. [Yang et al.(2020)] Zongheng Yang, Amog Kamsetty, Sifei Luan, Eric Liang, Yan Duan, Xi Chen, and Ion Stoica. 2020. NeuroCard: one cardinality estimator for all tables. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08109 (2020). [Yao et al.(2025)] Zhiming Yao, Haoyang Li, Jing Zhang, Cuiping Li, and Hong Chen. 2025. A query optimization method utilizing large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06902 (2025). [Yu et al.(2022)] Xiang Yu, Chengliang Chai, Guoliang Li, and Jiabin Liu. 2022. Cost-based or learning-based? A hybrid query optimizer for query plan selection. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 13 (2022), 3924–3936. 14 A PREPRINT - M ARCH 18, 2026 [Yu et al.(2020)] Xiang Yu, Guoliang Li, Chengliang Chai, and Nan Tang. 2020. Reinforcement learning with tree-lstm for join order selection. In 2020 IEEE 36th international conference on data engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, 1297–1308. [Zhang et al.(2020)] Ji Zhang, Ke Zhou, and Sebastian Schelter. 2020. AlphaJoin: Join Order Selection à la AlphaGo. 

PhD@ VLDB 2652 (2020). [Zhou et al.(2025)] Xuanhe Zhou, Junxuan He, Wei Zhou, Haodong Chen, Zirui Tang, Haoyu Zhao, Xin Tong, Guoliang Li, Youmin Chen, Jun Zhou, et al . 2025. A Survey of LLM × DATA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18458 

(2025). 15