Title: Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18477v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 00:39:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 

CHUNHAO LIAO, University of Waterloo, Canada 

HONGXU XU, University of Waterloo, Canada 

XINTONG ZHOU, University of Waterloo, Canada 

ZHENYANG XU, University of Waterloo, Canada 

CHENGNIAN SUN, University of Waterloo, Canada Peephole optimizations are a core component of modern optimizing compilers. It rewrites specific instruction into semantically equivalent but more efficient forms. In practice, creating a new peephole optimization often starts from a concrete optimization instance and requires lifting it into a more general rewrite rule that matches a wider range of instruction patterns. This generalization step is critical to optimization effectiveness, but it is also difficult: producing rules that are both correct and sufficiently general typically demands substantial manual effort and domain expertise. Existing approaches such as Hydra attempt to automate this task with program synthesis, but their generalization capability is often limited by search-space explosion, under-generalization, and restricted support for diverse instruction domains. We present LPG , large language model aided peephole optimization generalization, a framework that uses large language models (LLMs) to generalize peephole optimizations. The design of LPG is motivated by the observation that LLMs are effective at semantic abstraction and exploratory reasoning, while formal analyses are necessary to ensure that generated rules are sound and profitable. Based on this observation, LPG adopts a closed-loop workflow that integrates LLM-driven symbolic constant generalization, structural generalization, constraint relaxation, and bitwidth/precision generalization with feedback from syntactic validation, semantic verification, and profitability checking. We evaluate LPG on real-world peephole optimization issues drawn from the LLVM ecosystem. Overall, 

LPG successfully generalizes 90 out of 102 optimizations. On the integer-focused subset that is directly comparable to Hydra, LPG generalizes 74 out of 81 optimizations, whereas Hydra generalizes 35. Moreover, 

LPG produces strictly more general rules in 22 cases, compared with 2 for Hydra. These results show that 

LPG is more effective at generalizing real-world peephole optimizations across a broad range of instruction domains. Additional Key Words and Phrases: compiler, compiler optimization, compiler optimization generalization, large language model 

1 Introduction 

Peephole optimization is a cornerstone of modern compilation pipelines. Operating on a sliding window of instructions (the “peephole”), this technique identifies and replaces specific instruction patterns with semantically equivalent and more efficient alternatives [ 17 , 36 , 41 ]. Its significance is underscored by its substantial scale in industrial compilers; for instance, LLVM dedicates over 50,000 lines of C++ code to peephole optimizations in its InstCombine pass alone [ 45 ]. However, previous studies highlight that peephole optimizers are among the most error-prone components in a compiler [ 37 , 43 , 49 , 54 ]. This is exemplified by LLVM’s peephole optimizer, which accounts for a significant share of reported miscompilations [ 27 , 28 , 55 ]. Consequently, developing effective and reliable peephole optimizers remains both essential and challenging in modern compiler systems. Conventionally, adding a new peephole optimization involves three steps [ 43 ]: 1 identifying a suboptimal instruction sequence and deriving an optimized replacement; 2 generalizing this  

> Authors’ Contact Information: Chunhao Liao, University of Waterloo, Canada, chunhao.liao@uwaterloo.ca; Hongxu Xu, University of Waterloo, Canada, hongxu.xu@uwaterloo.ca; Xintong Zhou, University of Waterloo, Canada, x27zhou@ uwaterloo.ca; Zhenyang Xu, University of Waterloo, Canada, zhenyang.xu@uwaterloo.ca; Chengnian Sun, University of Waterloo, Canada, cnsun@uwaterloo.ca.
> arXiv:2603.18477v1 [cs.PL] 19 Mar 2026 2Liao, et al.

specific transformation into a broadly applicable rewrite rule; and 3 implementing the generalized rule within the compiler’s codebase. This generalization phase ( i.e. , step 2 ) is critical; it abstracts specific optimization instances into rules that enable the compiler to handle diverse instruction sequences beyond isolated concrete cases. Compiler developers typically generalize optimizations manually to extend their scope beyond initial motivating examples [ 21 , 43 , 51 ]. However, this manual approach poses significant hurdles; specifically, deriving general rules becomes increasingly difficult as optimization logic grows more complex [ 1 , 2, 6 – 10 ]. In one LLVM issue report regarding a missed optimization [ 7], a maintainer explicitly admitted: “ I don’t know how to generalize this specific fold. ” The fact that this issue remains unresolved long after being assigned underscores the non-trivial nature of manual peephole generalization. Furthermore, manual methods lack systematic rigor, introducing risks of unsoundness. This process is so error-prone and demanding that valid optimizations are frequently abandoned due to the prohibitive burden of manual generalization [21, 43, 51]. Prior work such as Hydra [ 43 ] has sought to automate optimization generalization through enumerative synthesis. While these methods systematically explore candidate generalizations, they suffer from three key limitations. First, the combinatorial growth of the search space frequently leads to synthesis failures ( e.g. , timeouts), especially for complex optimizations. Second, the resulting optimizations are often under-generalized, i.e. , less general than what is theoretically attainable. For example, Hydra adopts a greedy policy that returns the first valid generalization it finds, which may not be the most general one in the search space. Third, these techniques are typically restricted to narrow instruction domains, primarily integer arithmetic, and struggle to generalize optimizations involving floating-point or memory instructions. A more detailed discussion of Hydra’s limitations is provided in § 2.2. 

LPG . To bridge these gaps, we present LPG , an LLM-based pipeline for peephole optimization generation. LPG integrates formal verification to ensure the correctness of generalized rewrite rules and performance cost modeling to guarantee profitability (§ 3.2). Specifially, LPG orchestrates generalization across four stages: Symbolic Constant Generalization (§ 3.3), Structural Generaliza-tion (§ 3.4), Constraint Relaxation (§ 3.5), and Bitwidth/Precision Generalization (§ 3.6). By employing LLMs throughout this multi-stage process, LPG directly addresses the limitations of prior synthesis-based approaches. First, LPG leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to infer program intent, enabling it to explore large transformation spaces without incurring search-space explosion. Sec-ond, due to the semantic understanding provided by LLMs, LPG is not constrained by greedy policies and thus has greater potential to derive more general rewrite rules. Third, rather than restricting generalization to integer-only peephole optimizations, LPG exploits the generative flexibility of LLMs to extend its scope to more diverse and complex optimization domains, including floating-point and memory instructions. We extensively evaluated LPG ’s capability in generalizing peephole optimizations within the LLVM ecosystem. To facilitate a direct comparison with Hydra, we first evaluated LPG on Hy-draDataset , which consists of 40 benchmarks used in the original Hydra study [43]. On Hydra-Dataset , LPG successfully generalized 36 out of 40 optimizations, whereas Hydra generalized 23. Moreover, among the cases on which both systems succeeded, LPG produced strictly more general rewrite rules in 14 cases, while Hydra did so in only 1 case. To mitigate potential data leakage in evaluating LLM-based approaches, we further curated LPGDataset , which comprises 62 real-world missed optimizations mined from LLVM GitHub issues reported after the knowledge cutoff dates of the evaluated models. On LPGDataset , LPG successfully generalized 38 out of 41 integer opti-mizations, 12 out of 16 floating-point optimizations, and 4 out of 5 memory optimizations, while Hydra generalized only 12 out of 41 integer optimizations. Among the cases where both systems Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 3

succeeded, LPG produced strictly more general rewrite rules in 8 cases, whereas Hydra did so in 1 case. Furthermore, we assessed the effectiveness of the proposed generalization strategies within 

LPG . The results underscore the critical role of these different strategies in enhancing the LPG ’s generalization capabilities. 

Contributions. Our main contributions are listed below: 

• We introduced the use of LLMs for peephole optimization generalization. By leveraging their semantic reasoning capabilities, our approach overcomes the inherent limitations of traditional program-synthesis-based methods. 

• We designed and implemented LPG , a specialized pipeline for generalizing peephole optimiza-tions. LPG integrates four novel generalization strategies with formal verification and feedback-guided refinement to ensure both the correctness and the broad applicability of the generated optimizations. 

• We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of LPG using real-world optimizations in LLVM IR, demonstrating its ability to generalize optimizations across diverse instruction domains. In total, LPG successfully generalized 90 out of 102 cases. On the integer-related subset comparable with Hydra, LPG generalized 74 out of 81 cases, compared with 35 for Hydra, and produced strictly more general rules in 22 cases versus 2 for Hydra. Furthermore, we investigated the effectiveness of the distinct generalization strategies in LPG ’s pipeline, and the results underscore their significant role in improving overall generalization effectiveness. Taken together, these results highlight the advantages of LPG over the state of the art and establish it as a broadly applicable, effective tool for compiler development. 

2 Background 

We built LPG upon LLVM to generalize peephole optimizations in LLVM IR [ 27 ]. As a modular, open-source compiler infrastructure, LLVM utilizes a low-level, SSA-based, and platform-independent IR designed to support diverse source languages and reusable toolchain components. We selected LLVM due to its extensive tooling ecosystem and its widespread adoption across both industry and academia. While our current implementation specifically targets LLVM IR, the underlying principles of LPG remain applicable to other compiler frameworks. The following provides necessary background on peephole optimizations in LLVM, their generalization, and formal verification. 

2.1 Peephole Optimizations 

Peephole optimization is a well-established compilation technique for performing local code transformations. By inspecting a small, sliding window of instructions, the optimizer replaces specific sequences with semantically equivalent, more efficient alternatives. Formally, a peephole optimization is characterized by the triple [22, 41, 43]: 

PRE ⊨ LHS ⇒ RHS 

where LHS (left-hand side) represents the target instruction sequence, RHS (right-hand side) is its optimized replacement, and PRE is a logical predicate over the operands in LHS and RHS that defines the rewrite’s validity. Formally, This judgment states that substituting LHS with RHS is semantics-preserving provided that PRE holds. If no explicit PRE is specified, then PRE = true ,meaning that the rewrite is unconditional and there are no constraints over the operands in LHS 

and RHS .A classic peephole optimization example is strength reduction [ 17 ], where multiplication by a power of two is replaced by a computationally cheaper left-shift: PowerOfTwo (𝐶 ) ⊨ 𝑥 × 𝐶 ⇒ 𝑥 ≪ log 2 (𝐶 )4 Liao, et al. 

This substitution is preferred because bitwise shifts typically incur lower CPU latency and energy costs than multiplication and division. In LLVM, peephole optimizations are mainly implemented within InstCombine, a massive optimization pass written in C++ comprising over 50,000 lines of hand-written pattern-matching rules that identify and transform specific instruction sequences [45]. 

2.2 Peephole Optimization Generalization 

Peephole optimization generalization is the systematic process of abstracting a concrete optimization instance into a more general transformation rule that remains valid across a broader class of programs. While an initial optimization is often discovered from a specific code fragment, the objective of generalization is to expand its applicability domain without compromising semantic correctness. A generalization is considered successful if it preserves correctness on all cases handled by the original optimization while also enabling beneficial rewrites on additional cases outside the original domain. Formally, given two successful generalizations, one is considered more general if its applicability domain is a strict superset of the other’s. To illustrate the concept of peephole optimization generalization, consider the generalization for a concrete peephole optimization: 

true ⊨ (( 𝑥 ⊕ 173 ) & 94 ) ⊕ 57 ⇒ ( 𝑥 & 94 ) ⊕ 53 

where ⊕ denotes exclusive OR (XOR), & denotes bitwise conjunction (AND). This instance is difficult to generalize by human inspection. Nevertheless, a generalization framework may be able to infer the latent relation among the constants and synthesize the generalized rewrite 

𝐶 4 = (𝐶 1 & 𝐶 2) ⊕ 𝐶 3 ⊨ (( 𝑥 ⊕ 𝐶 1) & 𝐶 2) ⊕ 𝐶 3 ⇒ ( 𝑥 & 𝐶 2) ⊕ 𝐶 4

This rule is derived by applying the distributive law of bitwise AND over XOR: (𝐴 ⊕ 𝐵 ) & 𝑀 = (𝐴 &

𝑀 ) ⊕ ( 𝐵 & 𝑀 ). Unlike the original concrete rewrite, which is restricted to a single constant instance, the generalized rule applies to all instantiations satisfying the precondition 𝐶 4 = (𝐶 1 & 𝐶 2) ⊕ 𝐶 3.By strictly enlarging the set of programs to which the optimization applies, peephole optimization generalization is critical to maximizing compiler performance across a broad range of code patterns. 

Manual Generalization. Traditional implementations require developers to manually generalize each concrete peephole optimization. However, hand-crafted process faces two challenges. First, empirical analysis reveals that the manual generalization of transformation rules constitutes a primary source of correctness issues in peephole optimizations [ 43 ]. Second, developers may not always succeed in deriving a sound and sufficiently general rule from a specific optimization instance, potentially leaving valid optimization opportunities undiscovered. To illustrate the second challenge, we revisit a missed peephole optimization report from LLVM [ 7 ] introduced in § 1, where the maintainer explicitly remarks on the difficulty of generalizing this fold. The corresponding LHS 

and RHS LLVM IR fragments are shown in Figure 1. Generalizing this peephole optimization is difficult mainly because its validity depends on the interaction of several components. Specifically, it requires simultaneous reasoning about arithmetic negation, masking, cross-bitwidth normalization (i32 to i64 ), flag-sensitive behavior ( nneg , nsw ) and LLVM poison semantics within one reusable rule. Notably, to assist LLVM developers in implementing this peephole optimization, we posted 

LPG ’s generalized result of this peephole optimization in the issue thread, and the LLVM maintainer explicitly acknowledged its correctness and generality [24]. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 5                                                

> 1define i64 @lhs ( i32 % arg0 ) {
> 2%1 =sub i32 0, % arg0
> 3%2 =and i32 %1 , 63
> 4%3 =zext nneg i32 %2 to i64
> 5%4 =sub nsw i64 0, %3
> 6%5 =lshr i64 %4 , 8
> 7%6 =or i64 %5 , %4
> 8ret i64 %6
> 9}

(a) LHS (pre-transformation)                              

> 1define i64 @rhs ( i32 % arg0 ) {
> 2%1 =and i32 % arg0 , 63
> 3%2 =icmp ne i32 %1 , 0
> 4%3 =sext i1 %2 to i64
> 5ret i64 %3
> 6}

(b) RHS (post-transformation) 

Fig. 1. A missed peephole optimization example from LLVM. In LLVM IR, “ sub ” is subtraction instruction, “and ” is bitwise AND, “ zext ” is zero-extension, “ lshr ” is logical right shift, “ or ” is bitwise OR, “ icmp ne ” is integer comparison for not-equal, and “ sext ” is sign-extension. Flags like “ nneg ” and “ nsw ” indicate that the instruction does not allow certain behaviors such as negative overflow and signed overflow, and may cause undefined behavior if they occur.                                               

> Original Generalized
> PRE true PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1+1)∧0≤u𝑉 ≤u𝐶 1
> ∧PopCount (𝐶 1) ≤ u𝐶 2≤u𝑊 −PopCount (𝐶 1)
> LHS  (− zext (− 𝑥 )& 63 )≫u8| − zext (− 𝑥 & 63 )(− 𝑉 ) ≫ u𝐶 2| (− 𝑉 )
> RHS sext (𝑥 & 63 ≠0)sext (𝑉 ≠0)
> Note: PopCount (𝐶 1)denotes the number of 1-bits in 𝐶 1.
> sext and zext are the sign-extend and zero-extend operations. For operators with a subscript, such as ≫uand ≤u, the subscript denotes the signedness of the operation (“u” for unsigned, “s” for signed), which is relevant for overflow and comparison semantics in LLVM IR.

Table 1. Original and generalized forms of the peephole optimization shown in Figure 1. 

Automated Generalization. Hydra is the state-of-the-art technique to automatically generalize peephole optimizations from concrete optimization instances [ 43 ]. Built upon the Souper super-optimizer [ 46 ], Hydra generalizes transformations through inductive and enumerative synthesis guided by heuristics and greedy algorithms. While it ensures soundness using Alive2 [ 35 ], several inherent limitations constrain its effectiveness: 

• Search-Space Induced Synthesis Failure Hydra relies on depth-bounded enumerative synthe-sis, which is susceptible to exponential state-space explosions as instruction sequences increase in complexity. This often results in synthesis failures ( e.g. timeouts) before a valid generalized rule can be discovered. Furthermore, these rigid depth bounds strictly limit Hydra’s expressive-ness: complex preconditions requiring more than two conjunctions typically lead to synthesis failure [43], leaving more sophisticated optimization patterns out of reach. 

• Under-Generalization: Hydra relies on heuristic rules and greedy algorithms to mechanically recombine syntactic fragments, rather than deep semantic understanding of the code. Conse-quently, it might fail to uncover a more general form, yielding Under-Generalization . For example, Hydra heuristically binds concrete constants to variable bitwidths. When an optimization con-tains a constant 𝑐 and a variable 𝑣 , where Bitwidth (𝑣 ) = 𝑐 , Hydra greedily infers that 𝑐 denotes Bitwidth (𝑣 ) and returns a result even though 𝑐 may be semantically unrelated to 𝑣 ’s width. This 6 Liao, et al. 

creates an inherent dilemma: On one hand, applying this heuristic rule may misbind the constant and restrict the rule to a narrow domain where it holds only when Bitwidth (𝑣 ) = 𝑐 , missing the truly general form; On the other hand, disabling this heuristic rule may miss valid cases where the constant genuinely denotes a variable’s bitwidth. 

• Limited Domain Support: Hydra is restricted to integer operations, explicitly excluding floating-point and memory instructions. This restriction stems from the prohibitive complexity of the synthesis search space and verification challenges in these domains. Consequently, Hydra misses a substantial spectrum of critical peephole optimizations found in modern high-performance compilers. Due to these limitations, for the illustrative example shown in Figure 1, Hydra does not produce a result. Our observations of the LLVM community indicate that manual generalization continues to be the dominant practice [5, 12, 13]. 

2.3 Peephole Optimization Verification 

Generalized peephole optimizations must be verified for both semantic correctness and performance profitability. There are various tools available for these verification tasks. 

Formal Semantic Verification. Alive2 is a bounded translation-validation tool for LLVM IR [ 35 ]. It is fully automatic through invoking Z3 [ 23 ] to solve the SMT [ 20 ] queries for refinement checking. Given pre- and post-transformation LLVM IR sequences, it checks whether the post-transformation IR sequence refines the pre-transformation IR sequence: for every input on which the pre-transformation IR sequence is defined, the post-transformation sequence must produce the same result and must not introduce additional undefined behavior. 

Performance Profitability Assessment. Semantic correctness does not guarantee performance improvement: a transformation may cause performance regressions, such as increased instruction latency or reduced throughput. Accordingly, profitability assessment is typically required, and there are primarily two approaches. 1 Heuristic-based cost model like Hydra’s [ 43 ] assigns static costs to instructions to estimate profitability. However, static instruction costs are only a coarse proxy for runtime behavior and may therefore misjudge profitability, admitting performance-degrading generalizations. 2 Simulation-based performance analysis, e.g. llvm-mca (Machine Code Analyzer) [ 32 ] provided by LLVM, offers a more accurate profitability assessment by leveraging information from scheduling models in LLVM to measure the performance of machine code in a specific CPU. In practice, LLVM IR is first lowered to assembly with llc [ 31 ], the LLVM compiler, after which llvm-mca analyzes the resulting code to obtain multiple performance metrics, such as the number of micro-operations (uOps) and the estimated cycle count. 

3 Methodology 

This section presents the methodology of LPG for synthesizing generalized peephole optimizations from concrete optimization instances. LPG operates as an automated, closed-loop pipeline, and Fig-ure 2 provides an overview of the workflow. LPG generalizes peephole optimizations through four stages: (1) Constant Symbolic Generalization (§ 3.3). Replace concrete constants with symbolic con-stants. (2) Structural Generalization (§ 3.4). Abstract fixed subexpressions ( e.g. 𝐴 + 𝐵 ) with constrained symbolic values ( e.g. 𝑉 ), removing syntactic dependencies. (3) Constraint Relaxation (§ 3.5). Enlarge the valid generalization domain by removing precon-dition, weakening precondition, and removing instruction flags and attributes. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 7Constant Symbolic    

> Generalization
> llvm -mca
> Profitability Checker
> Alive2
> Semantic Checker
> Structural
> Generalization
> Remove Precondition
> Constraint
> Relaxation
> Weaken Precondition
> Remove Flag
> Verification
> Timeout & Shrink
> Precondition
> Weakening
> Checker
> Bitwidth/Precision
> Generalization
> Bitwidth
> Generalization
> Generalization
> Result
> LLM -Based
> 1
> 234
> Syntactic Checker
> Precision
> Generalization
> Optimization Rule -Based

Fig. 2. The overall workflow of LPG. 

(4) Bitwidth/Precision Generalization (§ 3.6). For integer optimizations, LPG performs bitwidth generalization, expanding a generalization in a specific bitwidth to a wider range of data types. For floating-point optimizations, LPG performs precision generalization, expanding a generalization in a specific precision to a wider range of floating-point types. 

3.1 Illustrative Example 

We illustrate LPG ’s generalization process using the peephole optimization in Figure 1. Table 2 presents this process step by step, where each step corresponds to one generalization strategy and finally derives the generalization result in Table 1. 

LPG starts with a concrete optimization instance whose validity depends on the literal constants 

63 and 8, the specific syntactic form zext (− 𝑥 & 63 ), the nsw flags, and the fixed LLVM integer bitwidths. At this point, the optimization is tied to this single concrete example. The objective of the workflow is to generalize this example while preserving correctness. 

Step 1 : Constant Symbolic Generalization. In the constant symbolic generalization stage, LPG 

replaces the concrete constants with symbolic constants 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 and introduces preconditions that capture the properties required by the optimization. The resulting candidate preserves the original computation pattern, but it is no longer tied to the single constant instance (63 or 8). 

Step 2 : Structural Generalization. LPG then performs structural generalization. Instead of requiring the concrete subexpression zext (− 𝑥 &𝐶 1), it introduces a fresh symbolic value 𝑉 together with the constraint 0 ≤u 𝑉 ≤u zext (𝐶 1). This step removes dependence on a particular syntax tree and retains only the semantic property needed by the optimization. 

Steps 3 : Constraint Relaxation. After obtaining this structurally generalized candidate, LPG 

enters constraint relaxation. As shown in Table 2, this stage proceeds in three substeps. LPG first removes the redundant precondition 𝐶 1 ≥s 0. It then weakens the upper bound on 𝐶 2 from the concrete constant 32 to the more general condition 64 − PopCount (𝐶 1). Finally, it removes the nsw 

flags. Each substep enlarges the applicability domain by eliminating a restriction inherited from the original optimization. 

Step 4 : Bitwidth/Precision Generalization. Finally, LPG performs bitwidth generalization by replacing the fixed LLVM integer types with a symbolic width parameter 𝑊 . The resulting rule is no longer tied to i32 and i64 ; instead, it applies to arbitrary integer bitwidths as long as the constraints among 𝐶 1, 𝐶 2, and 𝑉 are satisfied. As reflected in the workflow in Figure 2, each 8 Liao, et al. 

Step Peephole Optimization Transformation 

Original Optimization (§ 2.1) (0 −nsw zext (− 𝑥 : i32 & 63 ) ) ≫ u 8 | 0 −nsw zext (− 𝑥 & 63 )⇒ sext (𝑥 & 63 ≠ 0)

1 Constant Symbolic Generalization (§ 3.3) 

𝐶 1 : i32 ≥s 0 ∧ PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 : i64 ≤u 32 

⊨ (0 −nsw zext (− 𝑥 : i32 & 𝐶 1 ) ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | 0 −nsw zext (− 𝑥 & 𝐶 1 )⇒ sext ( − 𝑥 & 𝐶 1 ≠ 0)

63 → 𝐶 1

8 → 𝐶 2

2 Structural Generalization (§ 3.4) 

𝐶 1 : i32 ≥s 0 ∧ PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 : i64 ≤u 32 ∧

0 ≤u 𝑉 : i64 ≤u zext (𝐶 1 )

⊨ (0 −nsw 𝑉 ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | 0 −nsw 𝑉 

⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0)

zext (− 𝑥 & 𝐶 1 ) → 𝑉 

(− 𝑥 & 𝐶 1 ) → 𝑉 

3 Constraint Relaxation (§ 3.5) Remove precondition PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 : i64 ≤u 32 ∧

0 ≤u 𝑉 : i64 ≤u zext (𝐶 1 )

⊨ (0 −nsw 𝑉 ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | 0 −nsw 𝑉 ⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0)

remove 𝐶 1 ≥s 0

Weaken precondition PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 : i64 ≤u 64 − PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ∧ 

0 ≤u 𝑉 : i64 ≤u zext (𝐶 1 )

⊨ (0−nsw 𝑉 ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | 0−nsw 𝑉 ⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0)

32 →

64 − PopCount (𝐶 1 )

Flag & Attribute Removal PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 : i64 ≤u 64 − PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ∧ 

0 ≤u 𝑉 : i64 ≤u zext (𝐶 1 )

⊨ (0−𝑉 ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | ( 0−𝑉 ) ⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0)

remove nsw 

4 Bitwidth/Precision Generalization (§ 3.6) PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1 + 1) ∧ 

PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ≤ u 𝐶 2 ≤u 𝑊 − PopCount (𝐶 1 ) ∧ 

0 ≤u 𝑉 ≤u 𝐶 1

⊨ (− 𝑉 ) ≫ u 𝐶 2 | (− 𝑉 ) ⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0)

64 → 𝑊 

Note: constant symbolic generalization; structural generalization; remove precondition. weaken precondition; flag/attribute removal; bitwidth/precision generalization. 

𝑊 represents arbitrary Bitwidth; PopCount (𝐶 ) represents the number of 1-bits in 𝐶 .

Table 2. Illustrating example: iterative generalization from the original peephole optimization instance. 

intermediate candidate can then be passed to the verification and downstream generation stages, and the final result is the generalized peephole optimization shown in Table 1. 

3.2 Verification of Soundness and Profitability 

In this paper, we incorporate verification throughout the generalization pipeline, accepting a generalization candidate only when it is both semantically sound and performance-profitable. As illustrated in Figure 2, before invoking the downstream verification tools, LPG first applies syntactic check to each generated candidate. The malformed or structurally inconsistent candidates are Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 9

repaired through regeneration, guided by the syntactic error messages from the checker. Only syntactically well-formed candidates enter the subsequent two-phase verification for semantic correctness and performance profitability. 

Formal Semantic Verification. To guarantee that each generalized peephole optimization is semantically valid, we invoke Alive2 [ 35 ] introduced in § 2.3 to check refinement correctness between the LHS and RHS LLVM IR sequence. We discard any generalization candidate that violates semantic correctness in Alive2. 

Performance Profitability Assessment. As discussed in § 2.3, heuristic cost models provide only a coarse proxy for runtime behavior. Therefore, after establishing semantic correctness with Alive2, LPG assesses profitability using llvm-mca [ 32 ]. We lower LLVM IR to assembly for the host architecture via llc [ 31 ] and then invoke llvm-mca to analyze the generated code. We apply x86-64 architecture in our experiment as it is widely adopted in both industrial practice and academic research. Following prior LLVM superoptimization work [ 29 ], we use uOps as the primary cost metric. Consequently, we retain a transformation only when it is profitable: the RHS code sequence exhibits a lower uOps count than the LHS code sequence. 

Verification Feedback Loop. After generating candidate generalizations, LPG runs an automated refinement loop driven by verification outcomes. For candidates that fail the verification, the resulting diagnostics ( e.g. syntax errors, Alive2 counterexamples, and llvm-mca regression reports) are fed back to the LLM to refine subsequent generalizations. Currently, we only include the feedback loop in the first stage, Symbolic Constant Generalization, mainly because it serves as the foundation for subsequent stages and is more amenable to iterative refinement. 

3.3 Symbolic Constant Generalization 

Symbolic constant generalization abstracts concrete constants within a peephole optimization into symbolic expressions, broadening the applicability of the optimization beyond specific literal values. 

LPG utilizes LLM to propose these candidate generalizations. Leveraging its semantic reasoning capabilities, the LLM infers both the structural role of the constant and the necessary precondition for validity, such as bitwidth, value-range, or shift-legality constraints. For example, a concrete shift amount 𝐶 can be abstracted to a symbolic variable bounded by the operation’s bitwidth 𝑊 . In contrast, Hydra relies on heuristic rules rules and greedy algorithms within a bounded search space, inherently limiting its generalization scope. Moreover, Hydra conservatively avoids symbolizing certain constants ( e.g. 0, 1, and −1), because abstracting them without deep semantic context often yields invalid candidates. LPG overcomes this limitation, using the LLM to safely generalize these special constants when appropriate. 

Recursive Bitwidth/Precision Reduction. For particularly complex candidates, soundness verification with Alive2 may time out. Alive2 performs refinement checking by encoding program logic into SMT queries over bit-vector semantics. Such queries may become computationally intractable due to the explosion of the state space, which scales significantly with the increase in integer bitwidth or floating-point precision. To mitigate the risk that valid generalizations are rejected due to solver resource limits, LPG applies recursive bitwidth/precision reduction: integer widths are halved ( e.g. i16 → i8 ), floating-point types are progressively demoted ( e.g. double →

float → half ). The 1-bit integer type is excluded from this process because it typically represents boolean predicates (true/false). Each reduction step uniformly scales bitwidths by the same factor (i.e., half), thereby preserving their relative proportionality. After each reduction step, LPG re-runs verification to validate the generalization at the reduced Bitwidth until it no longer times out or a reduction limit is reached ( e.g. a literal can no longer be encoded at the reduced width, or an 10 Liao, et al. 

odd bitwidth prevents further halving etc. ). If verification fails or a reduction limit is reached, but Alive2 still times out, the generalization attempt is deemed unsuccessful. 

3.4 Structural Generalization 

Structural generalization abstracts the fixed expression structure of an optimization by replacing intermediate computations with symbolic inputs, removing dependencies on a particular syntax tree while retaining the precondition necessary for correctness. Table 3 illustrates a simple example. Structural generalization replaces the subexpression 𝑥 & 127 with a symbolic value 𝑉 and makes its semantic effect explicit through the range constraint 0 ≤u 𝑉 ≤u 127 . This constraint implies that 𝑉 is non-negative, so 0 − 𝑉 <s 0 is equivalent to 𝑉 ≠ 0: the predicate is false when 𝑉 = 0 and true for every 1 ≤u 𝑉 ≤u 127 . Hence the optimization sext (0 − 𝑉 <s 0) ⇒ sext (𝑉 ≠ 0) is valid. The precondition is essential since the optimization fails for negative values of 𝑉 .                              

> Original After Structural Generalization
> PRE true 0≤u𝑉 : i8 ≤u127
> LHS sext (0−𝑥 : i8 & 127 <s0)sext (0−𝑉 <s0)
> RHS sext (𝑥 : i8 & 127 ≠0)sext (𝑉 ≠0)
> Table 3. Structural generalization replaces the preserved subexpression 𝑥 & 127 with a symbolic value 𝑉
> constrained by the range implied by the mask.

The key challenge lies in identifying subexpressions amenable to abstraction and preserving the implicit constraints they encode, so that the generalized optimization remains valid. LPG 

prompts an LLM to conduct structural generalization. Specifically, LPG guides the LLM to decouple instruction structure from data dependencies with a task-specific prompt. LPG directs the model to abstract the subexpressions guarded with either non-relational precondition or relational precondition .Non-relational precondition includes property abstractions such as KnownBits (the known zero and one bits of a value), IntegerRange (the range of possible values for a variable), etc. or a collection of facts such as PowerOfTwo and LowBitsZero 𝑘 (the k low bits of a value that are known to be zero). For relational precondition, LPG instructs the model to synthesize necessary precondition between values ( e.g. 𝑥 < 𝑦 ). In contrast, Hydra restricts precondition to a small set of fix and predefined non-relational preconditions, which limits its expressiveness when an optimization’s implicit constraints cannot be captured by per-value properties. 

3.5 Constraint Relaxation 

In this stage, LPG enlarges the applicability of an optimization by relaxing the conditions under which it can be applied. Specifically, LPG considers three kinds of generalization: removing precon-ditions, weakening preconditions, and removing instruction flags and attributes. Each candidate generalization is validated as described in § 3.2 to ensure correctness. This stage proceeds in three substeps: 

• Remove Precondition: LPG enumerates the existing preconditions and attempts to remove them one at a time. A removal is retained only if the resulting optimization passes verification. 

• Weaken Precondition: For preconditions that cannot be removed entirely, LPG leverages the LLM to propose weaker alternatives that admit more inputs. For example, a constraint 𝐶 > 0

may be relaxed to 𝐶 ≥ 0. A weakened precondition is retained only if it passes verification and is confirmed to be strictly weaker than the original one. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 11 

• Remove Flags and Attributes: LPG also attempts to remove instruction-level flags and related attributes that may unnecessarily restrict the optimization, including integer overflow flags ( e.g. 

nsw ), floating-point fast-math flags ( e.g. fast ), and function attributes ( e.g. readonly ). As before, a removal is retained only if it passes verification. Among these substeps, weakening preconditions is particularly challenging. Prior enumerative approaches ( e.g. Hydra) weaken preconditions only within a limited set of dataflow domains, such as KnownBits . While it might be effective for some simple cases, it is often inadequate for real-world optimizations, whose preconditions frequently depend on richer semantic relationships that are not expressible in these abstractions. More generally, the space of useful relaxed predicates is large and often continuous, making it difficult to enumerate efficiently. For instance, relaxing an integer range requires deciding not only whether a bound should be removed, but also how far it can be widened. LPG addresses this challenge by leveraging the LLM’s semantic reasoning to propose candidate relaxations in this broader search space. 

Strictly Weakened Generalization. For precondition weakening, semantic preservation alone is insufficient: the new precondition must also be strictly weaker than the original one. To check this property, LPG uses a bidirectional refinement test in Alive2. In Alive2, a PRE is encoded using additional assume intrinsics in the LLVM IR. If an input does not satisfy the PRE , the corresponding 

assume is violated, causing the program to exhibit undefined behavior (UB). Since a UB-triggering program is semantically equivalent to any program, it can be refined by any other program. Suppose the original precondition is 𝑃 and the weakened precondition is 𝑃 ′, where 𝑃 ⇒ 𝑃 ′. Then the LHS 

program under 𝑃 can be refined by the LHS program under 𝑃 ′, because every input satisfying 𝑃 also satisfies 𝑃 ′. However, if the weakening is strict, the converse refinement does not hold: there exist inputs satisfying 𝑃 ′ but not 𝑃 . Therefore, LPG checks refinement in both directions and accepts the candidate only when the original version refines the weakened one, but not vice versa. This ensures that the new precondition is indeed strictly weaker. 

3.6 Bitwidth/Precision Generalization 

In this stage, LPG generalizes optimizations across different integer bitwidths and floating-point precisions. This is crucial for maximizing the applicability of optimizations, as many optimizations are valid across a range of bitwidths or precisions, and tying them to a specific type instance limits their utility. However, proving an optimization at a single integer bitwidth or a single floating-point precision does not imply that it is valid for all type variants. In LLVM IR, both integer and floating-point types must be given as explicit concrete types ( e.g. i8 , i16 , float , double ); symbolic forms such as iN 

or abstract precision variables are not valid LLVM IR syntax. Moreover, the verification toolchains also operate only on concrete type instances. Therefore, we cannot directly verify a generalized optimization over arbitrary bitwidths or precision. 

Bitwidth Generalization. For integer-related optimizations, LPG performs bitwidth general-ization using similar workflow as Hydra. First, LPG runs a conservative static analysis, where candidates containing explicit width-changing casts ( trunc , sext , zext ) are rejected, and only the trivial literals {0, 1, −1} are allowed. Second, we erase all concrete integer types in the candidates, and then instantiate them with every concrete bitwidth, up to a configurable maximum width (currently set to 64 bits), so that we can verify every resulting instantiation individually. Third, if brute-force instantiation succeeds only for a strict subset of bitwidths, LPG uses LLM to synthesize 12 Liao, et al. 

an additional predicate over the bitwidths ( e.g. 𝑊 1 ≤ 8,𝑊 1/𝑊 2 = 2). LPG accepts the generalization only when all bitwidth instantiations under the predicate pass the verification. 

Precision Generalization. For floating-point optimizations, LPG performs precision generaliza-tion: for a candidate rule parameterized by precision 𝑃 , we instantiate 𝑃 with a predefined set of floating-point types. We directly brute-force all three type instances: half , float , and double .

4 Evaluation 

This section presents our extensive evaluation of LPG , demonstrating its effectiveness in general-izing real-world peephole optimizations. We organize our evaluation around three key research questions: 

• RQ1: Can LPG effectively generalize real-world peephole optimizations? 

• RQ2: What is the impact of each strategy on the generalization quality? 

• RQ3: How do different large language models affect LPG ’s generalization performance? 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

In this section, we describe the experimental setup for evaluating LPG , including the hardware settings, selected models, data collection and preprocessing procedures, and the evaluation metrics. 

4.1.1 Hareware Setup. All experiments were conducted on a Ubuntu 22.04 (64-bit) server, which is equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 5217 CPU@3.00GHz with 32 cores, and 376 GB of RAM. 

4.1.2 Selected Models. Table 4 summarizes the models used in our evaluation. In RQ1 and RQ2, we use Gemini3-pro-preview as the default model, so that the effectiveness evaluation and strategy study are conducted under a fixed model configuration. In RQ3, we evaluate four different models: Qwen3-235B-Instruct, Qwen3-235B-Thinking, Qwen3-30B-Thinking, and Qwen3-30B-Instruct, to examine how model scale and reasoning capability may affect LPG ’s generalization performance. Gemini3-pro-preview has a knowledge cutoff date of January 2025, whereas all four Qwen3 variants have knowledge cutoff dates of April 2025.             

> Model Reasoning Knowledge Cutoff Date
> Gemini3-pro-preview Yes 01/2025 Qwen3-30B-Instruct No 04/2025 Qwen3-30B-Thinking Yes 04/2025 Qwen3-235B-Instruct No 04/2025 Qwen3-235B-Thinking Yes 04/2025
> Table 4. Selected models for evaluation

4.1.3 Data Collection. To construct a robust test suite for assessing LPG ’s effectiveness, we curated two datasets, namely HydraDataset and LPGDataset , consisting of 102 distinct peephole opti-mization instances collected from the LLVM project’s GitHub issue tracker. To ensure the quality in the test suite, each peephole optimization instance underwent rigorous verification: we filtered Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 13 

out invalid cases and retained only those that passed the verification of soundness and profitability (§ 3.2). 

HydraDataset For a direct comparison with Hydra [ 43 ], HydraDataset replicates all the instances used in the evaluation from the original Hydra paper, comprising 40 integer-related peephole optimizations collected from the LLVM GitHub issues. 

LPGDataset To validate LPG ’s effectiveness across diverse optimization domains and to elimi-nate the risk of data leakage, we curated an additional dataset, LPGDataset , by mining 62 new peephole optimizations from the LLVM GitHub issues. LPGDataset covers optimizations across multiple instruction categories, including 41 integer, 16 floating-point, and 5 memory optimizations. Importantly, all instances in LPGDataset were collected from issues reported after May 2025, which is later than the knowledge cutoff dates of the evaluated LLMs. This ensures that LPG ’s performance is assessed based on its reasoning capabilities rather than memorization of training data.                                                   

> 1define i8 @lhs ( i64 % arg0 ) {
> 2% v0 =trunc i64 % arg0 to i8
> 3% v1 =urem i8 %v0 , 25
> 4% v2 =urem i8 %v1 , 5
> 5ret i8 % v2
> 6}
> 78define i8 @rhs ( i64 % arg0 ) {
> 9% v0 =trunc i64 % arg0 to i8
> 10 % v2 =urem i8 %v0 , 5
> 11 ret i8 % v2
> 12 }

(a) Peephole Optimization Before Pruning                                     

> 1define i8 @lhs ( i8 % newvar_v0 ) {
> 2% v1 =urem i8 % newvar_v0 , 25
> 3% v2 =urem i8 %v1 , 5
> 4ret i8 % v2
> 5}
> 67define i8 @rhs ( i8 % newvar_v0 ) {
> 8% v2 =urem i8 % newvar_v0 , 5
> 9ret i8 % v2
> 10 }

(b) Peephole Optimization After Pruning Fig. 3. An example of pruning for the peephole optimization. In LLVM IR, trunc is the truncation instruction that converts a value to a smaller type, and urem is the unsigned remainder instruction. 

4.1.4 Data Preprocessing. This step aims to remove the noise in raw real-world optimization instances, which frequently contain code irrelevant to the optimization. To isolate the core opti-mization logic, we adopt the verification-guided pruning procedure of Hydra [ 43 ]. Following this idea, we apply simplification to remove unnecessary data-flow dependencies. For each optimization instance, represented as a pair of functions ( LHS , RHS ), we perform repeated pruning iteration over both functions. In each iteration, we consider one variable definition at a time and tentatively replace all uses of that variable with a fresh variable introduced as an additional function argument. Figure 3 provides an concrete example of the pruning process, where Figure 3a and Figure 3b show the optimization instance before and after pruning, respectively. Pruning replaces an intermedi-ate value computed in the original instance ( %v0 ) with a fresh argument ( %newvar_v0 ). During pruning, each tentative replacement is verified for soundness and profitability and accepted only if both verification stages succeed; otherwise, it is reverted. After each accepted substitution, dead instructions are eliminated, and the pruning procedure repeats until an iteration introduces no further changes. Thus, every retained instruction is necessary to preserve semantic correctness and performance profitability. 14 Liao, et al.                            

> Table 5. Peephole optimization generalization results of LPG across instruction domains.
> Instruction Domain #Instances #Success
> Integer Optimization 81 74 Floating-point Optimization 16 12 Memory Optimization 54Overall 102 90
> Table 6. Comparison of LPG and Hydra on integer-related peephole optimizations.
> Dataset #Inst.
> #LPG
> Succ. #Hydra Succ. #LPG
> Better #Hydra Better
> HydraDataset 40 36 23 14 1
> LPGDataset (Integer) 41 38 12 81Overall 81 74 35 22 2

4.2 RQ1: Can LPG effectively generalize real-world peephole optimizations? 

To quantitatively evaluate LPG ’s generalization capability on real-world peephole optimizations, we conducted experiments on all optimization instances from HydraDataset and LPGDataset 

described in § 4.1.3. To evaluate LPG against the state-of-the-art, we compared it with Hydra, a prior generalization approach restricted to integer optimizations. We executed Hydra’s publicly available implementation [ 42 ] on both its original dataset ( HydraDataset ) and the integer-related peephole optimizations from LPGDataset . We provide each tool with the concrete peephole optimization instance and task it with generating a generalized peephole optimization. 

4.2.1 Results. Table 5 summarizes the overall effectiveness of LPG across all instances in our datasets, broken down by instruction domain. In general, LPG successfully synthesized 90 gener-alized rewrite rules that pass the verification out of the all 102 instances. More specifically, LPG 

succeeded on 74 out of 81 integer optimizations, 12 out of 16 floating-point optimizations, and 4 out of 5 memory optimizations. These results suggest that LPG generalizes beyond the integer-centric setting addressed by prior work and can synthesize correct and profitable rules across diverse instruction domains. Table 6 shows the comparison between LPG and Hydra on integer-related peephole optimizations. 

LPG successfully generalizes 74 out of 81 instances (36 out of 40 on HydraDataset and 38 out of 41 on LPGDataset ), whereas Hydra succeeds on only 35 instances (23 on HydraDataset and 12 on LPGDataset ). Moreover, every instance successfully generalized by Hydra is also successfully generalized by LPG . Restricting to the cases both tools successfully generalizes, LPG produces 

strictly more general rewrite rules in 22 cases, while Hydra does so in only 2 cases. 

4.2.2 Analysis. Beyond overall effectiveness, the two approaches show distinctly different patterns in failure scenarios. In particular, LPG exhibits a relatively concentrated error profile: most failures are confined to a small number of semantically difficult cases, especially those involving subtle floating-point reasoning or limited verifier support. By contrast, Hydra shows a broader range of failures arising from different stages of its synthesis pipeline. This distinction suggests that LPG is Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 15 

mainly limited by hard corner cases, whereas Hydra is more often constrained by general search and synthesis bottlenecks. 

LPG . LPG successfully generalized the large majority of instances across the evaluated bench-marks, indicating that its generalization pipeline is robust on most real-world optimizations. The remaining non-successful cases are concentrated in only a few semantically difficult optimiza-tions. More specifically, these failures comprise a small number of semantic counterexamples together with one verification-inconclusive case. The counterexample cases indicate that LPG is most challenged when a correct generalization depends on subtle IEEE-754 semantics that are difficult to infer from the local rewrite alone, including signed-zero distinctions, NaN-sensitive comparison and maxnum -style behavior, and threshold rewrites whose correctness depends on avoiding overflow, underflow, and rounding error in derived floating-point constants [ 11 , 15 , 16 ]. These optimizations may also depend on subnormal behavior and the active rounding mode, so algebraically plausible rewrites need not remain exact under floating-point semantics. For the verification-inconclusive case, the difficulty does not appear to stem from an obviously incorrect generalization, but rather from incomplete verifier support for floating-point intrinsic combinations such as frexp and ldexp [ 14 ]. Taken together, these observations suggest that LPG is limited primarily by a very small set of optimizations at the boundary of floating-point reasoning, memory semantics, and current verifier support. 

Hydra. By contrast, although Hydra also succeeded on a fraction of the benchmark suite, its behavior is noticeably less stable. Its failures arise from several different stages in the generalization pipeline, including repeated shrinking failures, constant-synthesis exhaustion, timeouts, and crashes. More importantly, these failures are not confined to a small set of semantically difficult rewrites. Instead, they occur across a much broader range of rewrite patterns and program contexts. For example, on one optimization [ 3], Hydra fails to produce a usable rule because the synthesized candidate is ultimately rejected as “not valid for any width.” Even when Hydra does return a candidate, the result is often still too specific, rather than capturing the underlying optimization logic. 

4.2.3 Case Studies. In this section, we present 3 representative case studies comparing LPG and Hydra, analyzing 3 key dimensions of their generalization capabilities. Each optimization in these case studies is extracted from real-world optimization reports in the LLVM GitHub issues. 

Case Study 1: Search-Space Induced Synthesis Failure. Table 7 presents a representative instance [ 33 ] where Hydra timed out due to search-space explosion. Concretely, Hydra exhausted its constant-synthesis budget in the synthesis loop. This happens because a correct generalization must be expressed as a parameterized rewrite: the pre-optimized instruction sequence performs a clamp-based range check via smax /smin , while the equivalent post-optimized instruction sequence is an unsigned range test of the form 𝑥 + ( 𝐶 1 − 𝐶 2) <u 𝐶 3 − 𝐶 2 + 1 under semantic precondition (e.g., 𝐶 2 ≤ 𝐶 3 and (𝐶 3 − 𝐶 2) ≠ −1). The rewrite also introduces affine constraints that couple multiple constants, which make it difficult for Hydra to find a correct generalization candidate by the program-synthesis-based method. In contrast, the LLM-based LPG can recognize the clamp pattern and yield the verified generalization shown in the Table 7. 

Case Study 2: Under-Generalization. Table 8 shows a peephole optimization instance [ 4]where Hydra produced an under-generalized rewrite. In this example, LPG recovered a semantic characterization of the bit-position test: under the PRE that 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 are powers of two, the guard 

(𝐶 2 & (𝐶 1 ≪ 𝑥 )) ≠ 0 holds precisely when 𝑥 = cttz (𝐶 2) − cttz (𝐶 1), where cttz is the count-trailing-zeros operation. In contrast, Hydra returned a correct but instance-tied rule that hard-codes a specific relation between constants (e.g., 𝐶 5 = 8 · 𝐶 6) and retains the concrete conclusion 𝑥 = 3,thereby substantially narrowing the applicability of the generalization. This gap stems from Hydra’s 16 Liao, et al. 

Table 7. Generalization timeout due to search-space explosion in Case Study 1. smin and smax are the signed minimum and maximum operations.                                                 

> Item Optimization (a) Original optimization smin (smax (𝑥 −60 ,−155 ),100 )=𝑥 −60
> ⇒ ( 𝑥 +95 )<u256
> (b) Hydra generalization Timeout
> (c) LPG generalization
> 𝐶 2≤s𝐶 3∧ ( 𝐶 3−𝐶 2)≠−1
> ⊨smin (smax (𝑥 +𝐶 1, 𝐶 2), 𝐶 3)=𝑥 +𝐶 1
> ⇒ ( 𝑥 + ( 𝐶 1−𝐶 2) ) <u(𝐶 3−𝐶 2+1)

synthesis procedure: it is greedy and time-bounded, and it terminates as soon as it finds a candidate that passes verification. Moreover, Hydra compares verified candidates mainly through a limited collection of predefined dataflow facts ( e.g. KnownBits), rather than through a broader semantic notion of generality. When these facts are insufficient to distinguish between multiple verified candidates, it becomes difficult for Hydra to determine which generalization has wider applicability, and it may therefore not consistently prefer the broader one. 

Table 8. Under-generalization in Case Study 2. cttz is the count-trailing-zeros operation, which returns the number of trailing zeros in the binary representation of its argument.                                                         

> Item Optimization (a) Original optimization 16 & (2≪𝑥 )≠0⇒𝑥 =3
> (b) Hydra generalization PowerOfTwo (𝐶 5) ∧ PowerOfTwo (𝐶 6) ∧ 𝐶 5=8·𝐶 6
> ⊨𝐶 5&(𝐶 6≪𝑥 )≠0⇒𝑥 =3
> (c) LPG generalization PowerOfTwo (𝐶 1) ∧ PowerOfTwo (𝐶 2)
> ⊨(𝐶 2&(𝐶 1≪𝑥 ) ) ≠0⇒𝑥 =cttz (𝐶 2) − cttz (𝐶 1)

Case Study 3: Generalization on Floating-Point Optimizations. Table 9 presents a represen-tative floating-point clamp optimization [ 34 ]. This case shows the third key difference: LPG handles floating-point optimizations, while Hydra does not. Generalizing floating-point optimizations requires reasoning under IEEE-754 semantics [ 25 ], where even simple algebraic transformations may be invalidated by NaNs, ±∞ , signed zeros, or rounding, etc. For example, Table 9(c) includes two seemingly “redundant” preconditions, fcmp oeq (− 𝐶 1/2 · 2, −𝐶 1) and fcmp oeq (𝐶 1 · 0, 0). However, they are necessary under IEEE-754 semantics to ensure no underflow to signed zero in 𝐶 1 and that 𝐶 1 is finite (avoiding NaNs from 𝐶 1 · 0). The complexity in floating-point operation semantics enlarges the search space relative to integer patterns, making it more difficult for synthesis-based approaches to synthesize a correct generalization result within a fixed search budget. Moreover, Hy-dra builds its generalization pipeline upon the Souper superoptimizer, which only supports integer and bitvector operations. Extending to floating-point peephole generalization requires substantial manual engineering, including supporting floating-point related operators, IEEE-754 semantics, and re-tuned search heuristics, etc. In contrast, LPG uses LLMs to generate a generalization together with the IEEE-754 precondition required for the optimization to be valid (e.g., finiteness and lossless scaling constraints in Table 9(c)). Therefore, LPG mitigates the combinatorial blowup that arises from enumerating candidate precondition beyond integer-only patterns, an inherent limitation of program-synthesis-based approaches that can incur substantial computational overhead. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 17 

Table 9. Floating-point optimization generalization in Case Study 3. fcmp_oeq is the ordered-equal floating-point comparison.                                      

> Item Optimization (a) Original optimization fcmp oeq (2·𝑥 −1,0) ⇒ 𝑥 =0.5
> (b) Hydra generalization Unsupported (integer-only)
> (c) LPG generalization fcmp oeq (− 𝐶 1/2·2,−𝐶 1) ∧ fcmp oeq (𝐶 1·0,0)
> ⊨fcmp oeq (2·𝑥 +𝐶 1,0) ⇒ 𝑥 =−𝐶 1/2

RQ1 : LPG effectively generalizes real-world peephole optimizations, retaining 90 verified generalizations out of 102 instances across various instruction domains. On integer-related optimizations, it not only achieves a higher success count than Hydra (74 vs. 35), but also successfully generalizes every instance solved by Hydra; over this shared comparison set, 

LPG more often yields a strictly more general rule (22 vs. 2). The case studies further show that LPG can overcome search-space explosion and under-generalization, while also extending generalization to floating-point optimizations beyond Hydra’s scope. 

4.3 RQ2: What is the impact of each strategy on the generalization quality? 

To assess how each generalization strategy in LPG affects the quality of the synthesized rewrite rules, we quantified the effectiveness of each strategy by counting the number of optimization instances in which it contributes to a retained generalization, i.e. , one that passes the verfication described in § 3.2 and attains broader applicability. This analysis considers the four stages described in § 3. For finer-grained analysis, we further decomposed constraint relaxation into three substeps: removing precondition, weakening precondition, and removing flags or attributes. We instrumented LPG to record a strategy application as effective when it produces a candidate rule that is retained by LPG . We then aggregated these effective applications across all successful optimization instances and reported the number of accepted applications for each strategy stage or substep under constraint relaxation. 

Table 10. Contribution analysis of LPG ’s generalization strategies. “#Effective/#Success” represents effective applications over all successfully generalized optimizations.        

> Strategy #Effective/#Success
> Constant Symbolic Generalization 90/90 Structural Generalization 23/90 Constraint Relaxation (Remove precondition) 13/90 Constraint Relaxation (Weaken precondition) 30/90 Constraint Relaxation (Flag & Attribute Removal) 24/90 Bitwidth/Precision Generalization 78/90

4.3.1 Results. Table 10 shows that both high-level strategy stages and finer-grained constraint-relaxation operations make meaningful contributions to LPG ’s accepted generalizations. Constant symbolic generalization and structural generalization account for 90 and 23 effective applications, respectively, while bitwidth/precision generalization contributes 78. Within constraint relaxation, effective applications arise from removing precondition (13), weakening precondition (30), and 18 Liao, et al. 

removing flags or attributes (24). Taken together, these results indicate that LPG ’s effectiveness depends on all of these strategies to enlarge the applicability of original peephole optimizations.         

> Table 11. Change magnitude of effective strategy applications in LPG . “#Affected/#Effective” reports the number of transformed elements per effective application. “#Affected” counts the number of generalized constants, structurally abstracted elements, removed precondition, weakened precondition, removed flags or attributes.
> Strategy #Affected/#Effective
> Constant Symbolic Generalization 216/90 Structural Generalization 24/23 Constraint Relaxation (Remove precondition) 17/13 Constraint Relaxation (Weaken precondition) 34/30 Constraint Relaxation (Flag & Attribute Removal) 48/24

Table 11 shows the contribution counts by characterizing the change magnitude of each effective strategy application. Constant symbolic generalization generalizes 216 constants across 90 effective applications, while structural generalization abstracts 24 structural elements across 23 effective applications. Within constraint relaxation, removing precondition, weakening precondition, and removing flags or attributes affect 17, 34, and 48 elements over 13, 30, and 24 effective applica-tions, respectively. For bitwidth/precision generalization, we did not count the number of affected elements, it is applied to an optimization as a whole rather than to individual elements. Taken together, these results show that LPG ’s strategies differ not only in how often they contribute, but also in the granularity of the transformations they introduce. 

RQ2 : All strategy stages contribute to LPG ’s final effectiveness, indicating that high-quality generalization depends on their complementarity rather than any single transformation. The results further show that these strategies operate at different dimensions, and collectively enlarge the applicability of generalization rules 

4.4 RQ3: How do different large language models affect LPG’s generalization performance? 

To answer RQ3, we instantiated LPG with four Qwen3 variants: Qwen3-235B-Instruct, Qwen3-235B-Thinking, Qwen3-30B-Thinking, and Qwen3-30B-Instruct. These models span two model scales (30B and 235B) and two modes (Instruct and Thinking), where Instruct variants generate responses by directly following the prompt, whereas Thinking variants perform explicit reasoning before producing an answer. Therefore, it enables a controlled comparison of how model capacity and explicit reasoning behavior affect LPG ’s ability to generalize real-world peephole optimizations. To minimize the confounding effect of potential data leakage, we conducted this comparison exclusively on LPGDataset . For each model, we ran the same preprocessing, prompting, verification, and post-processing pipeline on the same LPGDataset instances, so that the only changing factor is the underlying LLM. In particular, comparing Qwen3-235B-Instruct with Qwen3-30B-Instruct isolates the effect of model scale under the same non-reasoning interface, while comparing Qwen3-235B-Thinking with Qwen3-30B-Thinking provides the corresponding scale comparison under reasoning mode. Likewise, comparing the Thinking and Instruct variants at the same scale allows us to assess the marginal effect of enabling explicit reasoning. Moreover, all four Qwen3 variants share the same knowledge cutoff date (April 2025), which helps reduce confounding effects from unequal training horizons. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 19           

> Table 12. Model comparison for RQ3.
> Model Reasoning #Success /#Total
> Qwen3-235B-Instruct No 33/62 Qwen3-235B-Thinking Yes 53/62 Qwen3-30B-Instruct No 28/62 Qwen3-30B-Thinking Yes 37/62

4.4.1 Results. Table 12 reports the model comparison results on LPGDataset . Among the four variants, Qwen3-235B-Thinking achieves the strongest performance, retaining 53 out of 62 gener-alizations. It is followed by Qwen3-30B-Thinking with 37 retained generalizations, Qwen3-235B-Instruct with 33, and Qwen3-30B-Instruct with 28. Two main findings emerge from these results. First, enabling explicit reasoning consistently improves performance at both model scales. At 235B, switching from Instruct to Thinking increases the number of retained generalizations from 33 to 53; at 30B, the same change increases the number from 28 to 37. This trend is consistent with the view that the Thinking mode provides stronger effective reasoning capability, particularly for optimizations whose generalized rules require preconditions with multiple conjunctive clauses. In such cases, the model appears better able to capture the semantic structure implicit in the original optimization and translate it into valid, more broadly applicable rewrite rules. Second, increasing model scale also improves performance, but its effect depends on the reasoning mode. Under Instruct mode, scaling from 30B to 235B yields only a modest gain, from 28 to 33. In contrast, under Thinking mode, the same scale increase leads to a much larger improvement, from 37 to 53. 

RQ3 : Model choice materially affects LPG ’s performance, with Qwen3-235B-Thinking achieving the best result (53/62). Explicit reasoning consistently improves performance at both scales, and the benefit of larger model scale is substantially greater under reasoning mode. 

4.5 Threats to Validity 

The first threat to validity is potential data leakage. Since our task is to generalize previously reported peephole optimizations, it is possible that the training data of the evaluated LLMs already contain information related to some benchmark instances, which could inflate the results. To mitigate this threat, we curated LPGDataset using LLVM issues reported after the knowledge cutoff dates of the evaluated LLMs and report its results separately from HydraDataset . Another threat is that the collected benchmarks may not be fully representative of all real-world peephole optimizations. To mitigate this threat, we evaluated LPG on two datasets covering multiple instruction domains and retained only carefully curated cases that passed our verification pipeline. 

5 Related Work 

In this section, we discuss the previous work related to LPG .

5.1 Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 

Hydra [ 43 ] is the most closely related work to LPG . It generalizes specific peephole optimizations based on program synthesis on top of Souper [ 46 ]. As discussed in § 2.2, Hydra remains limited by search-space explosion and fails on complex patterns, its heuristic and greedy synthesis strategy can yield under-generalized result without semantic understanding, and it only supports peep-hole optimizations in the integer domain. Based on superoptimization and enumerative search, 20 Liao, et al. 

Optgen [ 21 ] is another peephole optimization generalization work supporting symbolic constants and preconditions. Optgen works by enumerating all possible preconditions and all possible con-stant expressions, but it does not allow users to generalize a specific, ungeneralized optimization and it only supports optimizations at 8 and 32 bits. Besides, it does not support dataflow facts (e.g. PowerOfTwo), which are crucial for generalizaion. Overall, it only supports a limited set of optimizations and less suited to generalizing specific real-world optimizations or more complex rewrites. Proofgen [ 51 ] follows a different route to generalizing peephole optimizations. It adopts a proof-centric approach that derives generalized optimizations from explicit correctness proofs, rather than from a generate-and-verify workflow. This direction is powerful in principle, but it shows some limitations. First, the generalization is strictly bound to the explicit proof structure and different proofs or even different linearization orders of the same proof tree can yield entirely incomparable rules. Second, its capability is bottlenecked by the predefined axioms, restricting the system to concepts explicitly captured within that domain. Finally, this proof-centric approach has not yet been shown to scale to the complex, real-world generalizations. In contrast, LPG takes a more flexible and scalable approach to generalizing peephole optimiza-tions. LPG organizes generalization as a closed-loop pipeline that combines LLM-guided symbolic constant generalization, structural generalization, constraint relaxation, and bitwidth/precision generalization with feedback from syntactic checking, semantic verification, and profitability as-sessment. This approach allows LPG to handle a much broader range of optimization patterns, and to discover more general optimization rules. 

5.2 Superoptimization 

Superoptimization is a more aggressive optimization technique that searches for an equivalent but better implementation of a given program fragment, usually with solver-backed or formally checked validation. Massalin et al. introduced the classical superoptimizer based on exhaustive enumeration of short instruction sequences [ 39 ]. Josh et al. later proposed Denali, formulating superoptimization as goal-directed search guided by theorem proving [ 26 ], while Bansal and Aiken showed how brute-force search can automatically build peephole superoptimizers [ 18 ]. Schkufza 

et al. proposed STOKE, which further improved scalability by using stochastic search for loop-free x86 code [ 47 ]. Within the LLVM ecosystem, Souper synthesizes more efficient equivalents for a restricted, dataflow-oriented subset of LLVM IR [ 46 ], and Minotaur extends this direction toward SIMD-oriented code and broader instruction support [29]. These systems are effective at discovering concrete rewrites, but they generally target fixed program fragments and concrete constants. They do not directly address our setting of starting from a concrete missed optimization and inferring a reusable generalized rule with symbolic constants, dataflow facts, and preconditions. 

5.3 Automatic Missed Optimization Detection 

A complementary line of work focuses on automatically exposing optimization opportunities that production compilers miss. Barany uses differential testing to identify missed compiler optimiza-tions [ 19 ]. Taneja et al. use offline, SMT-based checking to expose imprecision in static analyses that can lead to missed optimizations [ 50 ]. Theodoridis et al. propose using dead code elimination as a lens for finding missed optimizations in LLVM and GCC [ 52 ], and later show that providing compilers with refined inputs can still lead to degraded optimized output because of unexpected optimization interactions [ 53 ]. DITWO extends differential testing to WebAssembly optimizers [ 30 ], and SBC cross-validates coordinated optimization behaviors to detect missed opportunities across passes [ 56 ]. Most recently, Lampo combines LLMs with formal verification to discover missed peephole optimizations in LLVM [54]. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 21 

These techniques are complementary to LPG . They help surface missed opportunities or the anal-ysis imprecision that causes them, but they do not focus on synthesizing a generalized optimization rule from a concrete optimization instance. 

5.4 Finding Weakest Preconditions 

Another related line of work focuses on inferring the weakest or sufficiently weak preconditions for an already known transformation, rather than synthesizing the transformation itself. PSyCO [ 38 ] is an early compiler-specific system in this space and synthesizes weakest preconditions for compiler optimizations within a predefined precondition language. Alive-Infer [ 40 ] later adopts a data-driven strategy for LLVM peephole optimizations expressed in Alive: it learns predicates that separate positive and negative examples, and reports both weakest and succinct partial preconditions. Outside compiler optimization, PIE [ 44 ] and P-Gen [ 48 ] study the broader problem of program precondition inference. PIE learns features on demand from examples to infer richer preconditions, while P-Gen uses counterexample-guided refinement to derive necessary and sufficient preconditions. These techniques are complementary to LPG . They all assume that the source and target programs are already fixed and aim to infer only the guard under which the optimization or program is valid, whereas LPG targets a harder setting: starting from concrete optimizations, it infers the generalized optimization rule itself together with its applicable conditions. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper presents LPG , a novel framework for generalizing peephole optimizations with large language models. Our central insight is that LLMs are effective at semantic abstraction and creative reasoning during generalization, while rigorous verification is necessary to ensure the correctness of the generalization. Accordingly, LPG organizes peephole generalization as a closed-loop pipeline that combines symbolic constant generalization, structural generalization, constraint relaxation, and bitwidth/precision generalization with syntactic checking, formal semantic verification, and profitability assessment. Through a comprehensive evaluation on real-world peephole optimizations from the LLVM ecosystem, we show that LPG successfully generalizes 90 out of 102 optimization instances across integer, floating-point, and memory domains. On integer-related optimizations, 

LPG also substantially outperforms Hydra in both success rate and generality, demonstrating that LLM-guided generalization can overcome the search-space explosion, Under-Generalization, and domain restrictions that limit prior program-synthesis-based approaches. Our results suggest that LLMs can serve as a practical foundation for compiler optimization when they are coupled with strong verification rather than used as standalone generators. The success of LPG indicates that similar methodologies could be applied to other compiler tasks that require semantic abstraction over concrete program transformations. More broadly, as reasoning-capable LLMs continue to improve, we expect frameworks like LPG to become an increasingly useful tool for helping compiler developers discover broader, more reusable, and more reliable optimization rules for modern compilation pipelines. 

References       

> [1] 2012. Missed instcombine with pointer differences. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/12792#issuecomment-1232603132 [2] 2021. [InstCombine] fold multiply and equality compare with constant. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/ 51744#issue-1077401101 [3] 2022. [InstCombine] missing fold for ’or’ with mismatched extends. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/59519 [4] 2022. LLVM Issue #55739: Failure to optimise shift+and+boolean conversion pattern to simple comparison. https: //github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/55739

22 Liao, et al. 

[5] 2022. Missed optimization: fold icmp sgt (fptosi %x), -1 to fcmp ogt %x, -1.0. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/ issues/154242#issuecomment-3218334136 [6] 2024. Comment on LLVM Issue #79690: [Vector Saturating Subtractions should be flipped around when the result is AND’ed]. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/79690#issuecomment-2914688099 [7] 2024. LLVM Issue 139641: InstCombine: Fold (X * 0.0) + 0.0 to X * 0.0 when optimization is safe. https://github.com/ llvm/llvm-project/issues/139641#issuecomment-2878901127. Accessed: 2026-02-09. [8] 2024. LLVM Issue #86061: [missed fold, zext(x + 1) - 1 > C => x > C]. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/ 86061#issuecomment-2011298443 [9] 2024. LLVM Issue #88481: [[InstCombine] Missing fold for nested selects]. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/ issues/88481#issue-2239303371 [10] 2024. LLVM Issue #97168: [Missed optimization for one-hot encoding]. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/ 97168#issuecomment-2735787019 [11] 2024. missed fold, x fmul C1 > C2 => x > C3. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/85267 [12] 2025. a & ~(a - b) optimizes to a & (~a + b) even though most targets have an ANDN instruction. https://github.com/ llvm/llvm-project/issues/140639#issuecomment-2892729284 [13] 2025. Failure to recognise unnecessary sext for add+cmp. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/130088# issuecomment-2706811286 [14] 2026. Missed optimization: fold frexp(x).exp < C to fabs(x) < 2(𝐶 −1) . https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/ 186554 [15] 2026. Missed optimization: fold x*a == b -> x == b/a. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/153991 [16] 2026. Missed Optimization: implemented using icmp and select and replace it with llvm.maxnum. https://github.com/ llvm/llvm-project/issues/186300 [17] Alfred V Aho, Monica S Lam, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D Ullman. 2006. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools (2nd ed.). Pearson Education. [18] Sorav Bansal and Alex Aiken. 2006. Automatic generation of peephole superoptimizers. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 40, 5 (Oct. 2006), 394–403. doi:10.1145/1168917.1168906 [19] Gergö Barany. 2018. Finding missed compiler optimizations by differential testing. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Compiler Construction (Vienna, Austria) (CC ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 82–92. doi:10.1145/3178372.3179521 [20] Clark Barrett and Cesare Tinelli. 2018. Satisfiability modulo theories. In Handbook of model checking . Springer, 305–343. [21] Sebastian Buchwald. 2015. Optgen: A generator for local optimizations. In International Conference on Compiler Construction . Springer, 171–189. [22] Keith D. Cooper and Linda Torczon. 2011. Engineering a Compiler (2nd ed.). Morgan Kaufmann. [23] Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. Z3: an efficient SMT solver. In Proceedings of the Theory and Practice of Software, 14th International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (Budapest, Hungary) (TACAS’08/ETAPS’08) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 337–340. [24] dtcxzyw. 2026. Comment on LLVM Issue #139641: Missed Optimization: -(x & c1) » shamt | -(x & c1) –> x & c1 ? -1 : 0 when 2𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑚𝑡 > c1 and shamt ≤ bitwidth(x)/2. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/139641#issuecomment-3979594887 [25] IEEE. 2019. IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic. doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229 [26] Rajeev Joshi, Greg Nelson, and Keith Randall. 2002. Denali: A Goal-Directed Superoptimizer. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2002 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Berlin, Germany) (PLDI ’02) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 304–314. doi:10.1145/512529.512566 [27] Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. 2004. LLVM: A Compilation Framework for Lifelong Program Analysis & Transfor-mation. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization: Feedback-Directed and Runtime Optimization (Palo Alto, California) (CGO ’04) . IEEE Computer Society, USA, 75. [28] Vu Le, Mehrdad Afshari, and Zhendong Su. 2014. Compiler validation via equivalence modulo inputs. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Edinburgh, United Kingdom) 

(PLDI ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 216–226. doi:10.1145/2594291.2594334 [29] Zhengyang Liu, Stefan Mada, and John Regehr. 2024. Minotaur: A SIMD-Oriented Synthesizing Superoptimizer. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, OOPSLA2, Article 326 (Oct. 2024), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3689766 [30] Zhibo Liu, Dongwei Xiao, Zongjie Li, Shuai Wang, and Wei Meng. 2023. Exploring Missed Optimizations in We-bAssembly Optimizers. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Seattle, WA, USA) (ISSTA 2023) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 436–448. doi:10.1145/3597926.3598068 [31] LLVM. 2026. llc - LLVM static compiler. https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/llc.html. Accessed: 2026-01-11. Leveraging Large Language Models for Generalizing Peephole Optimizations 23 

[32] LLVM Developers. 2025. LLVM Machine Code Analyzer . https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-mca.html [33] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Issue #157315. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/157315 [34] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Issue #185554. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/185554 [35] Nuno P. Lopes, Juneyoung Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, Zhengyang Liu, and John Regehr. 2021. Alive2: bounded translation validation for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Virtual, Canada) (PLDI 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 65–79. doi:10.1145/3453483.3454030 [36] Nuno P. Lopes, David Menendez, Santosh Nagarakatte, and John Regehr. 2015. Provably correct peephole optimizations with alive. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation 

(Portland, OR, USA) (PLDI ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 22–32. doi:10.1145/ 2737924.2737965 [37] Nuno P. Lopes, David Menendez, Santosh Nagarakatte, and John Regehr. 2015. Provably correct peephole optimizations with alive. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation 

(Portland, OR, USA) (PLDI ’15) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 22–32. doi:10.1145/ 2737924.2737965 [38] Nuno P. Lopes and José Monteiro. 2014. Weakest Precondition Synthesis for Compiler Optimizations. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation - Volume 8318 (San Diego, CA, USA) (VMCAI 2014) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 203–221. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-54013-4_12 [39] Henry Massalin. 1987. Superoptimizer: A Look at the Smallest Program. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Palo Alto, California, USA) 

(ASPLOS II) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 122–126. doi:10.1145/36206.36194 [40] David Menendez and Santosh Nagarakatte. 2017. Alive-Infer: data-driven precondition inference for peephole optimizations in LLVM. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Barcelona, Spain) (PLDI 2017) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 49–63. doi:10.1145/3062341.3062372 [41] Steven S. Muchnick. 1997. Advanced Compiler Design and Implementation . Morgan Kaufmann. [42] Manasij Mukherjee. 2026. Hydra: GitHub Repository. https://github.com/manasij7479/hydra [43] Manasij Mukherjee and John Regehr. 2024. Hydra: Generalizing Peephole Optimizations with Program Synthesis. 

Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, OOPSLA1, Article 120 (April 2024), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3649837 [44] Saswat Padhi, Rahul Sharma, and Todd Millstein. 2016. Data-driven precondition inference with learned features. 

SIGPLAN Not. 51, 6 (June 2016), 42–56. doi:10.1145/2980983.2908099 [45] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Instruction Combiner Pass Source Code. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/ llvm/lib/Transforms/InstCombine. [46] Raimondas Sasnauskas, Yang Chen, Peter Collingbourne, Jeroen Ketema, Gratian Lup, Jubi Taneja, and John Regehr. 2018. Souper: A Synthesizing Superoptimizer. arXiv:1711.04422 [cs.PL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04422 [47] Eric Schkufza, Rahul Sharma, and Alex Aiken. 2013. Stochastic Superoptimization. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Houston, Texas, USA) (ASPLOS ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 305–316. doi:10.1145/2451116.2451150 [48] Mohamed Nassim Seghir and Daniel Kroening. 2013. Counterexample-Guided Precondition Inference. In Programming Languages and Systems (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 7792) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 451–471. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37036-6_25 [49] Chengnian Sun, Vu Le, Qirun Zhang, and Zhendong Su. 2016. Toward understanding compiler bugs in GCC and LLVM. In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (Saarbrücken, Germany) 

(ISSTA 2016) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 294–305. doi:10.1145/2931037.2931074 [50] Jubi Taneja, Zhengyang Liu, and John Regehr. 2020. Testing static analyses for precision and soundness. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (San Diego, CA, USA) (CGO ’20) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 81–93. doi:10.1145/3368826.3377927 [51] Ross Tate, Michael Stepp, and Sorin Lerner. 2010. Generating compiler optimizations from proofs. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Madrid, Spain) (POPL ’10) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 389–402. doi:10.1145/1706299.1706345 [52] Theodoros Theodoridis, Manuel Rigger, and Zhendong Su. 2022. Finding missed optimizations through the lens of dead code elimination. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Lausanne, Switzerland) (ASPLOS ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 697–709. doi:10.1145/3503222.3507764 [53] Theodoros Theodoridis and Zhendong Su. 2024. Refined Input, Degraded Output: The Counterintuitive World of Compiler Behavior. 8, PLDI, Article 174 (June 2024), 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3656404 24 Liao, et al. 

[54] Zhenyang Xu, Hongxu Xu, Yongqiang Tian, Xintong Zhou, and Chengnian Sun. 2026. LPO: Discovering Missed Peephole Optimizations with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (USA) (ASPLOS ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1136–1150. doi:10.1145/3779212.3790184 [55] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers. In 

Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (San Jose, California, USA) (PLDI ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 283–294. doi:10.1145/1993498. 1993532 [56] Yi Zhang, Yu Wang, Linzhang Wang, and Ke Wang. 2025. Synchronized Behavior Checking: A Method for Finding Missed Compiler Optimizations. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, OOPSLA2, Article 327 (Oct. 2025), 28 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3763105