Title: Habitat-GS: A High-Fidelity Navigation Simulator with Dynamic Gaussian Splatting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12626v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:35:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Habitat-GS: A High-Fidelity Navigation Simulator with Dynamic Gaussian Splatting 

Ziyuan Xia 1, Jingyi Xu 1, Chong Cui 1, Yuanhong Yu 1, Jiazhao Zhang 2,Qingsong Yan 3, Tao Ni 4, Junbo Chen 4, Xiaowei Zhou 1, Hujun Bao 1, Ruizhen Hu 5, and Sida Peng 1†

> 1

Zhejiang University 2Peking University 3XGRIDS 4UDeer AI 5Shenzhen University 

https://zju3dv.github.io/habitat-gs/ 

Abstract. Training embodied AI agents depends critically on the vi-sual fidelity of simulation environments and the ability to model dynamic humans. Current simulators rely on mesh-based rasterization with lim-ited visual realism, and their support for dynamic human avatars, where available, is constrained to mesh representations, hindering agent gener-alization to human-populated real-world scenarios. We present Habitat-GS, a navigation-centric embodied AI simulator extended from Habitat-Sim that integrates 3D Gaussian Splatting scene rendering and drivable gaussian avatars while maintaining full compatibility with the Habitat ecosystem. Our system implements a 3DGS renderer for real-time photo-realistic rendering and supports scalable 3DGS asset import from diverse sources. For dynamic human modeling, we introduce a gaussian avatar module that enables each avatar to simultaneously serve as a photoreal-istic visual entity and an effective navigation obstacle, allowing agents to learn human-aware behaviors in realistic settings. Experiments on point-goal navigation demonstrate that agents trained on 3DGS scenes achieve stronger cross-domain generalization, with mixed-domain training being the most effective strategy. Evaluations on avatar-aware navigation fur-ther confirm that gaussian avatars enable effective human-aware naviga-tion. Finally, performance benchmarks validate the system’s scalability across varying scene complexity and avatar counts. 

Keywords: Embodied AI Simulation · 3D Gaussian Splatting · Dy-namic Gaussian Avatar 

## 1 Introduction 

Consider a household service robot tasked with navigating to a target location in a living room where people walk, sit, and move about freely. To navigate safely and effectively, the robot must perceive its surroundings with sufficient visual fidelity to recognize scenes and objects, and must detect and respond to dynamic human occupants for socially compliant navigation. Training such  

> †

Corresponding author 

> arXiv:2604.12626v1 [cs.RO] 14 Apr 2026

2 Z. Xia et al. Unrealistic Mesh Avatar Drivable Gaussian Avatar  

> Geometry Artifacts High -Fidelity Rendering
> Robust Agent

Fig. 1: Habitat-GS is a navigation-centric embodied simulation platform with 3DGS and dynamic gaussian avatars. Compared to traditional mesh-based simulators (left), our 3DGS-based simulator (right) preserves high-frequency visual details and view-dependent effects, while gaussian avatars provide realistic and dynamic human presence for human-aware navigation scenarios, thus helping train more robust agents. 

embodied agents directly in the physical world is slow, expensive, potentially dangerous, and difficult to reproduce across experiments [23]. The prevailing paradigm in Embodied AI is therefore to train agents at scale in simulation and transfer the learned policies to reality [1,3,30]. This paradigm places two critical demands on the simulator: the visual realism of rendered sensor observations directly governs the effectiveness of Sim-to-Real policy transfer, and the ability to populate scenes with realistic dynamic humans determines whether agents can learn to navigate safely among people. The leading open-source Embodied AI simulators, including Habitat-Sim [21, 23, 27], iGibson [24], AI2-THOR [9], ThreeDWorld [5], and SAPIEN [32], rely on mesh-based rasterization for visual rendering. While computationally efficient and well suited for basic geometric reasoning, the mesh representation inherently limits visual realism. Textured meshes lack high-frequency surface details, and view-dependent appearance effects such as specular reflections and subsurface scattering are difficult to reproduce faithfully via conventional rasterization. The resulting visual domain gap between simulation and reality, commonly termed the Sim-to-Real gap, has been shown to degrade the transfer of learned naviga-tion policies to physical platforms [29]. Beyond rendering quality, native support for dynamic high-fidelity human avatars remains limited across these platforms. Habitat 3.0 [21] introduced mesh-based humanoid avatars for studying social Habitat-GS 3

human-robot tasks, yet the visual quality of mesh avatars remains constrained. Most other simulators provide little or no avatar support, precluding research on navigation in human-populated environments. Finally, constructing high-quality textured mesh assets from real-world data entails labor-intensive 3D scanning, artist cleanup, and semantic annotation [26], resulting in a scalability bottleneck for expanding the diversity of training environments. Industrial-grade platforms such as NVIDIA Isaac Sim [18], built on the Omniverse rendering stack, have recently incorporated 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [8] for enhanced visual fidelity. However, their closed-source rendering backends impede the deep customization often required for research purposes. Moreover, these platforms depend on RT Core hardware available only in RTX-series GPUs, limiting their utility on datacenter-class accelerators such as A100 and H100. We present Habitat-GS , a navigation-centric embodied AI simulator up-graded from Habitat-Sim that integrates 3DGS scene rendering and drivable gaussian avatars while maintaining full compatibility with the Habitat ecosys-tem, including Habitat-Lab tasks, training, and evaluation APIs. Habitat-GS addresses the limitations described above along three complementary axes. First ,we implement a 3DGS renderer that delivers real-time photorealistic rendering within the Habitat sensor pipeline, substantially narrowing the Sim-to-Real gap relative to mesh-based rendering. Second , we design a gaussian avatar module that represents dynamic humans as animatable gaussians. By employing pre-baked canonical gaussians with CUDA-accelerated Linear Blend Skinning, avatar deformation is driven in real time by SMPL-X [19] pose sequences without neural network inference at runtime. Combined with GAMMA-generated [34] natural motion trajectories and offline-computed proxy capsules with online NavMesh blocking, each avatar simultaneously serves as a photorealistic visual entity and an effective dynamic obstacle for navigation. Third , Habitat-GS supports scal-able import of 3DGS assets from diverse sources. These include self-reconstructed scenes, public 3DGS datasets, and generative 3DGS pipelines like Marble [31], substantially lowering the barrier to obtaining high-quality, photorealistic scene assets. We validate Habitat-GS through comprehensive experiments across multi-ple navigation paradigms. A VLM-based scene quality assessment first confirms that 3DGS scenes substantially surpass mesh scenes in rendering quality, real-ism, and scene diversity. On point-goal navigation, we then demonstrate that agents trained on 3DGS scenes exhibit stronger cross-domain generalization, with mixed-domain training producing the most effective strategy by combin-ing foundational mesh-based navigation with visual robustness from GS scenes. On avatar-aware point-goal navigation, we show that training with gaussian avatars equips agents with strong collision avoidance capabilities that generalize effectively even to lower-fidelity mesh environments. Performance benchmarks further confirm the system’s efficiency and scalability across varying scene scales and avatar counts. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 4 Z. Xia et al. 

– A high-fidelity 3DGS-based embodied AI simulation platform ex-tended from Habitat-Sim for navigation tasks, enabling real-time photore-alistic rendering and supporting scalable import from diverse 3DGS asset sources. The platform is fully open-source and maintains complete compat-ibility with the Habitat ecosystem. 

– A real-time drivable gaussian avatar module that integrates photoreal-istic gaussian avatar rendering with collision properties, supporting natural motion and navigation-level obstacle avoidance for human-aware navigation tasks. 

– Comprehensive experimental validation demonstrates, via VLM-based assessment and PointNav experiments, that 3DGS rendering improves agent cross-domain generalization through a mixed-domain training strategy, and that gaussian avatars enhance agent capability in human-populated scenar-ios, accompanied by performance benchmarks confirming system scalability. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Embodied AI Simulators 

Embodied AI research relies on simulation environments for large-scale parallel training and subsequent Sim-to-Real policy transfer [23,30]. We compare existing platforms along four dimensions, namely render asset type , humanoid avatar support , platform openness , and hardware requirements , in Tab. 1. The predominant embodied AI simulators, including Habitat-Sim [21,23,27], iGibson [11, 24], AI2-THOR [9], ThreeDWorld [5], and SAPIEN [32], all employ mesh-based rasterization for scene rendering. Regarding humanoid avatars, while some platforms now provide some form of mesh-based representation, such as URDF-driven articulated bodies [9, 32], rigid-body tracks [11], and Unity Repli-cants [5], these uniformly lack the visual fidelity needed for training agents to perceive fine-grained human appearance and motion cues. Habitat 3.0 [21] offers an avatar system with deformable SMPL-X mesh avatars for human-robot social tasks, yet mesh rendering inherently constrains visual quality. Habitat-GS inherits the Habitat ecosystem’s high-performance infrastructure and training APIs while upgrading the rendering pipeline from mesh to 3DGS and natively integrating drivable gaussian avatars, uniquely combining photo-realistic rendering, dynamic high-fidelity humanoids, and a mature open-source research ecosystem. 

2.2 Neural Rendering 

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [16] demonstrated that implicit neural scene representations can synthesize photorealistic novel views from multi-view im-ages. Subsequent works significantly improved training speed and rendering qual-ity [2, 17]. However, NeRF’s volume rendering paradigm requires per-pixel ray marching, yielding frame rates far below the real-time requirements of embodied Habitat-GS 5

Table 1: Comparison of Embodied AI simulation platforms. “GPU Req.” in-dicates hardware requirements beyond standard CUDA-capable GPUs. “No Special Req.” means standard GPUs are sufficient. Habitat-GS is the only platform combining 3DGS rendering with drivable gaussian avatars while remaining fully open-source and deployable on standard datacenter accelerators.                               

> Platform Render Asset Humanoid Avatar Open-Source GPU Req.
> Habitat [21, 23, 27] Mesh Mesh (SMPL-X) ✓No Special Req. iGibson [11, 24] Mesh Mesh (Rigid-body) ✓No Special Req. AI2-THOR [9] Mesh Mesh (URDF) ✓No Special Req. ThreeDWorld [5] Mesh Mesh (Replicants) ✓No Special Req. SAPIEN [32] Mesh Mesh (URDF) ✓No Special Req. Isaac Sim [18] Mesh+3DGS Mesh (Sim-Ready) Partial Need RT Cores
> Habitat-GS (Ours) Mesh+3DGS Mesh+GS (SMPL-X) ✓No Special Req.

AI sensor pipelines. Moreover, its implicit representation is difficult to integrate with the explicit rendering backends employed by existing simulators. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [8] represents scenes as collections of explicit anisotropic 3D Gaussians and renders them via differentiable tile-based rasteri-zation, achieving real-time frame rates while maintaining rendering quality. The explicit nature of 3DGS lends itself naturally to integration with traditional graphics pipelines, for example via CUDA-OpenGL interop, and facilitates spa-tial editing, asset composition, and dynamic deformation. Follow-up works have extended 3DGS along multiple directions, including anti-aliasing [33] and dy-namic scene modeling [15], further broadening its applicability. Habitat-GS adopts 3DGS as its scene representation precisely because its explicit formulation and real-time rendering performance enable seamless inte-gration into existing rasterization pipeline, while simultaneously providing high-fidelity rendering results. 

2.3 Gaussian Avatars 

Parametric body models such as SMPL [14] and SMPL-X [19] provide differen-tiable mappings from pose parameters to human body meshes, serving as the standard infrastructure for avatar animation. Building on this foundation, a growing number of work combines 3DGS with parametric body models to cre-ate high-fidelity, drivable human avatars. AnimatableGaussians [12] maps 2D Gaussians into UV space for pose-driven rendering. GaussianAvatar [7] deforms canonical-space gaussians to posed configurations via Linear Blend Skinning. GART [10] introduces gaussian articulated templates with differentiable defor-mation. HumanGaussian [13] leverages Score Distillation Sampling [20] for text-driven gaussian avatar generation. The shared paradigm across these methods defines gaussian attributes in a canonical space and transforms them to target poses via skinning. This approach achieves a favorable balance between visual quality and rendering speed that surpasses mesh-based avatars with limited ge-ometric fidelity and NeRF-based avatars with insufficient rendering speed. 6 Z. Xia et al. Asset Preparation Habitat -GS Simulation Environment Embodied Agent Loop         

> Scene Asset
> Avatar Asset
> Render Engine Sensor Observation
> Agent Training Loop
> 3DGS
> .ply
> Render
> Asset
> Collision
> Mesh
> Nav
> Mesh
> GAMMA
> Trajectory
> Proxy
> Capsules
> Canonical Gaussians
> 3DGS
> Rasterizer LBS
> Deformation
> RGB Depth
> Agent
> Policy
> Reward /
> Penalty
> Action
> ( Move / Turn )
> Runtime
> Lookup Dynamic Blocking
> NavMesh Blocking Module

Fig. 2: System overview of Habitat-GS. From left to right: Asset Preparation ,where 3DGS scene assets and gaussian avatar assets are prepared respectively. Habitat-GS Simulation Environment , where the render engine performs 3DGS rasterization for scene gaussians and LBS deformation followed by rasterization for avatar gaussians, producing RGB-D observations. The NavMesh blocking module retrieves pre-computed proxy capsules at runtime and injects them into the NavMesh for obstacle blocking. 

Embodied Agent Loop , where the agent policy consumes sensor observations, executes actions, and receives rewards shaped by both navigation success and avatar collision. 

## 3 Habitat-GS Simulation Environment 

Habitat-GS extends Habitat-Sim with two key upgrades: extending mesh-based scene rendering with 3D Gaussian Splatting (Sec. 3.2), and implementing a gaus-sian avatar module to drive and render avatars (Sec. 3.3). A central design prin-ciple underlying both modules is visual–navigation decoupling : 3DGS handles all visual rendering and traditional NavMeshes continue to govern navigation, which sidesteps the lack of explicit surface geometry inherent in the 3DGS rep-resentation. Below we discuss the overall system architecture and the detailed design of each module. 

3.1 System Overview 

Figure 2 illustrates the end-to-end data flow in three stages: 

Asset Preparation. The scene pipeline prepares 3DGS assets in standard PLY format, together with the conventional NavMesh required by Habitat-Sim’s nav-igation logic. The avatar pipeline produces three artifacts per identity: first ,canonical gaussian attributes, specifically positions, SH coefficients, opacities, scales, rotations, and LBS weights, exported from a trained gaussian avatar model. Second , GAMMA-generated [34] motion trajectories converted to per-frame SMPL-X joint transformation matrices. Third , proxy capsules that ap-proximate the avatar’s per-frame collision geometry. Habitat-GS 7

Habitat-GS Simulation Environment. At each frame, the system operates two parallel modules. The render engine dispatches scene gaussians to the CUDA rasterizer and simultaneously deforms avatar gaussians to the current pose via CUDA Linear Blend Skinning before rasterizing them with an independent ren-derer instance. Both color and depth outputs are transferred to OpenGL tex-tures through CUDA–OpenGL interop. The navigation module retrieves the pre-computed proxy capsules for current frame and injects them into the NavMesh as dynamic obstacles, enabling the path planner to produce collision-aware steps around moving avatars. 

Embodied Agent Loop. The composited RGB-D observations serve as sensor in-puts to the agent policy, which outputs discrete actions including move forward, turn left/right, and stop. The augmented NavMesh ensures that actions violat-ing avatar collision boundaries are clipped, while two avatar state query APIs expose clearance distances and collision flags for reward shaping and metric computation in downstream tasks (Sec. 3.4). 

3.2 3DGS Scene Rendering Integration 

The core technical challenge in integrating 3DGS into Habitat-Sim lies in bridg-ing two heterogeneous rendering backends: the Habitat sensor pipeline is built on OpenGL, whereas high-performance 3DGS rasterization relies on CUDA tile-based rendering [8]. We address this through a zero-copy CUDA–OpenGL in-teroperability mechanism that keeps all rendering data on the GPU throughout the entire pipeline, eliminating CPU-side data movement. At each frame, the CUDA rasterizer performs forward splatting and writes color and depth results to GPU buffers, which are then transferred directly to pre-registered OpenGL textures via intra-GPU memory copy. This enables real-time photorealistic ren-dering within the Habitat sensor pipeline with minimal overhead. In practice, a Habitat-GS scene may contain both 3DGS assets and tradi-tional mesh assets, as well as multiple gaussian avatars. To ensure correct occlu-sion among these heterogeneous elements, we implement a depth compositing mechanism that merges the CUDA-produced 3DGS depth with the OpenGL depth buffer via a full-screen compositing pass. For gaussian avatars, all ac-tive avatars’ deformed gaussians are concatenated into a single GPU buffer and rasterized in one CUDA pass, then composited against the main framebuffer. This ensures correct depth ordering among 3DGS scenes, mesh objects, and an arbitrary number of avatars within a single frame. 

3.3 Dynamic Gaussian Avatar Module 

Existing gaussian avatar methods [7, 12] focus exclusively on standalone recon-struction and rendering, without coupling to simulator sensor pipelines or nav-igation mesh systems. To address this limitation, Habitat-GS incorporates an avatar module that supports the rendering, driving, and collision detection of gaussian avatars. We pre-bake canonical gaussian attributes offline and employ a 8 Z. Xia et al. Ours (3DGS Scenes)  

> Habitat -Sim
> (Mesh Scenes)
> Generative Pipeline Self Reconstructed Public Dataset

Fig. 3: Visual comparison of scene rendering. Mesh-based rendering (left) vs. our 3DGS rendering (right). Our simulator is based on 3DGS, which preserves high-frequency details and supports diverse sources of rendering assets. 

lightweight CUDA LBS kernel to deform them to arbitrary SMPL-X [19] poses, thereby avoiding costly neural network inference at runtime. Below we detail how this rendering capability is combined with driving trajectory and NavMesh blocking mechanism. 

GAMMA Trajectory. To drive avatars along scene-aware, physically plausible walking paths, we employ the GAMMA motion generation model [34] in an offline trajectory synthesis pipeline. Given a start point, an end point and several via points sampled on a scene’s NavMesh, we first compute a shortest path connecting all waypoints. This path is then fed as guiding targets to GAMMA, which generates temporally coherent body poses coupled with root translations. For each frame, we then compute the SMPL-X joint transformation matrices via forward kinematics. At runtime, the avatar module interpolates the joint matrices and root trajectory at the current simulation time and passes the results to the CUDA LBS kernel for deformation. 

Dynamic NavMesh Blocking. Since the 3DGS representation lacks a well-defined geometric surface, it is unsuitable for direct collision detection. To enable navigation-level obstacle interaction, we introduce a proxy capsule mechanism that decouples the avatar’s visual appearance from its collision geometry. During the offline trajectory synthesis stage, we generate a set of capsule primitives from the skeletal bone segments of the SMPL-X model, and pre-compute their world-space positions for each frame of the trajectory. At runtime, capsule positions are retrieved through temporal interpolation with negligible computational cost. A static NavMesh cannot express the time-varying occupancy of moving avatars. We therefore extend the Habitat-Sim path planner to support dynamic capsule obstacles . Each simulation step, the avatar manager collects the proxy Habitat-GS 9Ours ( Dynamic Gaussian Avatar) Habitat -Sim (Mesh Avatar) 

Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison of mesh avatars and gaussian avatars. Gaus-sian avatars exhibit significantly higher visual fidelity, preserving fine-grained details such as clothing wrinkles and hair texture. 

capsules of all active avatars and injects them into the path planner as dynamic obstacles. The path planner is augmented with a step clipping routine that checks for intersection between the agent’s bounding capsule and each avatar capsule, clipping agent’s motion at the collision boundary if necessary. This mechanism guarantees that the agent will not pass through any avatar’s body. 

3.4 APIs for Habitat-Lab 

Habitat-GS is designed for seamless integration with Habitat-Lab. During scene initialization, the simulator automatically loads gaussian avatar configurations from the scene description file and instantiates all avatars. At each simulation step, avatar pose updates are triggered transparently, synchronizing both visual and navigation pipeline. The sensor outputs, both RGB and depth, produced by 3DGS rendering are format-identical to those of the mesh renderer, allowing existing Habitat-Lab tasks including PointNav [1] to run on 3DGS scenes without modification. For avatar-aware navigation tasks such as avatar-aware point-goal navigation, two additional query APIs are provided. One returns the distance to the nearest avatar capsule, and the other indicates whether a candidate step is blocked. To-gether, these provide the information needed for computing rewards and metrics. Researchers can leverage these APIs to design proximity-based rewards, collision penalties, and tracking metrics within the Habitat-Lab framework. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate Habitat-GS along three complementary axes: 10 Z. Xia et al. 

First , we quantify the quality advantage of 3DGS scenes via a VLM-based assessment and demonstrate that training on these higher-quality scenes im-proves agent visual robustness and cross-domain generalization on PointNav (Sec. 4.2). Second , we examine whether training with dynamic gaussian avatars equips agents with human-aware navigation capabilities on dynamic point-goal navigation (Sec. 4.3). Third , we examine whether the system remains efficient under varying scene complexity and avatar counts (Sec. 4.4). We first describe the shared experimental setup. 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. For 3DGS scenes , we combine the InteriorGS dataset [25] with addi-tional real-world reconstructed GS scenes in a 4:1 ratio, yielding 120 scenes split into 100 for training and 20 for testing. For mesh scenes , we use the Habitat-Matterport 3D (HM3D) dataset [22], similarly split into 100 training and 20 test scenes. Importantly, the GS and mesh test sets are drawn from disjoint scene collections rather than two representations of the same physical spaces, so that evaluation measures cross-domain generalization. For gaussian avatars , we export canonical gaussians from six trained Ani-matableGaussians [12] identities, with three for training and three held out for testing. Each avatar is driven by GAMMA-generated [34] motion trajectories with pre-computed joint matrices and proxy capsules. 

Evaluation Metrics. We adopt standard embodied navigation metrics. Suc-cess Rate (SR) measures the fraction of episodes in which the agent reaches the goal within a distance threshold. Success weighted by Path Length (SPL) [1] jointly captures success and path efficiency: SPL = SR ×(ℓ∗/ℓ ), where 

ℓ∗ is the geodesic shortest-path length and ℓ the agent’s actual path length. Dis-tance to Goal (DTG) records the Euclidean distance between the agent and the goal at episode termination. Lower values indicate the agent consistently navigates closer to the target even in unsuccessful episodes. For avatar-aware tasks, we additionally report: Collision Rate (CR) , the fraction of collision steps. Personal Space Intrusion (PSI) , which quantifies the average degree to which the agent enters the 1.0 m personal-space radius around each avatar. Higher values indicate more frequent and severe intrusions. 

4.2 3DGS Scenes Train More Robust Agents 

We first characterize the quality advantage of 3DGS scenes through a VLM-based assessment, and then demonstrate that this quality advantage translates to more robust navigation agents on the PointNav [1] task. 

VLM Scene Quality Assessment. To objectively quantify the quality gap between 3DGS and mesh scene rendering, we employ Gemini 3.0 Pro [28] as an automated evaluator. We render 240 screenshots evenly from each renderer, Habitat-GS 11 …    

> Score the image rendered from
> an embodied AI simulator from
> following dimensions:
> 1. Rendering quality
> 2. Realism
> 3. Scene diversity
> …
> gemini -3. 0-pro
> …
> 3DGS Scenes Mesh Scenes
> {
> "rendering_quality ": [1,10],
> "realism": [1,10],
> "scene_diversity ": [1,10],
> }
> …

Fig. 5: VLM scene quality assessment. Gemini 3.0 Pro evaluates 240 rendered screenshots from each domain on three perceptual dimensions. GS scenes consistently outperform mesh scenes, confirming their superior visual fidelity and diversity. 

divided into 48 evaluation batches, each containing 5 GS and 5 mesh images with randomized indices to blind the model of rendering source. The VLM scores each image on a 10-point scale along three dimensions: rendering quality , realism , and 

scene diversity .As shown in Fig. 5, GS scenes substantially outperform mesh scenes across all three dimensions. These results confirm that 3DGS rendering produces higher-quality, more realistic, and more diverse training environments, establishing a strong foundation for the subsequent navigation experiments. 

PointNav Setup. To validate whether the quality advantage of GS scenes translates to stronger navigation agents, we train five agent groups under differ-ent scene-domain mixtures, with training budget fixed at 5×10 7 steps: A: 100 mesh scenes, B: 100 GS scenes, C: 80 M + 20 G, D: 50 M + 50 G, and E: 20 M + 80 G. All agents share a unified DD-PPO [30] architecture with a ResNet [6] visual encoder and a GRU [4] policy head, receiving 256 ×256 RGB and depth observations, with only training scene composition varying. Each agent is eval-uated on both the 20-scene mesh test set and the 20-scene GS test set. 

Analysis. Table 2(a) and the training curves in Tab. 2(b,c) together reveal a clear picture of three training strategies: 

Mesh-only training converges quickly but yields weak agents. As shown in Tab. 2 (b), training on 100 mesh scenes converges rapidly, yet the resulting agent plateaus at a modest success rate around 0.6 and fails to perform well on GS test set. Because mesh environments lack the visual realism of real-world scenes, the agent cannot develop robust visual representations, limiting its generalization capability. Mesh-only training is therefore not a competitive strategy. 

GS-only training builds stronger capability but converges too slowly. Config B

demonstrates that 3DGS scenes can indeed enable more robust agents: the train-ing curve in Tab. 2(c) shows that the agent reaches ∼0.8 SR on the GS training set, and it achieves higher GS test performance than the mesh-only baseline. 12 Z. Xia et al. 

Table 2: PointNav results and training curves. (a) Results across different train-ing domain mixtures. Agents are trained on varying ratios of mesh (M) and 3DGS (G) scenes and evaluated on disjoint mesh and GS test sets. SR and SPL are in %; DTG is in meters ( ↓). Best and Second best results per column are highlighted. (b) Training success rate curve for 100 Mesh (Config A). (c) Training success rate curve for 100 GS (Config B). 

(a) Quantitative Results Mesh Test GS Test Training Config SR ↑ SPL ↑ DTG ↓ SR ↑ SPL ↑ DTG ↓

A: 100 Mesh 59.00 51.23 5.537 61.30 52.09 4.982 B: 100 GS 53.00 43.13 6.439 70.70 58.49 3.550 C: 80 M + 20 G 60.20 52.06 6.004 73.40 64.32 3.757 D: 50 M + 50 G 61.80 51.34 5.938 78.10 67.42 3.008 E: 20 M + 80 G 59.60 51.01 5.901 79.60 68.38 2.698 

(b) Mesh Training 0 1 2 3 4 5 

> Step 1e7
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Success Rate

(c) GS Training 0 1 2 3 4 5 

> Step 1e7
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate

However, because GS scenes are more realistic and diverse, the agent requires considerably more steps to converge. Within the fixed budget of 5×10 7 steps, the GS-only agent has not fully converged, and its mesh test performance remains below that of Config A. Pure GS training is therefore not cost-effective under practical compute constraints. 

Mixed-domain training is the optimal strategy. Configurations D (50 M + 50 G) and E (20 M + 80 G) demonstrate the most effective approach: a small number of mesh scenes first establish foundational navigation competence, after which training on more realistic GS scenes further strengthens the agent’s ability to handle diverse and realistic environments. Config E achieves the best GS test performance while maintaining mesh test performance on par with the mesh-only baseline. This mixed strategy produces agents with strong cross-domain generalization, confirming that the two data modalities are complementary: mesh scenes provide efficient geometric learning, while GS scenes contribute visual robustness that transfers to more realistic deployment environments. 

4.3 Gaussian Avatars Equip Agents with Human-Aware Navigation 

We next evaluate whether gaussian avatars enable agents to navigate safely among dynamic humans. We extend the standard PointNav task by introducing three gaussian avatars walking around in scenes, and agents are supposed to reach the goal point without colliding with moving avatars. The agents are first trained on static PointNav for 5×10 7 steps to establish basic navigation competence, and then fine-tuned for an additional 5×10 6 steps Habitat-GS 13                             

> Table 3: Avatar-aware PointNav results. Top: Two training configurations are evaluated: a GS scene baseline without avatars, and a GS scene populated with GS avatars. Agents are evaluated on both mesh and GS dynamic test sets to assess in-domain performance and cross-domain generalization. SR, SPL and CR are in %. CR is the fraction of collision steps ( ↓). PSI is the average personal-space intrusion ( ↓).
> Bottom: Visual demonstration of our avatar-aware navigation policy. Agent success-fully navigates through gaussian avatars without collision or personal space intrusion.
> Mesh Scene+Avatar Test GS Scene+Avatar Test Training Config SR ↑SPL ↑CR ↓PSI ↓SR ↑SPL ↑CR ↓PSI ↓
> GS Baseline 54.80 46.98 2.521 0.075 81.80 71.35 6.713 0.092 GS Scene+GS Avatar 58.00 46.80 2.342 0.068 80.00 65.72 4.746 0.077
> (a) Start of episode (b) End of episode

on a subset of 20 GS scenes under two configurations: Baseline : GS scenes, no avatars; and GS Scene + GS Avatar : GS scenes with gaussian avatars. Both groups are evaluated on two dynamic test sets to assess cross-domain capability: 20 mesh scenes with mesh avatars, and 20 GS scenes with gaussian avatars. We prioritize CR and PSI in avatar-aware navigation evaluation, for collision is unacceptable in real-world human-aware navigation. 

Analysis. Table 3 demonstrates the clear benefit of training with gaussian avatars for human-aware navigation. First , compared to the avatar-free base-line, training with gaussian avatars effectively lowers the Collision Rate (CR) and Personal Space Intrusion (PSI) on the in-domain GS test set. This human-aware navigation capability is acquired with only a small number of fine-tuning steps ( 5×10 6, which is only 10% of the static pre-training budget), confirming that agents efficiently learn collision avoidance behaviors from the photorealis-tic humans and realistic motion simulations. Second , the agent fine-tuned with gaussian avatars also achieves lower CR (2.342% vs. 2.521%) and PSI (0.068 vs. 0.075) on the mesh test set. This improvement confirms that the high-fidelity per-ceptual cues learned from gaussian avatars, such as recognizing human shape, anticipating walking direction, and estimating personal space, are robust and generalize effectively even when transferred to lower-fidelity mesh environments. 

4.4 Performance Benchmarks 

To confirm Habitat-GS’s photorealistic rendering does not compromise training speed significantly, we benchmark rendering FPS and GPU memory under vary-ing scene scales and avatar counts. All measurements are conducted on Habitat-Lab’s PointNav task on a NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU at 256 ×256 resolution. 14 Z. Xia et al.                                       

> Table 4: Rendering performance and GPU memory usage. Mesh Ref. reports Habitat-Sim’s native mesh rasterization on a representative HM3D scene as a base-line. (a) Varying scene Gaussian count with no avatars. (b) Varying avatar count in a medium-scale scene with approximately 2M Gaussians. Habitat-GS maintains real-time throughput under typical RL training loads with up to 5M Gaussians and 1–4 avatars.
> Mesh (a) Scene Scale (Gaussian Count) (b) Avatar Count
> Ref. 300 K 500 K 1 M 3 M 5 M 7 M 012510 FPS ↑163.8 159.2 148.8 120.9 82.60 51.46 44.52 94.16 75.14 57.70 37.74 24.67 Mem (GB) ↓2.930 3.299 3.373 3.567 3.723 4.091 4.425 3.917 4.197 4.457 5.513 7.497

Analysis. Table 4 demonstrates three key properties of the system. First , un-der typical RL training loads, Habitat-GS sustains real-time rendering sufficient for large-scale DD-PPO training. For medium-scale scenes with 1–2 avatars, the system still maintains >50 FPS, well above the threshold for efficient paral-lel training. Second , FPS decreases gracefully with increasing scene scale and avatar count, reflecting the favorable computational scaling of the 3DGS raster-izer [8]. Scenes within the commonly used range remain well above interactive frame rates. Third , GPU memory consumption grows approximately linearly with both scene gaussian count and avatar count, providing predictable resource budgeting. The throughput reduction of 3DGS rendering, relative to mesh-based rasterization, is a favorable trade-off given the improvements in visual fidelity and agent generalization demonstrated in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We present Habitat-GS, a navigation-centric embodied AI simulator that up-grades the visual backbone of Habitat-Sim from mesh rasterization to 3D Gaus-sian Splatting, and populates environments with photorealistic drivable gaussian avatars. Habitat-GS is fully open-sourced to provide a high-fidelity, ecosystem-compatible foundation for future embodied AI research. 

Limitations. A central design choice of Habitat-GS is visual–navigation decou-pling (Sec. 3.1): 3DGS handles all visual rendering while NavMeshes are respon-sible for navigation logic. This intentional decoupling sidesteps the absence of explicit surface geometry in the 3DGS representation. However, it also confines physical interaction to navigation-level obstacle avoidance rather than force- or impulse-level contact. Since 3DGS is fundamentally a collection of anisotropic gaussians without inherent rigid-body properties and lacks topological connec-tivity, tasks requiring fine-grained physical interaction, like grasping or pushing GS-represented objects, currently fall outside the system’s scope. Habitat-GS is therefore best suited for navigation tasks. Extending support to manipulation would require deeper integration with the physics engine, which we identify as a promising direction for future work. Habitat-GS 15 

## References 

1. Anderson, P., Chang, A., Chaplot, D.S., Dosovitskiy, A., Gupta, S., Koltun, V., Kosecka, J., Malik, J., Mottaghi, R., Savva, M., Zamir, A.R.: On evaluation of embodied navigation agents (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.06757 

2. Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields (2022), https://arxiv.org/ abs/2111.12077 

3. Batra, D., Gokaslan, A., Kembhavi, A., Maksymets, O., Mottaghi, R., Savva, M., Toshev, A., Wijmans, E.: Objectnav revisited: On evaluation of embodied agents navigating to objects (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13171 

4. Cho, K., van Merrienboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H., Bengio, Y.: Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for sta-tistical machine translation (2014), https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.1078 

5. Gan, C., Schwartz, J., Alter, S., Mrowca, D., Schrimpf, M., Traer, J., Freitas, J.D., Kubilius, J., Bhandwaldar, A., Haber, N., Sano, M., Kim, K., Wang, E., Lingelbach, M., Curtis, A., Feigelis, K., Bear, D.M., Gutfreund, D., Cox, D., Torralba, A., DiCarlo, J.J., Tenenbaum, J.B., McDermott, J.H., Yamins, D.L.K.: Threedworld: A platform for interactive multi-modal physical simulation (2021), https://arxiv. org/abs/2007.04954 

6. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition (2015), https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 

7. Hu, L., Zhang, H., Zhang, Y., Zhou, B., Liu, B., Zhang, S., Nie, L.: Gaussianavatar: Towards realistic human avatar modeling from a single video via animatable 3d gaussians (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02134 

8. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.04079 

9. Kolve, E., Mottaghi, R., Han, W., VanderBilt, E., Weihs, L., Herrasti, A., Deitke, M., Ehsani, K., Gordon, D., Zhu, Y., Kembhavi, A., Gupta, A., Farhadi, A.: Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for visual ai (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1712.05474 

10. Lei, J., Wang, Y., Pavlakos, G., Liu, L., Daniilidis, K.: Gart: Gaussian articulated template models (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16099 

11. Li, C., Xia, F., Martín-Martín, R., Lingelbach, M., Srivastava, S., Shen, B., Vainio, K., Gokmen, C., Dharan, G., Jain, T., Kurenkov, A., Liu, C.K., Gweon, H., Wu, J., Fei-Fei, L., Savarese, S.: igibson 2.0: Object-centric simulation for robot learning of everyday household tasks (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03272 

12. Li, Z., Zheng, Z., Wang, L., Liu, Y.: Animatable gaussians: Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps for high-fidelity human avatar modeling. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2024) 13. Liu, X., Zhan, X., Tang, J., Shan, Y., Zeng, G., Lin, D., Liu, X., Liu, Z.: Hu-mangaussian: Text-driven 3d human generation with gaussian splatting (2024), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17061 

14. Loper, M., Mahmood, N., Romero, J., Pons-Moll, G., Black, M.J.: SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) 

34 (6), 248:1–248:16 (Oct 2015) 15. Luiten, J., Kopanas, G., Leibe, B., Ramanan, D.: Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by persistent dynamic view synthesis (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09713 16 Z. Xia et al. 16. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis (2020), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934 

17. Müller, T., Evans, A., Schied, C., Keller, A.: Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics 41 (4), 1–15 (Jul 2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530127 , http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1145/3528223.3530127 

18. NVIDIA: Isaac Sim, https://github.com/isaac-sim/IsaacSim 

19. Pavlakos, G., Choutas, V., Ghorbani, N., Bolkart, T., Osman, A.A.A., Tzionas, D., Black, M.J.: Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05866 

20. Poole, B., Jain, A., Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B.: Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14988 

21. Puig, X., Undersander, E., Szot, A., Cote, M.D., Yang, T.Y., Partsey, R., Desai, R., Clegg, A.W., Hlavac, M., Min, S.Y., Vondruš, V., Gervet, T., Berges, V.P., Turner, J.M., Maksymets, O., Kira, Z., Kalakrishnan, M., Malik, J., Chaplot, D.S., Jain, U., Batra, D., Rai, A., Mottaghi, R.: Habitat 3.0: A co-habitat for humans, avatars and robots (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13724 

22. Ramakrishnan, S.K., Gokaslan, A., Wijmans, E., Maksymets, O., Clegg, A., Turner, J., Undersander, E., Galuba, W., Westbury, A., Chang, A.X., Savva, M., Zhao, Y., Batra, D.: Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000 large-scale 3d environments for embodied ai (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.08238 

23. Savva, M., Kadian, A., Maksymets, O., Zhao, Y., Wijmans, E., Jain, B., Straub, J., Liu, J., Koltun, V., Malik, J., Parikh, D., Batra, D.: Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01201 

24. Shen, B., Xia, F., Li, C., Martín-Martín, R., Fan, L., Wang, G., Pérez-D’Arpino, C., Buch, S., Srivastava, S., Tchapmi, L.P., Tchapmi, M.E., Vainio, K., Wong, J., Fei-Fei, L., Savarese, S.: igibson 1.0: a simulation environment for interactive tasks in large realistic scenes (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.02924 

25. SpatialVerse Research Team, M.T.I.: Interiorgs: A 3d gaussian splatting dataset of semantically labeled indoor scenes. https : / / huggingface . co / datasets / spatialverse/InteriorGS (2025) 26. Straub, J., Whelan, T., Ma, L., Chen, Y., Wijmans, E., Green, S., Engel, J.J., Mur-Artal, R., Ren, C., Verma, S., Clarkson, A., Yan, M., Budge, B., Yan, Y., Pan, X., Yon, J., Zou, Y., Leon, K., Carter, N., Briales, J., Gillingham, T., Mueggler, E., Pesqueira, L., Savva, M., Batra, D., Strasdat, H.M., Nardi, R.D., Goesele, M., Lovegrove, S., Newcombe, R.: The replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05797 

27. Szot, A., Clegg, A., Undersander, E., Wijmans, E., Zhao, Y., Turner, J., Maestre, N., Mukadam, M., Chaplot, D., Maksymets, O., Gokaslan, A., Vondrus, V., Dharur, S., Meier, F., Galuba, W., Chang, A., Kira, Z., Koltun, V., Malik, J., Savva, M., Batra, D.: Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to rearrange their habitat (2022), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.14405 

28. Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., et al.: Gemini: A family of highly capable mul-timodal models (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805 

29. Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W., Abbeel, P.: Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world (2017), https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06907 

30. Wijmans, E., Kadian, A., Morcos, A., Lee, S., Essa, I., Parikh, D., Savva, M., Batra, D.: Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.00357 Habitat-GS 17 31. World Labs: Marble: A multimodal world model (11 2025), https : / / www . worldlabs.ai/blog/marble-world-model 

32. Xiang, F., Qin, Y., Mo, K., Xia, Y., Zhu, H., Liu, F., Liu, M., Jiang, H., Yuan, Y., Wang, H., Yi, L., Chang, A.X., Guibas, L.J., Su, H.: Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08515 

33. Yu, Z., Chen, A., Huang, B., Sattler, T., Geiger, A.: Mip-splatting: Alias-free 3d gaussian splatting (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16493 

34. Zhang, Y., Tang, S.: The wanderings of odysseus in 3d scenes (2022), https: //arxiv.org/abs/2112.09251 18 Z. Xia et al. 

# Appendix 

This appendix provides supplementary information, extended evaluations, and implementation specifics to further support the main text. Specifically, Sec. A offers a more detailed illustration of the Habitat-GS architecture, elab-orating on system components and data flow. Sec. B presents additional qual-itative results, including extended visualizations of our 3DGS scenes, dynamic avatars and navigation episodes. Sec. C covers further experimental details, com-prehensive task definitions, and extended navigation benchmark results. 

## A Habitat-GS Architecture Details 

This section provides a detailed description of the Habitat-GS architecture, which serves as a further refinement of Sec. 3 in the main text. Control & Manage           

> Layer
> Habitat -GS Backend
> Core C++ Engine
> Hardware  &
> Execution  Layer
> Simulator
> -Main entry point and controller
> +step_world ()
> Triggers of physics and rendering
> Navigation Module
> Asset Importing Module
> PathFinder
> NavMesh
> CUDA Kernel Execution
> CUDA -OpenGL Interop
> Gaussian Data Structures
> Dynamic Capsules
> GaussianSplattingData
> GaussianAvatarData
> 3D Gaussian Splatting Rendering Module
> GaussianSplattingDrawable
> GaussianAvatarDrawable
> GaussianSplattingRenderer
> GaussianSplattingShader
> launchAvatarLBS 3DGS CUDA
> Rasterizer
> Hardware Interface Textures
> Color Texture
> Depth Texture
> GaussianSplattingImporter
> GaussianAvatarImporter
> ResourceManager
> -Asset manager and dispatcher
> +createRenderAssetInstance ()
> Return asset instance to Simulator

Fig. 6: System architecture of Habitat-GS. The system adopts a “visual–navigation decoupling” design principle, separating the visual rendering modules handled by the CUDA-based 3DGS rasterizer and LBS deformation, from the navigation module man-aged by the traditional NavMesh and injected proxy capsules. This allows for photo-realistic agent observations without modifying the core Habitat-Sim navigation logic. 

Habitat-GS is built as a non-intrusive extension to Habitat-Sim [21,23,27]. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the system data flow is systematically organized into inter-connected module stages within the simulation environment. First, during asset initialization, scene and avatar data are parsed by custom Importer modules and stored in CPU Data containers before being attached to the Habitat Scene-Graph via extended Drawable node interfaces. At each simulation frame, the visual rendering module performs CUDA tile-based rasterization for 3DGS [8] Habitat-GS 19 

and CUDA Linear Blend Skinning for dynamic gaussian avatars. The com-puted color and depth outputs are routed to the OpenGL sensor pipeline via a zero-copy CUDA–OpenGL interoperability mechanism. Synchronized with vi-sual rendering, the dynamic navigation module retrieves pre-computed proxy capsules corresponding to the current motion timestamp and injects them into the PathFinder NavMesh as temporary spatial obstacles. Such data flow en-sures that high-fidelity rendering outputs seamlessly feed into agent sensor ob-servations, while collision constraints continuously inform the underlying path planning logic, thereby maintaining robust performance and full compatibility within the existing Habitat ecosystem. 

A.1 Asset Management 

Habitat-Sim’s native asset pipeline relies on Magnum and primarily supports mesh formats (e.g., .glb , .obj ). To accommodate 3DGS assets, we implement a custom GaussianSplattingImporter in C++ to parse .ply binary formats. It extracts essential gaussian attributes including canonical positions μ, spherical harmonics (SH) coefficients c, opacities α, scales s, and rotations q. This cus-tomized importer unifies assets from diverse sources, such as self-reconstructed scenes, public 3DGS datasets, and generative 3DGS pipelines [31], into a stan-dardized data container GaussianSplattingData , thus integrating with Habi-tat’s existing asset management module. For gaussian avatars, we provide scripts to export the results of existing avatar methods like AnimatableGaussians [12] and GaussianAvatar [7] into the canonical representation in .npz format. GaussianAvatarImporter then reads this unified format, which contains canonical gaussian attributes alongside Linear Blend Skinning weights W and inverse bind matrices B−1, and subsequently stores them in a GaussianAvatarData container. 

A.2 Drawable Extension and CUDA–OpenGL Interoperability 

Habitat’s rendering pipeline is organized around a drawable abstraction in which each renderable entity in the scene graph implements a draw callback. To inte-grate 3DGS into the Habitat-Sim SceneGraph, we introduce new Drawable ab-stractions: GaussianSplattingDrawable for static scenes and GaussianAvata rDrawable for dynamic avatars. These classes encapsulate the 3DGS rendering logic and coexist with traditional mesh objects via the same rendering interface. The core rendering challenge lies in bridging the CUDA tile-based rasterizer with the OpenGL-based Habitat sensor pipeline. While a naive solution would be continuously copying rendered frames between GPU and CPU, this intro-duces severe latency that is unacceptable for real-time simulation. We tackle this through zero-copy CUDA–OpenGL interoperability in a Map–Render–Unmap 

mechanism. At initialization, OpenGL color and depth textures are registered as CUDA-accessible resources. During each frame’s rendering pass, these textures are dynamically mapped into the CUDA address space. The CUDA rasterizer executes forward splatting and writes the RGB and depth outputs directly into 20 Z. Xia et al. 

the mapped buffers. After unmapping, the textures are immediately available to the OpenGL sensor pipeline without any data transfer between the CPU and GPU, ensuring real-time performance. Finally, a full-screen depth compositing shader merges the 3DGS depth buffer with the OpenGL depth buffer, correctly resolving occlusions among 3DGS scenes, mesh objects, and multiple gaussian avatars. 

A.3 Avatar Kinematics and CUDA LBS 

Offline Export. To avoid the substantial latency of neural network inference at runtime, the gaussian avatar module relies on a pre-baked canonical represen-tation combined with a highly optimized CUDA Linear Blend Skinning kernel. During offline preparation, canonical gaussian attributes (positions μ, rotations 

q, scales s, properties c and α, alongside LBS weights W), as well as pose-dependent joint transformation matrices Tj generated by GAMMA [34], are exported and serialized into driving .pkl files. 

Runtime Deformation. At runtime, the simulator retrieves and interpolates these pre-computed joint transformation matrices Tj based on the target timestep. A parallelized CUDA kernel then performs the explicit LBS deformation. For each gaussian point i, its canonical position μi is transformed to the posed space position μ′ 

> i

by blending the transformations of the nearest joints according to the pre-computed skinning weights wi,j :

μ′ 

> i

= X

> j

wi,j Tj μi (1) Similarly, the canonical rotation quaternion qi is adjusted using dual-quaternion blending parameterized by the same weights. This explicit deformation paradigm avoids costly neural network operations, maintaining high frame rates even when rendering multiple dynamic avatars simultaneously. 

A.4 Dynamic Navigation Module 

Because the 3DGS representation lacks explicit geometric surfaces, direct colli-sion detection is computationally infeasible. To enable navigation-level physics like obstacle avoidance, we introduce a proxy capsule mechanism (see Sec. 3.3 of the main text). 

Offline pre-computation. During the trajectory synthesis stage, a temporary URDF representation is generated from the rest-pose joint positions of the SMPL/SMPL-X [14, 19] model, containing one capsule per skeletal bone seg-ment with radius proportional to bone length. For each frame of the generated trajectory, forward kinematics along the URDF joint chain produces world-space capsule endpoints (p0, p1, r ) for every bone. The resulting capsule sequences are stored as a [T, C, 7] tensor with T being the number of frames and C the number of capsules per skeleton, in the driving .pkl file. Habitat-GS 21 

Runtime Injection. At runtime, the avatar module loads the pre-computed cap-sule data at initialization and retrieves current capsule positions via temporal linear interpolation. This reduces the per-frame cost to a simple array index and interpolation with no forward kinematics evaluation. All capsules from all active avatars are merged into a single [N, 7] array containing p0, p1, and radius per capsule for downstream navigation mesh. This design achieves an effective balance. The Gaussian representation deliv-ers photorealistic rendering, while the lightweight pre-computed capsule proxy provides efficient collision primitives for navigation planning without imposing heavy runtime computational overhead. 

## B Simulation Visualization 

B.1 3DGS Scene and Avatar Visualization 

In this section, we provide additional qualitative results of the Habitat-GS simu-lation environment. Fig. 7 presents a diverse set of 3DGS scenes populated with high-fidelity dynamic gaussian avatars, further demonstrating the photorealistic rendering capabilities and the support for diverse assets of our system. 

B.2 Navigation Episodes 

We present qualitative visualizations of Habitat-Lab’s navigation episodes con-ducted within the Habitat-GS environment. Figure 8 shows example episodes on five different navigation tasks from our experiments, illustrating how agents trained on Habitat-GS navigate through 3DGS environments while interacting with dynamic gaussian avatars. These visualizations prove Habitat-GS’s compat-ibility with Habitat-Lab and further demonstrate that the agents learn mean-ingful navigation behaviors after training on our simulator. 

## C Experimental Details and Further Results 

C.1 Additional Results on Static Navigation 

In the main text (Sec. 4.2), the five PointNav training configurations are com-pared under a fixed budget of 5×10 7 steps. As noted, this budget is sufficient for mesh-only training (Config A) to converge, but GS-heavy configurations, partic-ularly Config B (100 GS), have not yet fully converged due to the greater visual diversity of 3DGS scenes. To provide a fair comparison that disentangles training efficiency from final capability, we extend all five configurations to 1×10 8 steps so that every configuration reaches full convergence. 22 Z. Xia et al. RGB Depth 

Fig. 7: Additional visualizations of 3DGS scenes and gaussian avatars. 

Habitat-GS supports real-time rendering of diverse, large-scale indoor and outdoor environments with photorealistic quality, while simultaneously integrating high-fidelity drivable human avatars to facilitate human-aware embodied AI research. Habitat-GS 23 (d) Avatar -aware Point Goal Navigation 

> (a) Point Goal Navigation
> (e) Human Tracking Navigation
> (b) Image Goal Navigation
> (c) Object Goal Navigation

Fig. 8: Qualitative visualization of navigation episodes. Example episodes from our navigation experiments conducted in the Habitat-GS environment. The visualiza-tions illustrate agent trajectories in 3DGS scenes, demonstrating learned navigation behaviors including goal-directed path planning and human-aware obstacle avoidance. 

Table 5 presents the resulting Success Rate, SPL, and Distance to Goal on both the mesh and GS test sets. We also provide an Average column that reports the mean of each metric across the mesh and GS test sets, which measures the overall cross-domain generalization capability and comprehensive performance of trained agents. 

Analysis. Table 5 together with Tab. 2 in the main text reveal the following conclusions: 24 Z. Xia et al.                                                             

> Table 5: Fully converged PointNav results ( 1×10 8steps). All five training con-figurations are trained to full convergence. SR and SPL are in %; DTG is in meters ( ↓). Best and Second best results per column are highlighted. Average column measures the cross-domain generalization performance of trained agents.
> Mesh Test GS Test Average Training Config SR ↑SPL ↑DTG ↓SR ↑SPL ↑DTG ↓SR ↑SPL ↑DTG ↓
> A: 100 Mesh 62.80 54.75 5.211 61.70 52.06 5.187 62.25 53.41 5.199 B: 100 GS 59.80 49.27 5.911 77.60 66.96 2.777 68.70 58.12 4.344 C: 80 M + 20 G 63.00 53.52 5.658 77.60 67.60 3.351 70.30 60.56 4.505 D: 50 M + 50 G 62.80 53.26 5.748 79.50 69.43 2.911 71.15 61.35 4.330 E: 20 M + 80 G 62.10 52.39 5.612 80.20 69.37 2.906 71.15 60.88 4.259

Mesh-only training excels on mesh but fails on realistic scenes. Config A achieves the highest mesh-test SPL and the lowest mesh-test DTG, confirming that mesh scenes provide efficient geometric learning for mesh environments. However, this advantage is strictly in-domain. When evaluated on the more diverse and re-alistic GS test set, Config A falls dramatically behind all other configurations, with the lowest GS SR (61.70) and GS SPL (52.06). This large gap demonstrates that mesh-only training produces agents whose visual representations are nar-rowly tuned to the synthetic appearance of mesh scenes and do not generalize to realistic visual conditions. 

GS-only training is the better single-source strategy. Config B achieves sub-stantially higher GS-test performance than Config A (SR 77.60 vs. 61.70, SPL 66.96 vs. 52.06), while its mesh-test performance is only slightly lower (SR 59.80 vs. 62.80). This indicates that the visual robustness acquired from realistic GS scenes transfers reasonably well to mesh environments, whereas the converse is not true. Therefore, if training scenes are restricted to a single source, GS scenes are the superior choice for training generalizable navigation agents. 

Mixed-domain training remains optimal. Even after full convergence, Configs D

(50 M+50 G) and E (20 M+80 G) dominate the Average columns. They tie for the best average SR and Config D achieves the best average SPL, while Config E

attains the best average DTG. These configurations maintain competitive mesh-test performance close to the mesh-only baseline, while simultaneously reaching the highest GS-test scores. This further confirms the complementary role of the two data modalities observed in the main text: mesh scenes provide foundational navigation competence through efficient geometric learning, and GS scenes fur-ther enhance agent robustness and generalization through their greater visual diversity and realism. Mixed-domain training is therefore the most effective strat-egy for producing agents with strong cross-domain generalization. Habitat-GS 25 

C.2 Avatar-aware PointNav Task Definition 

Our avatar-aware PointNav task (Sec. 4.3) keeps the standard Habitat Point-Nav [1] goal and action interface, but augments the reward with avatar-aware safety signals. Concretely, the policy still solves a point-goal navigation prob-lem with the standard discrete action space { stop , move_forward , turn_left ,

turn_right }, and the observation space remains the standard PointNav obser-vation bundle used in our experiments, namely RGB-D egocentric observations together with the point-goal signal in the agent frame. The key difference is that dynamic avatars are injected into the simulator as both rendering entities and proxy capsules, so they affect both the agent’s sensor observations and the reward returned to DD-PPO [30]. 

Task interpretation. The task is best defined as standard PointNav under dy-namic social constraints. The goal specification and success condition remain those of PointNav, but avatars become moving obstacles in the transition model and contribute a dense safety penalty in the reward. This makes the problem substantially different from static-scene PointNav: a successful policy must not only reach the goal efficiently, but do so while respecting the personal space of nearby avatars. 

Signed clearance to avatars. Let ct denote the minimum signed clearance between the robot capsule and all active avatar proxy capsules at time t. By construction, 

ct > 0 means the agent is separated from the nearest avatar, ct = 0 means touching, and ct < 0 means overlap. If no avatar proxy is active, the simulator returns +∞, in which case the avatar-related penalty is zero. A binary collision flag is recorded using a small numerical tolerance εcol = 10 −5, i.e., 

collision t = I[ct ≤ εcol ]. (2) 

Personal intrusion function. The task tracks a per-step personal intrusion value that measures how deeply the agent enters the avatar’s personal space. The total intrusion can be written as a single three-piece function: 

It =



0, ct ≥ dint ,dint − ct, 0 ≤ ct < d int ,dint , ct < 0.

(3) In the PointNav configuration in our experiments, the personal-space threshold is set to dint = 1 .0 m and the critical threshold is set to dcrit = 0 .5 m. Outside the personal-space radius, the agent incurs no intrusion. Once the clearance falls below dint , the intrusion grows linearly as the agent moves closer to the avatar. When overlap occurs, the intrusion saturates at dint rather than increasing with-out bound, which keeps the metric numerically stable and easy to interpret across episodes. Thus, It serves as a descriptive measure of social-space violation. 26 Z. Xia et al. 

Two-stage avatar penalty. The avatar-related reward does not use the linear intrusion value directly. Instead, we design a smoother two-stage penalty as a function of signed clearance: 

P (ct) = 



0, ct ≥ dint ,p1

 dint −ct

> dint −dcrit

α1

, dcrit ≤ ct < d int ,p1 + ( pcol − p1)



1 −

 max( ct,0) 

> dcrit

α2 

, c t < d crit .

(4) In our experiments, the parameters are p1 = 0 .1, α1 = 2 .0, α2 = 4 .0, pcol = 0 .6,and the final penalty is capped by pmax = 0 .6. The reward measure returned by the simulator is therefore 

ravatar  

> t

= − min( P (ct), p max ). (5) This design is deliberate. The first segment provides a weak, smooth repulsion near the boundary of personal space, which discourages the agent from grazing avatars while preserving stable optimization. The second segment becomes much steeper inside the critical zone, strongly penalizing unsafe proximity and saturat-ing at a fixed collision penalty when contact or overlap occurs. The two branches are continuous at ct = dcrit , and the second branch also saturates smoothly at 

ct ≤ 0.

Total reward. The base navigation term is still the standard PointNav progress reward: 

rprog  

> t

= dgoal  

> t−1

− dgoal  

> t

, (6) where dgoal  

> t

is the geodesic distance to the navigation goal at step t. The avatar-aware PointNav reward measure linearly combines progress and avatar safety: 

rmeasure  

> t

= λprog rprog  

> t

+ λavatar ravatar  

> t

, (7) with weights λprog = 1 .0 and λavatar = 1 .0 in our experiments. Finally, the RL environment wrapper adds the standard Habitat task-level slack and success terms: 

rt = rmeasure  

> t

+ rslack + I[success t]Rsucc . (8) Therefore, the agent is rewarded for shortening the geodesic distance to the goal, simultaneously discouraged from entering an avatar’s personal space, and strongly penalized when it gets dangerously close or collides. 

C.3 Human Tracking Experiment 

Beyond avatar-aware PointNav, we further evaluate Habitat-GS on a self-defined 

human tracking task (TrackNav), where the agent has no fixed goal position but must continuously follow a moving avatar at an appropriate distance and ori-entation. Unlike PointNav, the goal is dynamic: the agent must stay within a Habitat-GS 27 

prescribed distance band behind the target avatar while maintaining visual con-tact. This tests whether the simulator can support more complex, long-horizon human-aware navigation tasks. 

Tracking definition. A tracking step is considered successful when three con-ditions are satisfied simultaneously: 1. Distance band. The Euclidean distance between the agent and the target avatar’s center lies within [dmin , d max ], where dmin = 1 .2 m and dmax = 2 .5

m in our experiment. 2. View cone. The angle between the agent’s forward heading and the direc-tion toward the target is at most θview = 45 ◦, ensuring the target remains within the agent’s frontal field of view. 3. Rear sector. The angle between the avatar’s backward-facing direction and the vector from the avatar to the agent is at most θrear = 60 ◦, constraining the agent to follow from behind rather than from the side or front. We denote the binary indicator as track t = I[all three conditions hold at step t].The cumulative track rate is TR = P 

> t

track t / T , where T is the total number of steps. 

Reward design. The TrackNav reward is composed of several dense shaping terms. 

(i) Approach-to-band progress. Let et denote the unsigned distance from the current agent-to-target distance to the nearest boundary of the tracking band 

[dmin , d max ], i.e., et = 0 when the agent is inside the band. The approach reward is 

rapproach  

> t

= λapp (et−1 − et), (9) with λapp = 0 .8, rewarding the agent for reducing the gap to the band. 

(ii) In-band reward. When the agent is inside the distance band, a Gaussian-shaped bonus encourages it to stay near the band center: 

rband  

> t

= rpeak 

"

η + (1 − η) exp  − 12 (δ/σ )2 − wedge 

1 − wedge 

#

, (10) where δ is the distance from the band center, σ = 0 .85 × 12 (dmax −dmin ), η = 0 .58 

is the edge ratio, wedge = exp( − 12 (h/σ )2) with h the half-span, and rpeak = 0 .36 .The reward is zero outside the band. 

(iii) Avatar collision penalty. The same two-stage penalty used in avatar-aware PointNav (Sec. C.2) is applied, driven by the minimum clearance from all proxy capsules. Due to the closer desired operating range of tracking, the penalty magnitudes are scaled down: p1 = 0 .03 , pcol = 0 .12 , α1 = 2 .0, and α2 = 3 .0.

(iv) Orientation penalties. When the agent is inside the distance band but fails to satisfy the view or rear constraint, per-step penalties of pview = 0 .10 and 28 Z. Xia et al.        

> Table 6: Human tracking (TrackNav) cross-validation results. Agents are trained under two configurations and cross-evaluated on both test sets. TR is the cumulative track rate (%). CC is the average agent-avatar collision count ( ↓).

Mesh Test GS Test Average Training Config TR ↑ CC ↓ TR ↑ CC ↓ TR ↑ CC ↓

Mesh Scene+Mesh Avatar 38.40 12.14 17.78 11.72 28.09 11.93 GS Scene+GS Avatar 28.42 6.280 19.84 5.080 24.13 5.680 

prear = 0 .10 are applied respectively, discouraging the agent from drifting to the avatar’s side or front while maintaining distance. 

(v) Anti-circling shaping. A dense radial/tangential decomposition of each step rewards motion toward the target (weight 0.9) and penalizes tangential orbit-ing (weight 0.45 ), preventing the agent from circling the avatar without closing distance. 

(vi) Track bonuses. A per-step bonus bstep = 0 .08 is given for each successful tracking step. An additional streak bonus grows linearly with the number of consecutive tracking steps, up to a cap of 50 steps, with maximum bonus bstreak =0.12 :

rstreak  

> t

= bstreak · min  streak t, 50 

50 . (11) 

Experimental setup. All agents use the same DD-PPO [30] architecture as in the PointNav experiments, receiving 256 ×256 RGB-D observations and the 4-dimensional tracking sensor. We train two agents separately: (1) Mesh Scene + Mesh Avatar : trained on mesh scenes with mesh humanoid avatars, and (2) GS Scene + GS Avatar : trained on GS scenes with gaussian avatars. Each agent is then cross-evaluated on mesh test scenes with mesh avatars and GS test scenes with gaussian avatars to assess in-domain performance and cross-domain generalization. 

Analysis. Table 6 presents the cross-validation results for the TrackNav task. During evaluation, we prioritize CC over TR , as colliding with humans may pose severe safety risks in real-world scenarios. 

Mesh-trained agents achieve higher tracking rates at the cost of unacceptable col-lision levels. While the agent trained on mesh scenes and mesh avatars attains a higher average TR, this advantage comes at the expense of drastically elevated collision counts. Its average CC (11.93) is more than double that of the GS-trained agent (5.68). This indicates that the mesh-trained agent has learned a distorted navigation strategy that aggressively pursues the target while largely Habitat-GS 29 

ignoring avatar proximity, trading safety for tracking performance. Such behav-ior is unacceptable in real-world deployment. A household service robot that re-peatedly collides with people during navigation would pose severe safety hazards and undermine user trust. Therefore, despite its slightly higher TR, mesh-trained agent cannot be considered a feasible policy for human-tracking navigation. 

GS-trained agents learn safer and more generalizable human-aware policies. The agent trained on GS scenes and gaussian avatars exhibits significantly lower collision counts across both test sets, demonstrating that it has learned to better coexist with humans and navigate with a more human-friendly strategy. This substantially improved safety comes with only a moderate reduction in tracking capability, and notably, the GS-trained agent achieves a higher TR on the GS test set than its mesh-trained counterpart, indicating strong in-domain tracking performance. Furthermore, the GS-trained agent generalizes well across domains. Its performance remains stable when evaluated on the mesh test set, whereas the mesh-trained agent suffers a dramatic TR drop from 38.40 on mesh test to 17.78 on GS test, revealing poor cross-domain transferability. The GS-trained policy therefore offers a better balance of safety and effectiveness, making it the more practical and deployable choice for real-world human-aware navigation. 

C.4 Text Prompt for VLM Evaluation 

We provide the complete text prompt used for the Gemini 3.0 Pro [28] scene quality assessment described in Sec. 4.2 of the main text. The prompt is designed to objectively elicit 1-10 scores on rendering quality, realism, and scene diversity from exactly 10 images randomly sampled from mesh and GS rendering results. 

You are an expert visual evaluator for embodied AI simulation imag es. You will receive exactly 10 rendered scene images from embodied AI simulators. For EACH image, score 3 criteria on 1-10 scale (higher is better): 1) rendering_quality: Visual fidelity (sharpness, blur, artifacts, texture quality, g eometry consistency). 2) realism: How realistic and natural the rendered scene looks compared wit h real-world scenes. 3) scene_diversity: How distinct this image is compared with the other 9 images in this same batch (layout variety, scene types, objects, visual appearance variety). Important constraints: 30 Z. Xia et al. 

- Do NOT infer or mention rendering methods, engines, or dataset names. - Do NOT output markdown. Return strict JSON only. Required JSON format: {"images": [ {"image_position": 1, "rendering_quality": <integer in [1,10]>, "realism": <integer in [1,10]>, "scene_diversity": <integer in [1,10]> }, ... {"image_position": 10, "rendering_quality": <integer in [1,10]>, "realism": <integer in [1,10]>, "scene_diversity": <integer in [1,10]> }], "brief_reason": "<max 60 words>" }