Title: MaskAdapt: Learning Flexible Motion Adaptation via Mask-Invariant Prior for Physics-Based Characters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29272v2

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:56:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# MaskAdapt: Learning Flexible Motion Adaptation via Mask-Invariant Prior for Physics-Based Characters 

# Soomin Park Eunseong Lee Kwang Bin Lee Sung-Hee Lee KAIST 

https://www.soominpark.xyz/MaskAdapt 

Figure 1. MaskAdapt enables flexible motion adaptation across two representative tasks: dynamic motion composition, where selected body parts are flexibly modified, and text-driven partial motion tracking, where designated regions follow semantically guided kinematic targets. 

# Abstract 

We present MaskAdapt, a framework for flexible motion adaptation in physics-based humanoid control. The frame-work follows a two-stage residual learning paradigm. In the first stage, we train a mask-invariant base policy us-ing stochastic body-part masking and a regularization term that enforces consistent action distributions across mask-ing conditions. This yields a robust motion prior that re-mains stable under missing observations, anticipating later adaptation in those regions. In the second stage, a resid-ual policy is trained atop the frozen base controller to mod-ify only the targeted body parts while preserving the orig-inal behaviors elsewhere. We demonstrate the versatility of this design through two applications: (i) motion compo-sition, where varying masks enable multi-part adaptation within a single sequence, and (ii) text-driven partial goal tracking, where designated body parts follow kinematic tar-gets provided by a pre-trained text-conditioned autoregres-sive motion generator. Through experiments, MaskAdapt demonstrates strong robustness and adaptability, producing diverse behaviors under masked observations and deliver-ing superior targeted motion adaptation compared to prior work. 

# 1. Introduction 

Creating interactive, physically realistic characters capable of performing a wide range of motions remains a long-standing challenge in both robotics and character anima-tion. Recent studies in physics-based humanoid control have sought to extend the skills of pretrained controllers by introducing auxiliary modules while keeping the origi-nal weights frozen [18, 31–34]. These auxiliary modules can take various forms, such as a set of lightweight adap-tation layers operating in the latent space [18, 32, 34] or a residual architecture [31, 33] whose output is added to that of the base policy. Such designs enable efficient policy reuse and targeted behavioral adaptation without retraining from scratch, while avoiding catastrophic forgetting of the original skills. Among them, residual reinforcement learn-ing (RL) has proven particularly effective for localized mo-tion adaptation, where the residual controller modifies only a subset of body parts while preserving the stability and co-ordination of the remaining body parts [33]. However, prior residual approaches for motion adapta-tion face two key limitations. First, they typically train the base policy without accounting for the substantial state-distribution shifts that arise during the subsequent adapta-tion phase. Consequently, the frozen base controller, never 

> arXiv:2603.29272v2 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026

exposed to such variations, often produces unstable actions once the residual policy begins modifying specific body parts. Second, existing composition methods remain lim-ited in flexibility: adaptation is either restricted to fixed body regions or lacks an integrated mechanism for semantic control, such as text-conditioned guidance. To address these limitations, we propose a two-stage framework called MaskAdapt that enables flexible motion adaptation across two representative applications as shown in Fig. 1. Our framework comprises two key components: a base policy that learns a robust motion prior, and a residual policy that adapts the motion to target behaviors. In the first stage, the base policy is trained under stochas-tic observation masking applied to various body parts and regularized to maintain the consistency in its action distri-bution with that under full observations. This process en-courages the policy to produce consistent actions even when certain inputs are missing, effectively learning to be mask-invariant . The resulting motion prior remains robust when masked regions are later modified during residual learning, allowing the policy to rely on visible observations to gener-ate coherent behaviors. In the second stage, a residual policy is trained on top of the frozen base policy to modify only the targeted body parts while preserving the rest of the body unchanged. The adapted parts can be either fixed or dynamically varying de-pending on the scenario. We demonstrate this versatility through two tasks: Motion Composition and Text-Driven Partial Motion Tracking . In motion composition, users can modify more than one body part within a single sequence, where the adapted motions emerge in those regions accord-ing to the provided mask information. In text-driven goal tracking, the adaptable parts are predefined, and free-form textual commands provided at inference control their mo-tion. For this task, we employ a pre-trained autoregressive diffusion model to provide kinematic guidance, from which localized goals around the masked areas are extracted as se-mantically meaningful targets for the residual controller. In the experiments, MaskAdapt demonstrates strong ro-bustness and adaptability. Our base policy exhibits diverse and consistent behaviors under varying masking conditions, and the residual policy, building on this prior, effectively adapts the targeted body parts while preserving the un-derlying behaviors. Please also refer to our supplemen-tary video, where our base policy generates diverse mo-tion even under masked observations, comparable to the un-masked baseline [19] and superior adaptation ability over prior work [33]. 

# 2. Related Work 

Motion adaptation has been a long-standing topic of re-search, explored across both kinematic and physics-based domains. In this section, we focus primarily on physics-based approaches, to which our work belongs. In physics-based control, early work applied generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) [9] to train simu-lated characters to reproduce complex behaviors from mo-tion capture data. AMP [19] introduced a discriminator-based reward formulation to achieve this goal, followed by ASE [20] and CALM [25], which incorporated encoder-and discriminator-based rewards to map random noise to realistic motions. While these methods produce highly nat-ural movements, they remain constrained by the diversity of motions available in their training datasets. 

2.1. Motion Adaptation and Composition 

To extend pretrained controllers beyond their original skill set, recent studies have explored incremental or resid-ual adaptation, where auxiliary network components mod-ify learned behaviors without full retraining [18, 31– 34]. AdaptNet [34] introduced auxiliary modules that adjust latent representations for new environments, while PhysicsVAE [31] appended a helper branch to refine policy outputs for novel conditions. However, these approaches are largely confined to simple skills and tend to produce only minor stylistic variations. Furthermore, meaningful adaptation typically depends on manually defined task ob-jectives and carefully engineered rewards. A complementary line of research investigated part-level motion composition to broaden controllable behaviors [3, 4, 11, 13, 33]. Composite Motion Learning (CML) [33] em-ployed discriminator ensembles to combine part-wise mo-tions with those generated by a pre-trained policy. Simi-larly, PMP [3] used multiple part-wise discriminators, each providing a distinct learning signal for composing motions of different body regions. PLT [4] utilized a part-wise dis-crete latent representation updated independently per body part. Although effective, these architectures require sequen-tial updates across multiple components, resulting in high computational cost and limited scalability. In addition, their adaptation scope is usually restricted to fixed body regions. Our approach is most closely related to CML, as it also learns a new policy on top of a pre-trained controller. Unlike CML, however, our method allows selective motion com-position, enabling adaptation to be applied to different body regions on demand, while preserving the stability of the un-derlying motion. 

2.2. Masking Mechanisms for Motion Control 

Several recent works [8, 18, 26] introduced masking mech-anisms to enable controllers to track user-specified targets on demand. Inspired by these efforts, we propose a body-part masking scheme that anticipates which regions will later be adapted in the residual learning stage. By varying masking conditions during training, the base policy learns stable, mask-invariant motion priors under partial observa-Figure 2. Overview of the base policy training process. At each step, a mask mt specifies which body parts are hidden from observation. The full state st is masked to form ¯st, which is passed to the base policy π to generate the action at. The mask-invariant loss enforces consistency between masked and unmasked action distributions, promoting robustness to partial observations. 

tions, while the residual policy adapts only the masked re-gions according to localized objectives or semantic goals. 

2.3. Leveraging Text-Driven Kinematic Models 

Text-guided motion synthesis and editing have recently gained attention as a means for intuitive, high-level control. Following the success of diffusion-based generative models such as MDM [27], subsequent works have demonstrated part-wise motion editing through inpainting [12, 21]. More recent methods [2, 10, 14] further advance fine-grained body-part editing using triplets of source motion, editing instruction, and edited motion. While these models demon-strate impressive precision in semantic editing, they remain purely kinematic and thus lack physical plausibility. Hybrid systems such as CLoSD [28] and DART [35] ad-dress this issue by generating text-conditioned trajectories that are tracked by physics-based controllers to enforce re-alism. However, these approaches limit the controller to a passive tracking role, preventing it from leveraging its own learned dynamics to produce novel, hybrid motions. In contrast, our framework integrates text-conditioned kine-matic guidance directly into the residual learning process, enabling physically consistent yet semantically adaptable control. 

# 3. Learning Flexible Motion Adaptation 

3.1. Overview 

We adopt a two-stage framework that first trains a base pol-icy for motion imitation and then learns a residual policy for localized motion adaptation. Throughout both stages, we follow the Adversarial Motion Prior (AMP) frame-work [19], where a policy and discriminator are jointly opti-mized to align generated motions with the reference dataset. In Sec. 3.2, we describe how the base policy π is trained to acquire a robust motion prior. On top of this frozen prior, a residual policy ψ is then learned to modify only selected body parts while leaving the remaining regions unchanged. We demonstrate this capability in two settings: motion com-position (Sec. 3.3), where dynamically chosen body parts are adapted to new behaviors, and text-guided partial goal tracking (Sec. 3.4), where designated body regions follow kinematic targets produced by a text-conditioned autore-gressive motion generator. 

3.2. Learning a Mask-Invariant Motion Prior 

We first train a base policy π on the motion dataset M to es-tablish a robust motion prior for subsequent residual learn-ing. The overall procedure is illustrated in Fig. 2. The base policy is trained using two key mechanisms: (i) a stochas-tic observation masking scheme and (ii) a mask-invariant regularization term that encourages consistent actions un-der different masking conditions. During training, we intentionally mask parts of the state input to expose the policy to imperfect observations. At timestep t, the masked state ¯st is obtained by occluding spe-cific body part-related components of the full state st as: 

¯st = (1 − mt) ⊙ st, (1) where mt ∈ {0, 1}∣S∣ is a binary mask over the state dimen-sion ∣S∣ indicating which elements to zero out. Masking operates on functionally coherent joint groups. We partition the full set of joints into N coarse body-part groups J = {G1, . . . , GN } and a subset of groups Jsub is sampled with probability ρ. The mask is then constructed as 

mt,i =

⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩

1 if f (i) ∈ Jsub ,

0 otherwise , (2) where f ∶ {0, . . . , ∣S∣−1} → J maps each state element to its corresponding body part. With probability (1 − ρ),we apply a null mask, yielding a fully observed state. For clarity, we denote by mAt the mask for a subset of body parts JA ⊂ J , and by ¯sAt the resulting masked state. The policy receives (¯st, m t) and outputs an action at, while the discriminator always evaluates unmasked transitions (s, s ′).This asymmetric setup forces the policy to generate realis-tic, expert-like transitions even when observations are cor-rupted. While the observation masking scheme enhances robust-ness through data augmentation, it does not explicitly guar-antee consistent behavior across different masking condi-tions. To address this, we introduce the mask-invariant (MI) loss, a regularization term that explicitly enforces consis-tency in the policy’s actions under different levels of ob-servation occlusion. The MI loss is defined as the Kull-back–Leibler (KL) divergence between the policy’s action distributions under fully observed and masked states: 

LMI = Em [DKL [π(⋅ ∣ s, m 0) ∥ π(⋅ ∣ ¯s, m )]] . (3) Here, π(⋅∣s, m 0) denotes the action distribution under the full state s (i.e., using the null mask m0) and serves as the consistency target, while π(⋅ ∣ ¯s, m ) is the distribution con-ditioned on the masked observation ¯s. Minimizing their divergence encourages the policy to align its behavior un-der the masked state with that under the full state, thereby making the policy explicitly mask-invariant . The final train-ing objective integrates the MI loss with the PPO objective: 

L = LPPO + λMI LMI , where λMI controls the strength of the regularization. The training procedure of the base policy is provided in the supplementary material. Once trained, the base policy π is frozen for subsequent residual learning. 

3.3. Dynamic Motion Composition 

In motion composition, the residual policy ψ leverages the mask information as a conditioning signal, enabling it to se-lectively adapt the masked body parts to new motions. An overview of this learning process for motion composition is illustrated in Fig. 3. Given the simulated state st and the base action at produced by π, the residual policy ψ gener-ates a residual action ∆at to modify only the masked re-gions while preserving stability in the unmasked parts. The final executed action is obtained by combining the base and residual components: 

ˆat = wgain ⋅ π(at ∣ ¯st, m t) + ψ(∆at ∣ st, a t, m t), (4) where wgain is a gain coefficient applied to at, implemented either as a learnable parameter or as a fixed value [33].     

> Figure 3. Overview of training the residual policy for motion com-position. At each step, a mask mtspecifies which body parts are subject to adaptation, and ψlearns to generate residual actions for those regions while maintaining stability elsewhere.

Unlike prior approaches [3, 33], which employ an en-semble of discriminators, each dedicated to a particular body part, we adopt a conditional discriminator Dψ (s, s ′ ∣

m) inspired by CALM [25]. Whereas CALM conditions on skill embeddings, our discriminator conditions on the mask itself, enabling selective enforcement of motion re-alism under different masking configurations. Real sam-ples for the discriminator are constructed kinematically by blending a motion sequence from M with another sequence from Mnew , which contains the new motions to be adapted. We follow the compositing method of [13] for this blending. Formally, the objective of Dψ is given by: 

arg max 

> Dψ

EdM(s,s ′)[log Dψ (s, s ′ ∣ m)] 

+ Edψ (s,s ′)[log (1 − Dψ (s, s ′ ∣ m))] 

− λgp EdM(s,s ′)[∥ ∇θ Dψ (θ)∥ 22]θ=(s,s ′,m ) ,

(5) where λgp denotes the gradient penalty weight applied to real samples as used in [6, 19]. This design enables flexible, body-part–wise motion composition. In Fig. 5a, the controller first masks the lower body to elicit alternating kicks in the legs, then unmasks the lower body and masks the upper body so the legs revert to jumping while the upper body switches to the adapted mo-tion. In Fig. 5b, the policy performs fine-grained adaptation by first masking both arms to execute rotating-arms motion while maintaining walking, and then unmasking only the left arm so that the rotation persists in the right arm, yielding smooth, progressive transitions across different body part combinations. Lastly, in Fig. 5c, the policy remains inac-tive when no region is masked (exhibiting only the aiming motion), and once the lower body is masked, a sneaking motion emerges in that region, resulting in a natural transi-tion between the base and residual behaviors. 

3.4. Text-Driven Partial Motion Tracking 

In partial tracking, the residual policy ψ adapts specific body parts to follow motion trajectories defined by text in-puts. An overview of this process at inference time is shown in Fig. 4. During this stage, a subset of body parts JK

is designated for modification, and its corresponding mask 

mK .To provide kinematic goals, we employ a pre-trained au-toregressive diffusion model G from DART [35]. Given a motion history τh = xt−H+1∶t and a text command c,the generator predicts a short-horizon future sequence τf ,where localized targets for the designated body parts are extracted as: 

τf = G(zT , T, τ h, c ), gt = ExtractGoal (τf ; t, K ). (6) Here, zT ∼ N (0, I) is diffusion noise and T is the total number of diffusion steps. For the selected subset JK , we construct a text embedding pool from which a text condition 

c is sampled as input for G. By repeatedly exposing ψ to kinematic guidance generated from body-part-relevant text conditions, the residual controller learns to adapt to diverse, targeted goals focused on the selected areas. During training, we improve efficiency by periodically pre-generating batches of future trajectories τf with G and storing them in a goal buffer Bτ . For each rollout, a trajec-tory is sampled from Bτ , and its goal states gt are consumed sequentially to guide ψ. At inference time, G runs online: incoming text prompts are immediately converted into fu-ture motion predictions, enabling ψ to adapt the designated body parts in real time while the base policy π preserves the underlying behavior. This results in interactive text-driven control, as illustrated in Fig. 5d, where a walking charac-ter responds to successive text commands with semantically aligned arm motions. The full training procedure integrat-ing ψ with G is provided in the supplementary material. 

# 4. Experiments 

We evaluate the base policy (Sec. 4.1) as well as the per-formance of our approach in motion composition (Sec. 4.2) and partial tracking (Sec. 4.3) through both quantitative and qualitative analyses. 

Datasets. Our base policies are trained on motions from LAFAN1 [7]. Motion composition uses clips from AMASS [16], and partial tracking uses trajectories gener-ated by a pre-trained model on BABEL [22]. 

Implementation Details. We use a simulated humanoid with 22 rigid bodies and 63 degrees of freedom, following the SMPL kinematic structure with the mean body shape from [15]. For masking, we partition the 22 joints into five   

> Figure 4. Overview of text-guided partial motion tracking during inference. The trajectory generator Gcontinuously produces kine-matic trajectories in response to dynamic text inputs, which serve as tracking targets for the residual policy.

body parts, defining J = {Trunk , Left Arm , Right Arm , Left Leg , Right Leg }, and allow masking of at most three parts. This granularity follows prior works [1, 3]. Physics simu-lation runs in IsaacGym [17] at 60Hz, with control at 30Hz via PD controllers tracking target joint positions. All pol-icy, value, and discriminator networks are implemented as MLPs with hidden dimensions [1024, 1024, 512]. The dis-criminator processes 5 consecutive transitions as input, and PPO [24] is used for optimization. 

4.1. Evaluation on Base Policy 

We aim for a robust base policy that preserves behavioral diversity even under partial observations. To quantify this, we measure dataset coverage using frame visitation fre-quency, following the approach of [37]. Frame visitation is computed based on frame-wise similarity between gen-erated motions and the reference motion. For each gen-erated frame, we identify all reference frames with simi-lar joint features within a certain threshold and increment their corresponding bins. Aggregating these counts yields a visitation distribution over the reference motion. We then compute the normalized Shannon entropy of this distribu-tion Hnorm = − ∑ni=1 pi log p i  

> log n

, where pi denotes the visitation frequency of the i-th frame and n is the total number of ref-erence frames. This metric captures how closely the method follows the reference and how broadly covers its different motion phases, with values close to 1 indicating broad cov-erage and values close to 0 indicating collapse to a limited set of motion patterns. 

Quantitative Comparison. We compare our base policy against AMP [19], which serves as an unmasked baseline trained without observation masking. Our goal is to demon-strate that the our approach can maintain comparable per-formance even under masking. We train our method both Figure 5. Examples of motion adaptation achieved by the residual policy. (a) Jump + Alternating Kick : Two behaviors are combined via alternating masks on lower and upper body. Kicks first emerge in the legs, then swapping the mask restores jumping while shifting the adapted behavior to the upper body. (b) Locomotion + Rotate Arms : With walking as the base motion, both arms are initially masked to perform rotating-arm motion. Unmasking the left arm yields fine-grained control, where only the right arm continues the adapted behavior, producing smooth, localized transitions. (c) Aim + Sneak : When no region is masked, the controller performs only aiming. Masking the lower body induces sneaking in that region, creating a natural blend between base and adapted behaviors. (d) Text-driven partial motion tracking: The character begins with walking and responds to sequential text commands by producing semantically aligned arm motions. 

without and with the proposed mask-invariant loss and an-alyze how each variant performs relative to AMP baseline. As shown in Tab. 1, AMP achieves the highest entropy value of 0.9124, representing optimal dataset coverage under full observation. When masking is applied without MI loss, entropy drops sharply to 0.7448, indicating strong sensi-tivity to missing inputs. In contrast, applying the MI loss (λMI =1.0) restores the entropy to 0.9025, nearly matching the unmasked baseline. These results demonstrate that the MI loss effectively prevents collapse under masking and en-ables the policy to retain dataset-level diversity compara-ble to the AMP baseline, qualifying it as a robust motion prior. We further evaluate a weaker regularization setting (λMI =0.1), which achieves an entropy of 0.8968. This re-sult indicates that even mild MI regularization substantially improves robustness over the no-MI setting, although it re-mains slightly below full MI. Additional ablation results are available in the supplementary material (Sec. D.1). 

Qualitative Analysis. Fig. 7 visualizes root trajectories from 30-second rollout sequences under two extreme mask-ing conditions: masking both legs (left) and both arms (right). Without the MI loss, motions quickly fall into repet-itive loops, producing highly constrained spatial trajecto-ries. With the MI loss, the trajectories are more dispersed and varied, demonstrating that the base policy can generate diverse and stable locomotion even when critical body parts are masked. Additional results are included in the supple-mentary video. Figure 6. Goal-driven tasks (a–c) and complex scenarios (d–e) enabled by dynamic motion composition. Base Policy Model Masking Hnorm ↑

AMP [19] × 0.9124 

− Ours w/o LMI ✓ 0.7448 

+ Ours w/ LMI (λMI = 0.1) ✓ 0.8968 

+ Ours w/ LMI (λMI = 1.0) ✓ 0.9025      

> Table 1. Normalized entropy ( Hnorm ) comparison between the AMP baseline and ablated variants of our base policy trained with and without the MI loss.
> Figure 7. Comparison of root trajectories on the XY plane when both legs (left) and both arms (right) are masked during locomo-tion, with and without the mask-invariant loss. All sequences start from the same initial state and random seed. The ☆symbol de-notes the starting point, and ×marks the end of each episode.

4.2. Evaluation on Motion Composition 

In motion composition, body parts controlled by the resid-ual policy are expected to follow the newly introduced mo-tion, while the remaining parts adhere to the original motion learned by the base policy. To evaluate this dual objective, we reuse the normalized entropy metric Hnorm introduced earlier, computing it separately for modified and unmodi-fied regions. For evaluation, we consider three motion com-position cases proposed in Fig. 5a–c. In each case, a sin-gle subset of body parts is selected as the adaptation tar-get to simplify the evaluation process. We generate 1,000                                          

> Method A/B Hnorm ↑
> Case (a) Case (b) Case (c) CML [33] A0.7835 0.9193 0.8461 B0.8788 0.7478 0.8460 Ours A0.8580 0.9268 0.8980
> B0.8935 0.8710 0.9214
> Table 2. Comparison of Hnorm across three motion composition cases: Case definitions: (a) Jump +Alternating Kick (Lower Body ), (b) Locomotion +Rotate Arms (Arms ), (c) Aim +Sneak
> (Lower Body ). Each case is denoted as “ A+B (P) ,” with Aas the base motion, Bas the new motion, and Pas the adapted body parts.

frames in 10 parallel environments, yielding 10,000 frames per case. 

Quantitative Comparison. We compare our method against Composite Motion Learning (CML) [33], the cur-rent state-of-the-art in motion composition. CML similarly employs a residual controller to modify selected body parts of a base motion, enabling a direct and fair comparison. Tab. 2 summarizes the results, where each case follows the notation “ A+B (P) ,” with A as the base motion, B as the new motion, and P as the adapted body part. Across all cases, our method consistently achieves higher scores for both preserved and adapted regions, indicating stronger re-tention of the base motion and greater adaptability in the modified parts. Qualitative results are presented in the sup-plementary material (Sec. D.4) and the video. 

Goal-driven and Complex Scenarios. Our method en-ables a wide range of goal-driven and complex scenarios through dynamic motion composition. Fig. 6a–c show goal-driven tasks; (a) demonstrates target location task with fine-grained Rotate Arms control, indicating that our policy iso-lates and integrates adapted motions independently of task objectives. (b) shows coordinated execution of an adapted Method Success Rate ↑ (%) Location Strike Heading AdaptNet [34] 94.3 1.0 82.1       

> CML [33] 100.0 46.5 75.2 Ours 99.5 64.2 76.9
> Table 3. Comparison of performance on goal-driven tasks

motion ( Punch ) with the base capability ( Jump ) to approach and knock over an object, highlighting effective composi-tion of disparate motor skills. (c) demonstrates concurrent control by following the target heading and speed using 

Sneak while maintaining Aim . Fig. 6d shows introducing multiple motions ( Sneak & Groom ) to different body parts (trunk and arms) on top of a base motion ( Walk ). Finally, we validate our framework on a real humanoid robot (Unitree G1) in Fig. 6e, where the policy adapts a walking motion learned by π with a punching behavior learned by ψ. Please also refer to the supplementary video. 

Performance on Goal-Driven Tasks. We evaluate perfor-mance on goal-driven tasks shown in Fig. 6a–c, comparing ours with AdaptNet [34] and CML [33]. Note that Adapt-Net does not introduce new motions, but instead modifies base motions to achieve task objectives. As shown in Tab. 3, all methods perform competitively on Location and Head-ing , which are less dependent on introducing new motions. In contrast, the Strike task, where a new motion ( Punch ) is essential to knock over the box using the wrist, reveals clear performance differences. AdaptNet fails to learn an appro-priate wrist-based striking, exploiting alternative body parts (e.g ., feet) allowed to make contact. While CML shows im-proved performance using Punch , our method achieves the highest success rate by a significant margin. 

4.3. Evaluation on Partial Goal Tracking 

In partial tracking, body parts controlled by the residual pol-icy follow target trajectories synthesized by G, while the re-maining parts preserve the base policy’s motion prior (i.e., 

walk ). We designate the Arms as the adaptable parts. To evaluate these objectives, we measure tracking error be-tween simulated and target poses and DTW-aligned pose error with respect to the reference walking motion. In our experiments, we use 10 random text prompts, track each se-quence for 5 seconds, and repeat three times, yielding 4,500 frames per method. 

Quantitative Comparison. We compare our method against CML and a from-scratch model on the partial goal tracking task. Note that the from-scratch model is not built on top of the base policy and therefore lacks an inherent walking prior. For a fair comparison, we adopt the same discriminator setup as CML to preserve base behavior in non-adapted regions. Tab. 4 shows that our method achieves lower errors than both baselines across metrics, indicating more accurate tracking and better preservation of walking motion. Fig. 8 reports normalized returns for tracking and                    

> Method Tracking Error ↓(m) Pose Error ↓(m) From Scratch 0.076 ±0.005 0.057 ±0.008 CML [33] 0.069 ±0.001 0.079 ±0.008 Ours 0.055 ±0.007 0.047 ±0.001
> Table 4. Comparison of tracking and imitation errors.
> Method Tracking Error ↓(m) Success Rate ↑(%) MaskedMimic [26] (Arms) 0.0849 ±0.003 95.5 MaskedMimic [26] (Full) 0.0699 ±0.007 100.0
> Ours (Arms) 0.0423 ±0.006 100.0
> Table 5. Comparison of tracking error against MaskedMimic.
> Figure 8. Learning curves of residual policies for tracking (left) and imitation (right) tasks, showing normalized returns averaged over three random seeds.

imitation, where our method converges faster than models without MI regularization, suggesting more efficient and stable residual learning. Qualitative results are provided in the supplementary material (Sec. D.5) and the video. 

Comparison with MaskedMimic. We compare with MaskedMimic [26] on full-body and arm-level tracking us-ing targets from G. For fairness, MaskedMimic is given targets blended with the same base walking motion for full tracking. In Tab. 5, our method achieves lower track-ing error and higher success rates ( <0.5m deviation), while MaskedMimic struggles with arm-only tracking, highlight-ing the challenge of part-constrained motion generation. 

# 5. Discussion and Conclusion 

We have presented a framework for flexible motion adap-tation, enabled by a mask-invariant training scheme that regularizes the policy to produce consistent actions under masked observations. The resulting motion prior enables both motion composition and text-driven partial goal track-ing. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves ro-bustness comparable to the unmasked baseline while pro-viding superior adaptability over prior work. While MaskAdapt demonstrates strong adaptability, sev-eral limitations remain that open avenues for future re-search. Our method may fail when conflicting motions are assigned to closely related body parts (e.g., Kick on one leg and Jump on the other). Moreover, our text-driven partial tracking relies on a pre-trained kinematic diffusion model, inheriting its semantic constraints and failure modes. Please refer to the supplementary video for details. 6. Acknowledgments 

We appreciate the anonymous reviewers for their con-structive comments that helped improve the final ver-sion of this paper. This work was supported by the KOCCA (RS-2025-02307327) and the IITP (RS-2025-25441313), all funded by the Korean government (MCST and MSIT). 

# References 

[1] Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and G¨ ul Varol. Sinc: Spatial composition of 3d human motions for simultaneous action generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 9984–9995, 2023. 5 [2] Nikos Athanasiou, Alp´ ar Cseke, Markos Diomataris, Michael J Black, and G¨ ul Varol. Motionfix: Text-driven 3d human motion editing. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 3 [3] Jinseok Bae, Jungdam Won, Donggeun Lim, Cheol-Hui Min, and Young Min Kim. Pmp: Learning to physically inter-act with environments using part-wise motion priors. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings , pages 1– 10, 2023. 2, 4, 5 [4] Jinseok Bae, Younghwan Lee, Donggeun Lim, and Young Min Kim. Plt: Part-wise latent tokens as adaptable motion priors for physically simulated characters. In Pro-ceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graph-ics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Pa-pers , pages 1–10, 2025. 2 [5] Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, and Gang Yu. Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 18000–18010, 2023. 5 [6] Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville. Improved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 4 [7] F´ elix G. Harvey, Mike Yurick, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, and Christopher Pal. Robust motion in-betweening. 39(4), 2020. 5, 2 [8] Tairan He, Wenli Xiao, Toru Lin, Zhengyi Luo, Zhenjia Xu, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Changliu Liu, Guanya Shi, Xiaolong Wang, et al. Hover: Versatile neural whole-body controller for humanoid robots. In 2025 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 9989–9996. IEEE, 2025. 2 [9] Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial im-itation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. 2 [10] Nan Jiang, Hongjie Li, Ziye Yuan, Zimo He, Yixin Chen, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Dynamic motion blending for versatile motion editing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 22735–22745, 2025. 3 [11] Niloofar Khoshsiyar, Ruiyu Gou, Tianhong Zhou, Sheldon Andrews, and M van de Panne. Partwisempc: Interactive control of contact-guided motions. In Computer Graphics Forum , page e15174. Wiley Online Library, 2024. 2 [12] Jihoon Kim, Jiseob Kim, and Sungjoon Choi. Flame: Free-form language-based motion synthesis & editing. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,pages 8255–8263, 2023. 3 [13] Seyoung Lee, Jiye Lee, and Jehee Lee. Learning virtual chimeras by dynamic motion reassembly. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 41(6):1–13, 2022. 2, 4 [14] Zhengyuan Li, Kai Cheng, Anindita Ghosh, Uttaran Bhat-tacharya, Liangyan Gui, and Aniket Bera. Simmotionedit: Text-based human motion editing with motion similarity pre-diction. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 27827–27837, 2025. 3 [15] Zhengyi Luo, Jinkun Cao, Kris Kitani, Weipeng Xu, et al. Perpetual humanoid control for real-time simulated avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 10895–10904, 2023. 5 [16] Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F. Troje, Ger-ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. AMASS: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In International Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 5442–5451, 2019. 5, 2 [17] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin, David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470 , 2021. 5 [18] Liang Pan, Zeshi Yang, Zhiyang Dou, Wenjia Wang, Buzhen Huang, Bo Dai, Taku Komura, and Jingbo Wang. To-kenhsi: Unified synthesis of physical human-scene inter-actions through task tokenization. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5379–5391, 2025. 1, 2 [19] Xue Bin Peng, Ze Ma, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Amp: Adversarial motion priors for styl-ized physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) , 40(4):1–20, 2021. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 1 [20] Xue Bin Peng, Yunrong Guo, Lina Halper, Sergey Levine, and Sanja Fidler. Ase: Large-scale reusable adversarial skill embeddings for physically simulated characters. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) , 41(4):1–17, 2022. 2, 1 [21] Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Pu Wang, Minwoo Lee, and Chen Chen. Mmm: Generative masked motion model. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1546–1555, 2024. 3 [22] Abhinanda R. Punnakkal, Arjun Chandrasekaran, Nikos Athanasiou, Alejandra Quiros-Ramirez, and Michael J. Black. BABEL: Bodies, action and behavior with english labels. In Proceedings IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 722–731, 2021. 5 [23] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. 5 [24] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Rad-ford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algo-rithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. 5 [25] Chen Tessler, Yoni Kasten, Yunrong Guo, Shie Mannor, Gal Chechik, and Xue Bin Peng. Calm: Conditional adversarial latent models for directable virtual characters. In ACM SIG-GRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings , pages 1–9, 2023. 2, 4[26] Chen Tessler, Yunrong Guo, Ofir Nabati, Gal Chechik, and Xue Bin Peng. Maskedmimic: Unified physics-based char-acter control through masked motion inpainting. ACM Trans-actions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(6):1–21, 2024. 2, 8 [27] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yoni Shafir, Daniel Cohen-or, and Amit Haim Bermano. Human motion diffu-sion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 3 [28] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Setareh Cohan, Daniele Reda, Zhengyi Luo, Xue Bin Peng, Amit H Bermano, and Michiel van de Panne. Closd: Closing the loop between simulation and diffusion for multi-task character control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03441 , 2024. 3 [29] Hado P Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, Matteo Hessel, Volodymyr Mnih, and David Silver. Learning values across many orders of magnitude. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. 1 [30] Jungdam Won, Deepak Gopinath, and Jessica Hodgins. Ascalable approach to control diverse behaviors for physi-cally simulated characters. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 39(4):33–1, 2020. 1 [31] Jungdam Won, Deepak Gopinath, and Jessica Hodgins. Physics-based character controllers using conditional vaes. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 41(4):1–12, 2022. 1, 2 [32] Pei Xu and Ruocheng Wang. Synchronize dual hands for physics-based dexterous guitar playing. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 1 [33] Pei Xu, Xiumin Shang, Victor Zordan, and Ioannis Karamouzas. Composite motion learning with task control. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(4):1–16, 2023. 1, 2, 4, 7, 8 [34] Pei Xu, Kaixiang Xie, Sheldon Andrews, Paul G Kry, Michael Neff, Morgan McGuire, Ioannis Karamouzas, and Victor Zordan. Adaptnet: Policy adaptation for physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6):1–17, 2023. 1, 2, 8 [35] Kaifeng Zhao, Gen Li, and Siyu Tang. Dartcon-trol: A diffusion-based autoregressive motion model for real-time text-driven motion control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05260 , 2024. 3, 5, 4 [36] Yi Zhou, Connelly Barnes, Jingwan Lu, Jimei Yang, and Hao Li. On the continuity of rotation representations in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5745–5753, 2019. 1 [37] Qingxu Zhu, He Zhang, Mengting Lan, and Lei Han. Neural categorical priors for physics-based character control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6):1–16, 2023. 5 MaskAdapt: Learning Flexible Motion Adaptation via Mask-Invariant Prior for Physics-Based Characters 

# Supplementary Material 

# A. Implementation Details 

Base policies were trained for 30K iterations using 4,096 parallel environments. Residual policies were trained for 20K iterations, with 4,096 environments for motion compo-sition and 2,048 for partial tracking. For goal-driven tasks, training was extended to up to 35K iterations. All policies were optimized with Adam optimizers, using learning rates 

1 × 10 −5, 1 × 10 −4, and 1 × 10 −4 for the actor, critic, dis-criminator, respectively. Other hyperparameters are listed in Tab. 1 and 2. All experiments were conducted on NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs. Training the base policy took about one day, and the residual policy took roughly 16.5 hours for mo-tion composition and 13.5 hours for partial tracking. 

State and Action Representation. The state is represented as st = (ht, pt, qt, ˙pt, ˙qt) ∈ R328 , where ht ∈ R1 represents the root height, pt ∈ R(J−1)×3 the joint positions excluding the root, qt ∈ RJ×6 the joint rotations using 6D represen-tation [36], and ˙pt, ˙qt ∈ RJ×3 the joint linear and angular velocities, respectively, all normalized with respect to the character’s heading transform. Here, J is the total number of joints (in our case 22). The action space matches the number of DoFs, yielding a 63-dimensional vector. 

Reward. For learning the base policy, the imitation reward follows [19]: 

rt = − log (1 − Dπ (s, s ′)) . (7) For dynamic motion composition, we use the same formula-tion but condition the discriminator on the active body-part mask m:

rt = − log (1 − Dψ (s, s ′ ∣ m)) . (8) For the partial tracking task, we combine an imitation re-ward with a tracking reward: 

rimit  

> t

= − log (1 − Dψ (ϕK (s), ϕ K (s′))) , (9) 

rtrack  

> t

= exp (−∥ˆqt − qt∥2) , (10) where ϕK extracts the state corresponding to the pre-designated body parts JK , and ˆqt denotes the target joint rotations from the generated motion. The final reward is 

rt = wimit rimit  

> t

+ wtrack rtrack  

> t

with wimit = wtrack = 0.5. The residual policy is optimized through multi-objective learn-ing with PopArt normalization [29, 33] to stabilize learning in the tracking task. 

Early Termination. The episode ends when the character falls, determined by any rigid body falling below a height 

Parameters Value horizon length 32 number of environments 4096 minibatch size 4096 actor learning rate 1e-5 critic learning rate 1e-4 discriminator learning rate 1e-4 discount factor γ 0.99 GAE parameter τ 0.95 clip range ϵ 0.2 critic loss weight λV 5.0 gradient penalty weight λGP 5.0 MI loss weight λMI 1.0 Masking probability ρ 0.8 Table 1. Hyperparameters for learning base policy. Parameters Value horizon length 32 number of environments 4096 / 2048 minibatch size 4096 actor learning rate 1e-5 critic learning rate 1e-4 discriminator learning rate 1e-4 discount factor γ 0.99 GAE parameter τ 0.95 clip range ϵ 0.2 critic loss weight λV 5.0 gradient penalty weight λGP 5.0 gain coefficient wgain learned 

Table 2. Hyperparameters for learning residual policy. 

threshold, except for end effectors that are allowed to con-tact the ground. For partial tracking, we additionally adopt the early termination strategy of [30], ending the episode when the average reward over a fixed time window becomes sufficiently low. 

# B. Goal-Driven Tasks 

We describe three goal-driven tasks in detail. The reward function formulation primarily follows prior work [20, 33]. 

Target Location. In this task, the objective is to move the character to a target location pgoal . The task reward is de-fined as 

rgt =

⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩

exp (−3 ∥ ˙proot     

> t−v∗
> t∥2
> ∥v∗
> t∥2

) if ∥pgoal − proot  

> t

∥ > R, 

1 otherwise , (11) where R = 0.5m defines a goal radius around the target lo-cation, ˙proot  

> t

denotes the root velocity, and v∗ 

> t

is the desired velocity toward the goal. The goal observation gt ∈ R4 com-prises the relative direction to the target, the target velocity, and the distance to the goal. A trial is considered successful if the character reaches within the 0.5 m radius of the target location. 

Strike Task. The objective of character is to approach and strike a box. The task reward is defined as 

rgt = 1 − uworld ⋅ ubox , (12) where uworld = [0, 0, 1] is the world up vector and ubox is the box’s up vector. The goal observation gt ∈ R15 consists of the state of the target box. The success rate is computed based on whether the box tilts beyond 78 ○, i.e ., uworld ⋅ubox <

0.2.

Heading Task. The heading task requires the character to move in a target direction d at a specified speed s∗, where the target velocity is defined as v∗ = s∗d. The reward is formulated as 

rgt = 0.7 exp (−0.25 (∥ v∗ − vd∥2 + 0.1∥v⊥∥2)) 

+ 0.3 max (d ⋅ f , 0),

(13) where vd is the character’s velocity component along the target direction d, v⊥ is the velocity component orthogonal to d, and f represents the character’s current heading di-rection. The goal observation gt ∈ R3 comprises the target direction and the target speed. A trial is considered success-ful if the velocity error along the target direction, ∣v∗ − vd∣,is less than 0.5. 

# C. Reference Motion Dataset 

Our base policies were trained using motion capture data from LAFAN1 [7]. For the motion composition task, we used motion clips sourced from the AMASS dataset [16]. The partial tracking task relies on trajectories produced by the generator G, which are layered on top of the base walk-ing motion, which is also from LAFAN1. A summary of all reference motions used across our experiments is provided in Tab. 3. 

# D. Experiments 

D.1. Ablation Study on MI Loss Strength 

We conducted an ablation study across a wider range of mask-invariant weights λMI . The full results are presented in Tab. 4. For each setting, we report the average normal-ized entropy Hnorm computed over all body-part masking configurations. To account for different initialization con-ditions, we evaluate the policies when motions are gener-ated from random initial states (Random Init.) as well as from a same initial state (Same Init.), and we report Hnorm                                                 

> Motion Dataset Duration (s) Stage Task Jump LAFAN1 24.4 Base CLocomotion LAFAN1 1000 Base CAim LAFAN1 305 Base CWalk LAFAN1 5.6 Base TWalk (G1) LAFAN1 33.3 Base CAlternating kick AMASS 9.9 Residual CRotate arms AMASS 25.1 Residual CSneak AMASS 8.3 Residual CPunch AMASS 18.3 Residual CPunch (G1) AMASS 14.5 Residual CGroom AMASS 14.5 Residual C
> Table 3. Reference motions used in our experiments. Task type ”C” denotes motions used for motion composition, and ”T” indi-cates motions used for partial tracking.

for both cases. Under the random-initialization setting, a moderate-to-strong MI weight yields the highest entropy, with λMI = 5.0 performing best. Beyond this point, ex-cessively large weights begin to harm performance, reduc-ing entropy even below that of the weakest regularization (λMI = 0.1). Under the same-initialization setting, the re-sults reflect the policy’s ability to branch into different mo-tions from an identical initial state. In this case, λMI = 1.0

achieves the highest value, outperforming all weaker and stronger regularization strengths. This suggests that a mod-erate MI weight provides the best balance between enforc-ing invariance and preserving sufficient freedom for the pol-icy to diverge into a wide range of skills. In our experi-ments, we adopt λMI = 1.0 as the default setting. 

D.2. Consistency Across Masking Conditions 

We further evaluated whether the base policy maintains con-sistent behavioral diversity under different masking con-ditions. Specifically, we compute Hnorm over all masking combinations involving up to two body parts. As shown in Tab. 5, the entropy values vary by only 0.014, indicating that the policy produces similarly diverse motions regardless of which body parts are masked. This consistency confirms that the MI-trained base policy serves as a reliable motion prior for subsequent residual learning. We also evaluated the consistency across all masking conditions when the MI loss is not applied. As shown in Tab. 6, the Hnorm values decrease substantially across all combinations. The policy retains relatively higher values only when a single body part is masked (up to 0.845), but performance drops further when two body parts are masked. The degradation becomes most severe when the masked parts are critical for locomotion. In particular, masking both legs produces the lowest score of 0.602, showing a large gap compared to the 0.905 achieved when the MI loss is applied in Tab. 5. These results highlight the importance of MI regu-larization in maintaining consistent behaviors under diverse masking configurations. Method Masking MI Weights (λMI )Avg. Hnorm ↑

Random Init. Same Init. AMP [19] × – 0.9124 0.8890 

− Ours w/o LMI ✓ – 0.7448 0.7019 

+ Ours w/ LMI 

✓ 0.1 0.8968 0.8387 

✓ 0.5 0.8987 0.8441 

✓ 1.0 (default) 0.9025 0.8833 

✓ 2.5 0.9048 0.8387 

✓ 5.0 0.9123 0.8552 

✓ 10.0 0.9075 0.8722 

✓ 50.0 0.8803 0.8461 Table 4. Ablation study on the mask-invariant loss weights.                              

> Trunk Left Arm Right Arm Left Leg Right Leg Trunk 0.909 0.896 0.906 0.908 0.906 Left Arm –0.895 0.900 0.898 0.896 Right Arm ––0.907 0.902 0.903 Left Leg –––0.904 0.905 Right Leg ––––0.902

Table 5. Normalized entropy ( Hnorm ) across all masking condi-tions. Values are arranged in an upper-triangular matrix, with lower entries omitted (“–”) due to symmetry. Diagonal entries correspond to single body-part masking, while off-diagonal en-tries represent the average Hnorm when two body parts are masked simultaneously. Darker shades indicate higher entropy.                              

> Trunk Left Arm Right Arm Left Leg Right Leg Trunk 0.798 0.830 0.790 0.749 0.629 Left Arm –0.814 0.736 0.796 0.702 Right Arm ––0.845 0.681 0.664 Left Leg –––0.754 0.602 Right Leg ––––0.783

Table 6. Normalized entropy ( Hnorm ) across all masking con-ditions when the MI loss is not applied. The Hnorm values de-crease substantially across all combinations, with particularly se-vere degradation when two body parts are masked simultaneously. 

D.3. Frame Visitation Frequency 

Fig. 1 shows frame visitation distributions for locomotion under an extreme masking condition where both legs are masked. The y-axis indicates visitation frequency per frame (log scale), and the x-axis lists frames sorted by visitation frequency. Without the MI loss (blue), the distribution is highly skewed, showing that the policy visits only a narrow subset of frames. In contrast, applying the MI loss (yellow) yields a far more uniform distribution, indicating that the policy explores a broad range of motion states rather than collapsing onto a small set of highly visited frames. For reference, we also show the AMP baseline (green), which does not apply masking. Notably, the base policy with the MI loss achieves a level of uniformity comparable to AMP, demonstrating that it supports robust and diverse state visi-tation even under heavily masked observations. 

Figure 1. Frame visitation frequencies for locomotion with both legs masked. The policy without MI loss (blue) shows a skewed visitation pattern, whereas applying the MI loss (yellow) produces a markedly more uniform distribution. Our mask-invariant base achieves a level of uniformity comparable to AMP (green), indi-cating that the MI loss preserves diverse state visitation even under heavy masking. 

D.4. Qualitative Comparison for Motion Composi-tion 

Fig. 2 visualizes generated motion sequences for the three composition cases using each method. Our method pro-duces more natural and coordinated motion combinations, while CML often exhibits delayed activation or incomplete execution of the adapted motion ( e.g ., limited arm rotation or missing/delayed kick behaviors). These qualitative re-sults corroborate the entropy-based findings, demonstrat-ing that our framework yields more balanced and expres-sive motion compositions. Notably, while CML is con-strained to fixed adaptation regions, our method supports more complex scenarios and continues to achieve superior performance under these challenging, high-flexibility set-tings. 

D.5. Qualitative Comparison for Partial Motion Tracking 

Fig. 3 presents a comparison among our method, CML, and a from-scratch model, all conditioned on the text commands shown on the left. When the character is instructed to exe-Figure 2. Qualitative comparison of composition methods, each motion generated from the same initial state. In (a), the kick mo-tion in CML is delayed; in (b), CML exhibits severe artifacts and fails to complete full arm rotations; and in (c), CML produces lim-ited motion combinations compared to ours. 

Figure 3. Qualitative comparison of our method, CML, and a from-scratch model for the partial tracking task given the text com-mands on the left. The red region highlights deviations from the base behavior. 

cute more pronounced arm motions, such as raising arms or waving hands, both CML and the from-scratch model often struggle to preserve the underlying walk. CML exhibits in-termittent disruptions in its stepping pattern, leading to no-ticeable gait instability. The from-scratch model performs even less reliably and frequently fails to sustain walking. In contrast, our method maintains stable locomotion through-out the sequence. With its improved stability and stronger tracking capability, our controller produces motions that re-main coherently aligned with the intended goals provided by the text commands. 

# E. Training Procedure 

E.1. Training Base Policy 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the full training procedure for the base policy. For each rollout, we store the transition in the 

Algorithm 1: Training Base Policy 

Initialize base policy π and value function V π

Initialize discriminator Dπ

Initialize replay buffer B

while training not converged do 

/* Collect rollouts */ 

for t = 1, ..., L do 

Sample mask mt

Compute masked state ¯st from (st, m t) using Eq. (1) Sample action at ∼ π(at ∣ ¯st, m t)

Simulate next state st+1 using st and at

Store transition (st, m t, a t, s t+1) in buffer B

st ← st+1

end 

/* Update discriminator */ 

Update Dπ on (s, s ′) from M and B

/* Update base policy */ 

for u = 1, ..., n do 

Sample (st, m t, a t, s t+1) from B

Compute LMI from (st, m 0, m t) using Eq. (3) 

L ← LPPO + λMI 

Update π and V π with L

end end 

replay buffer B, including the full state st and the mask mt

used to construct ¯st. This is necessary since computing the MI loss requires comparing the action distributions under the masked state ¯st paired with its mask mt against those under the corresponding full state st with the null mask m0.

E.2. Training Residual Policy for Partial Tracking 

Algorithm 2 outlines the training procedure for the residual policy in the partial motion tracking task. To improve effi-ciency, we sampled batches of future trajectories τf every 

Nsample iterations using G and store them in a goal buffer 

Bτ . For each rollout, a trajectory was sampled from Bτ ,and its future goal states gt were consumed sequentially to guide the residual policy ψ.

# F. Details on Trajectory Generator 

The generator G is a diffusion-based autoregressive motion generation model [35] that takes a text prompt c and a his-tory motion τh = xt−H+1∶t as conditioning inputs, and pre-dicts a future motion segment τf = xt+1∶t+F .

Motion Representation. Each pose in the sequence is rep-resented as xt = (tt, ot, pt, Θt, ˙tt, ˙ot, ˙pt), where tt ∈ R3

is the root translation, ot ∈ R6 the root orientation in 6D representation, Θt ∈ R(J−1)×6 the local joint rotations, and 

pt ∈ RJ×3 the joint positions. The dotted terms represent the first-order temporal derivatives (velocities) of the corre-Algorithm 2: Training Residual Policy for Partial Tracking                                                                                                          

> π: pre-trained base policy
> G: pre-trained trajectory generator
> JK: pre-defined subset of body parts
> C: text embedding pool for JK
> Initialize residual policy ψand value function Vψ
> Initialize discriminator Dψ
> while training not converged do
> /* Sample trajectories offline */
> if imod Nsample =0then
> Sample random noise zT∼N(0,I)
> Sample text input c∼C
> Sample τf∼G(zT, T, τ h, c )
> Store τfin Bτ
> end
> /* Collect rollouts */
> Sample τf∼Bτ
> for timesteps t=1, . . . , F do
> Compute ¯sKtfrom (st, m Kt)using Eq. (1) Compute gt←ExtractGoal (τf;t, K )
> Sample at∼π(at∣¯sKt, m K)
> Sample ∆at∼ψ(∆at∣st, g t, a t)
> Compute ˆat=wgain ⋅at+∆at
> Simulate next state st+1using stand ˆat
> Store transition (st, g t, m Kt,ˆat, s t+1)in B
> st←st+1
> end
> /* Update discriminator */
> Update Dπon (s, s ′)from Mand B
> /* Update residual policy */
> Update ψand Vψusing data from B
> end

sponding quantities. The motion is canonicalized with re-spect to the first frame of the history motion. 

Formulation. The generator G is implemented as a la-tent diffusion model [5], where generation operates within the compact latent space constructed by the VAE. In the forward diffusion process, Gaussian noise is progressively added to the latent variable z0 according to 

q(zk ∣ zk−1) = N (√αk zk−1, (1 − αk)I) , (14) where αk ∈ (0, 1) is a hyperparameter for noise schedul-ing at diffusion step k. The diffusion model is trained to approximate the reverse process 

pθ (zk−1 ∣ zk, k, τ h, c ) = N (μθ , ˜σkI), (15) where μθ is modeled by a neural network parameterized by 

θ, and ˜σk is the variance specified by the noise schedule. During generation, the model iteratively denoises zk from 

k = T down to 0, and the final latent vector ˆz0 is decoded by the VAE decoder to obtain the clean future motion τf .For convenience, we refer to the entire sampling pipeline as 

τf = G(zT , T, τ h, c ).

Implementation details. We used a history length of H = 5

and a future length of F = 15 . The total number of dif-fusion steps was T = 10 . Both the VAE and the diffu-sion model were implemented using Transformer architec-tures. We performed sampling using the DDPM procedure and applied classifier-free guidance (CFG) with a guidance weight of 5.0 for text-conditioned generation. The text input was encoded using the CLIP [23] text encoder. Following DART [35], we trained the diffusion model using a simple objective, where the model directly predicts the clean latent code rather than the added noise. 

# G. Details on Text Embedding Pool 

In partial tracking task, we defined a subset of body parts 

JK for adaptation and sample a text input c from its as-sociated embedding pool C as input to G. To construct C,we used OpenAI’s GPT-4.1 API to automatically determine the body-part involvement of each action label in the BA-BEL dataset [22], following a similar strategy to [1]. GPT is guided through three sequential steps: (1) Action clar-ity check: Determine whether the label contains enough information to infer body-part involvement. Vague labels are skipped with a brief justification. (2) Body-part analy-sis: For analyzable labels, identify the essential body parts based on an isolated recognizability criterion, meaning a part is chosen only if the action remains identifiable when observed in isolation. (3) Structured output: Return a JSON entry containing the selected parts and a brief rationale, or a skip flag with a skip reason. After the body-part assign-ments are obtained, we extracted only the descriptions asso-ciated with the designated parts to construct C. In our exper-iments, we constructed C for the Arms region and inputted arms-related texts as conditioning inputs to G to produce the kinematic guidance. 

# H. Failure Modes 

Our method may struggle when conflicting motions are as-signed to closely related body parts. For example, combin-ing a Kick on one leg with a Jump on the other can produce unnatural motion. This is because motions like jumping in-herently require coordinated support from multiple related parts, making them difficult to realize when one part is con-strained by a different objective.