Title: ReMoGen: Real-time Human Interaction-to-Reaction Generation via Modular Learning from Diverse Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01082v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 01:27:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# ReMoGen: Real-time Human Interaction-to-Reaction Generation via Modular Learning from Diverse Data 

## Yaoqin Ye 1, Yiteng Xu 1, Qin Sun 2,3, Xinge Zhu 4, Yujing Sun 5, Yuexin Ma 1,†

> 1

## ShanghaiTech University, 2Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, CAS, 

> 3

## University of Science and Technology of China, 4The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 

> 5

## Nanyang Technological University 

{yeyq2025, mayuexin }@shanghaitech.edu.cn Human-Human-Scene Interaction 

b. Motion Generation across Domains 

Human Human Interaction Human Scene Interaction  Text2Motion  

> Human-Human-Scene Interaction Data

a. Learning from Diverse Data 

# Text-to-Motion 

# Data 

Human-Scene 

Interaction Data 

Human-Human 

Interaction Data 

Other  Data 

# ReMoGen 

Figure 1. Overview of ReMoGen. ReMoGen is a modular framework that learns from heterogeneous interaction data. It supports real-time, high-quality, and coherent reaction generation across both single-domain and mixed-modality interaction settings. Our project page and code can be found at https://4dvlab.github.io/project_page/remogen/ .

## Abstract 

Human behaviors in real-world environments are inher-ently interactive, with an individual’s motion shaped by sur-rounding agents and the scene. Such capabilities are essen-tial for applications in virtual avatars, interactive anima-tion, and human-robot collaboration. We target real-time human interaction-to-reaction generation , which gener-ates the ego’s future motion from dynamic multi-source cues, including others’ actions, scene geometry, and op-tional high-level semantic inputs. This task is fundamen-tally challenging due to (i) limited and fragmented inter-action data distributed across heterogeneous single-person, human-human, and human-scene domains, and (ii) the need to produce low-latency yet high-fidelity motion re-sponses during continuous online interaction. To address  

> 1†Corresponding author.

these challenges, we propose ReMoGen (Re action Mo tion 

Gen eration), a modular learning framework for real-time interaction-to-reaction generation. ReMoGen leverages a universal motion prior learned from large-scale single-person motion datasets and adapts it to target interaction domains through independently trained Meta-Interaction 

modules, enabling robust generalization under data-scarce and heterogeneous supervision. To support responsive on-line interaction, ReMoGen performs segment-level genera-tion together with a lightweight Frame-wise Segment Re-finement module that incorporates newly observed cues at the frame level, improving both responsiveness and temporal coherence without expensive full-sequence infer-ence. Extensive experiments across human-human, human-scene, and mixed-modality interaction settings show that ReMoGen produces high-quality, coherent, and responsive reactions, while generalizing effectively across diverse in-

> arXiv:2604.01082v1 [cs.CV] 1 Apr 2026

teraction scenarios. 

## 1. Introduction 

Human behaviors in realistic environments are inherently interactive and context-dependent [2, 42]. An individual’s action is often a reaction —dynamically shaped by the ob-served motions of other people and the surrounding scene. We target the task of real-time human interaction-to-reaction generation as predicting the ego’s future motion conditioned on multi-source interaction cues, including the behaviors of surrounding agents, the spatial configuration of the scene, and high-level textual cues that specify inter-action intent. This task requires the model to continuously perceive and respond to dynamic human-human-scene in-teractions, generating physically plausible and semantically consistent motion in real time. Accurately modeling such interaction-to-reaction dynamics is a key step toward em-bodied intelligence that can understand and respond to com-plex social and physical contexts. It enables lifelike dig-ital avatars and cooperative robots to exhibit human-level reactivity and situational awareness. Applications span from virtual character animation, gaming, and film produc-tion [36, 49] to assistive robotics, human-robot collabora-tion [2, 23], and other interactive AI systems. Human motion generation has evolved from text-driven single-person actions [12, 29] to context-aware and multi-agent scenarios [8, 17, 40]. Text-to-motion methods learn direct mappings from natural language to human motion, producing diverse and semantically aligned sequences [12, 29, 36] but in isolation from the physical world. Human-scene interaction approaches [16, 17, 25] introduce spatial awareness by conditioning on 3D layouts or scene geome-try, yet remain limited to single-agent behaviors. Human-human interaction frameworks [8, 21, 40] attempt to gen-erate all interacting agents jointly under pre-defined inter-action constraints, while action-to-reaction settings [2, 42] predict how one agent reacts to another. Despite these advances, these paradigms have not captured the essence of real-time interaction-to-reaction generation , where an agent has to respond instantly to dynamic inputs from others and the environment. Most of these still assume paired or fully observed motion sequences and operate offline [3, 8], observing both past and future actions of others before gen-eration. Although our target task captures a natural aspect of hu-man behavior, it introduces two fundamental challenges that current motion-generation frameworks fail to address. 

(1) Data scarcity and heterogeneity. Available motion datasets vary widely in domain coverage and supervi-sion modality—ranging from large-scale single-person ac-tions [12, 31] to smaller and more fragmented human-human [9, 21, 41] and human-scene interaction sets [6, 16, 17]. This combination of limited interaction data and strong heterogeneity makes it difficult to learn unified mo-tion priors or transferable representations. As a result, end-to-end models trained within a single domain often overfit to its specific distribution and generalize poorly to new in-teraction configurations. Effectively exploiting all available yet sparse and domain-specific resources remains an open problem for building a generalizable interaction-to-reaction model. 

(2) Real-time responsiveness. Practical applications such as virtual agents, interactive avatars, embodied assistants, and human-robot collaboration [2] require motion responses that are both immediate and high-quality . However, existing architectures struggle to maintain this balance. Diffusion-based models [5, 36, 43] achieve strong motion fidelity but depend on offline generation or heavy optimization, mak-ing them too slow for interactive use. Conversely, online autoregressive designs [4, 49] offer higher speed but often accumulate prediction errors, leading to degraded realism and noticeable drift over long horizons. Achieving low-latency reactions without sacrificing motion fidelity re-mains a central technical challenge, as models have to con-tinuously integrate dynamic observations while preserving smooth, coherent, and physically plausible motion. To address the above challenges, we propose Re-MoGen (Re action Mo tion Gen eration), a modular learn-ing framework for real-time human interaction-to-reaction generation. ReMoGen addresses reaction generation through a modular design that separates universal motion prior learning from interaction-specific adaptation. It sup-ports diverse interaction settings by combining a shared mo-tion prior with domain-specific modules that incorporate observations of other agents and the scene. Specifically, ReMoGen consists of two functional layers that address the two major challenges: 1. Prior-guided Modular Learning for Heterogeneous Interaction Domains. 

ReMoGen learns a universal motion prior from abun-dant single-person datasets and transfers it to scarce in-teraction domains through independently trained Meta-Interaction modules. Rather than relying on extensive joint multi-domain training, these modules rapidly adapt to new target domains by leveraging the shared motion prior. In this way, ReMoGen transfers general motion knowledge learned from single-person data to interac-tion settings, and further generalizes to more complex or previously unseen scenarios, effectively addressing the challenges of data heterogeneity and data scarcity. 2. Frame-wise Segment Refinement for Real-time Roll-out. 

During rollout, ReMoGen performs real-time generation in short temporal segments instead of processing full se-quences through the large backbone network. Within each segment, a lightweight Frame-wise Segment Refine-ment module updates motion predictions using the lat-est incoming observations of other agents and the scene. This refinement mechanism provides a balance between motion fidelity and low-latency responsiveness: the large backbone offers stable long-term dynamics, while the small segment-wise adapter ensures rapid, fine-grained reactivity. In summary, our main contribution is a unified framework for real-time human interaction-to-reaction generation 

that addresses data scarcity, heterogeneous supervision, and real-time responsiveness in a modular design. ReMoGen 

achieves this by combining a universal motion prior with in-dependently trained Meta-Interaction Modules for efficient interaction-specific adaptation, together with a lightweight 

Frame-wise Segment Refinement mechanism for respon-sive online generation. Extensive experiments show that ReMoGen produces high-quality, coherent, and respon-sive reactions across diverse interaction scenarios and input modalities, establishing an effective and scalable approach to real-time interaction-to-reaction generation. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Single-Person Text-to-Motion Generation 

Single-person text-to-motion generation has progressed rapidly. Early VAE-based models such as T2M [12] and TEMOS [29] demonstrated effective language-to-motion mapping [13, 28], and diffusion-based approaches [7, 19, 36, 46] further improved realism and diversity. Subsequent developments explored latent diffusion for efficiency [5, 32], incorporated physical constraints for more plausible synthesis [37, 43], and introduced lightweight autoregres-sive architectures for real-time generation [4, 34, 49]. Despite this progress, single-person models largely op-erate in isolation from social context. They produce se-mantically accurate motion but lack awareness of surround-ing agents or scene geometry, limiting their use in in-teractive settings. Nevertheless, large-scale single-person datasets [12, 24, 30, 31] and the models trained on them provide rich motion priors capturing kinematic structure, temporal regularity, and semantic diversity, offering strong potential for transfer to downstream interaction tasks. 

2.2. Human Interaction Motion Generation 

Human interaction motion generation extends the single-person text-to-motion task to scenarios involving multiple agents and scene context. This task has progressed across Human-Scene Interaction (HSI), Human-Human Interac-tion (HHI), and broader multi-entity settings. HSI methods model how humans navigate or inter-act with 3D environments using scene geometry or affor-dances [14, 16, 17, 25, 39, 48]. HHI approaches focus on interpersonal coordination, ranging from collaborative be-haviors to fine-grained action-reaction dynamics [1, 8, 10, 21, 33, 40–42]. Recent actor-reactor frameworks generate reactions in response to another’s motion [8, 22, 42], while real-time online systems demonstrate the feasibility of pro-ducing responsive interactions in human-robot collabora-tion [2]. Despite these developments, many frameworks rely on domain-specific datasets, treat HHI and HSI separately, or require fully observed partner trajectories [11, 20]. Re-cently, a notable attempt to address human-human-scene interaction [3] assembles separate specialized modules to produce in-scene multi-person motion. While it brings in-teraction into scene context, it operates strictly offline and merges independently generated segments via interpolation, limiting adaptability to dynamic interaction cues. As a result, real-time interaction-to-reaction generation that re-mains responsive, scene-aware, and stable under evolving conditions is still insufficiently addressed. 

2.3. Prior-Guided Adaptation in Motion Genera-tion 

A growing direction in generative modeling adapts large pre-trained backbones using lightweight modular com-ponents. In 2D image synthesis, approaches such as LoRA [15], ControlNet [44], and T2I-Adapter [26] demon-strate that attaching small trainable branches or parameter-efficient layers to a frozen prior enables flexible condi-tioning without retraining the full model. This philoso-phy—leveraging strong foundational priors while introduc-ing task-specific adapters—has begun influencing 3D mo-tion generation. Modular motion approaches adopt this idea in several ways. Some introduce spatial or geometric control branches that guide the backbone with scene or contact cues [18, 40, 49]. Others employ noise-based optimization modules that modify diffusion noise or latent trajectories to impose spa-tial or interaction constraints at runtime [18, 38]. Another line of work decomposes motion generation into separate functional components or hierarchical body parts, offering improved controllability and flexibility [8, 10, 35, 45]. While these strategies highlight the promise of prior-guided modularity, they are typically domain-specific, op-erate offline, or rely on fully observed partner trajectories, and therefore do not directly address how to reuse a shared motion prior across heterogeneous interaction domains un-der sparse supervision. In contrast, ReMoGen is designed to transfer general motion knowledge learned from single-person data to interaction domains through independently trained modules, and further support responsive online generation through frame-wise refinement. This distinc-tion makes ReMoGen suitable for real-time interaction-to-reaction generation across diverse interaction scenarios and ❄Latent Decoder    

> Predicted Future
> Segment-based Autoregressive Rollout
> Others
> Encoder
> f-2 f-1
> f-2 f-1
> Dynamic Context
> execution
> Universal Single-Person Prior
> History Motion
> ❄Transformer Denoiser
> "Walk forward" "Cross arms"
> CLIP
> Others History
> Linear
> Transformer
> Transformer
> Transformer
> Transformer
> Linear
> MI Block
> Scene Geometry
> Scene
> Encoder
> MI Block
> Meta-Interaction Modules for Heterogeneous Interaction Adaptation
> ❄Latent Decoder
> 🔥 Meta-Interaction Module
> HHI Branch
> 🔥 Meta-Interaction Module
> HSI Branch
> Train  Independently

HSI          

> ... Ego Motion
> ff+1 f+2 ... ff+1 f+2 ...
> FWSR
> Module ff-1 Latent Decoder ff+1 f+2 …
> next execution
> f-1 f
> Frame-wise Segment Refinement
> Add
> Latent Decoder
> MI Block
> MI Block
> MI Block
> MI Block
> MI Block
> MI Block

HHSI 

HHI 

HSI Figure 2. Overview of the ReMoGen Framework . Our framework is designed to address the challenges of data scarcity and real-time responsiveness in interaction-to-reaction generation. 

input modalities. 

## 3. Method 

3.1. Overview 

ReMoGen is a modular framework for real-time interaction-to-reaction generation (Fig. 2). Given text intent, observed motions of other agents, and scene context, it autoregres-sively predicts the ego’s future motion using three com-ponents: (1) a frozen text-conditioned single-person mo-tion prior pretrained on large-scale datasets; (2) Meta-Interaction modules that adapt this prior to different in-teraction domains (e.g., HHI, HSI); and (3) a Frame-wise Segment Refinement module that updates short predicted segments using the latest interaction cues to achieve low-latency online rollout while preserving motion fidelity. 

3.2. Universal Single-Person Prior 

ReMoGen builds upon a universal text-conditioned single-person motion prior learned from large-scale text-to-motion datasets. This prior captures general kinematic structure, temporal dynamics, and language-motion correlations. It is kept frozen during all interaction-aware learning, serving as the backbone motion generator for ReMoGen. 

Problem Formulation. Given a textual description  W ,the prior generates a sequence of 3D human poses  M =

{m(1) , . . . , m (T )}, where each pose  m(i) ∈ RD follows a modified SMPL-X [27] representation encoding body pose, hand pose, root motion, and other dynamic attributes [49]. 

Segment-based Autoregressive Generation. For effi-cient long sequences, we adopt a segment-based autoregres-sive approach: the model iteratively predicts a future seg-ment  ˆM if ∈ RF ×D from a history window  M ih ∈ RH×D

and text  W , and updates the history via 

M i+1  

> h

= concat( M ih, ˆM if )[ −H :] . (1) 

Latent Motion Diffusion. Following DART [49], each segment is encoded into a latent space with a transformer-based VAE:  ˆM if = Dθ (M ih, z i), (2) where  w = Enc text (W ) conditions a latent denoiser  Gψ . At diffusion step  t, the denoiser predicts a clean latent 

ˆz0 = Gψ (zt, t, M ih, w ), (3) which is decoded back to motion space by the VAE decoder. 

3.3. Meta-Interaction Modules for Heterogeneous Interaction Adaptation 

To imbue the universal prior with interaction awareness, we introduce Meta-Interaction Modules . These adapters plug into the frozen prior and inject guidance from dynamic in-teraction cues without requiring expensive full-model re-training. While high-level semantic inputs are consumed only by the universal prior, Meta-Interaction Modules re-main text-agnostic and specialize in adapting the shared prior to a particular interaction domain (e.g., HHI, HSI) based on observations of other agents and the scene. Each module is trained independently. Human-Human Interaction Human-Scene Interaction Human-Human-Scene Interaction 

Sit Figure 3. Qualitative results of ReMoGen across Human–Human, Human–Scene, and mixed Human–Human–Scene scenarios. Blue meshes denote the generated ego motion, while red meshes represent the observed motions of others. The examples cover diverse in-teraction behaviors, including Taichi-style movements, chasing, chatting, and scene-aware interaction, demonstrating the versatility of ReMoGen across heterogeneous interaction settings. 

Overview. At each denoising step  t, the latent denoiser re-ceives: (i) the ego motion history M ih, (ii) a noisy latent zt,and (iii) contextual embeddings derived from either other agents or the scene. Meta-Interaction Modules transform these contextual embeddings into adaptive modulation sig-nals that steer the prior’s latent update: 

ˆz0 = Gψ

 zt, t, M ih, c others , c scene , w  (4) where text embedding w conditions the universal prior only , while cothers and cscene exclusively drive the Meta-Interaction Modules. 

Context Encoding. Two independent encoders extract high-level interaction cues: 

ccontext = Enc context (Xcontext ) (5) where Xothers is a short history of surrounding agents’ poses, 

Xscene is a voxelized 3D occupancy representation of the environment. The Others Encoder (TCN-based) [2] captures relative velocity, approach direction, and human-human spatial re-lations, while the Scene Encoder (ViT-based) [16] summa-rizes nearby geometry and affordances. Both encoders are modular and replaceable. 

3.4. Meta-Interaction Block 

The Meta-Interaction Block injects interaction-awareness into the frozen prior. Given ego features  h and contex-tual cues  ccontext , a self-attention layer first refines  h into  h′,and a cross-attention layer over  ccontext  extracts interaction-relevant signals . These signals are converted into FiLM-style modulation parameters  (γ, β ) that apply a feature-wise affine transformation 

hmod = (1 + tanh γ) ⊙ h′ + tanh β,  (6) followed by a feed-forward layer to obtain interaction-aware features for each denoising step. 

Training Strategy. Each Meta-Interaction Module is trained independently on its corresponding domain (HHI on Inter-X, HSI on LINGO) while the universal prior re-mains frozen. This allows each module to specialize with-out requiring costly joint supervision. The training objec-tives mirror those of the prior [49], including reconstruction and temporal-delta losses ( Lrec , L latent , L aux ), ensuring that the learned modulations are domain-consistent and tempo-rally stable. 

Composable Inference. At inference time, each Meta-Interaction Module produces a modulation term  ∆i that reflects the influence of its corresponding interaction cue on the ego latent representation. Multiple modules can be activated simultaneously, and their effects are combined through a weighted sum: 

∆total = X

> i

αi∆i, (7) where  αi are user-defined coefficients that control the relative contribution of each domain. To prevent instability from excessively large updates, the fused modulation  ∆total  is normalized with an L2-norm clamp before being applied to the latent features. This com-posable design enables flexible blending of HHI and HSI cues while preserving the integrity of the frozen prior. 

3.5. Frame-wise Segment Refinement for Low-Latency Online Updates 

Standard segment-based autoregression presents a trade-off: long segments ensure smooth, high-quality motion but introduce significant latency, as updates occur only after a full segment is generated. Conversely, short segments re-duce latency but can lead to jerky, incoherent motion. Re-computing the entire diffusion process for every frame is computationally infeasible for real-time applications. The central challenge, therefore, is to bridge the gap between 

high-fidelity generation and low-latency response .

Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR). To resolve this trade-off, we introduce Frame-wise Segment Refine-

Algorithm 1 Frame-wise Segment Refinement 

Input: latent z0, dynamic interaction cues Xdyn , initial fu-ture segment ˆM (0)  

> f

, ego history window Mh, de-coder Dθ , frame-wise adapter FWSR. 

Output: Refined future segment ˆMf .Initialize first-frame prediction: m(0) ← ˆM (0)  

> f

[: , 1, :] 

Update history window: M (0)  

> h

← concat (Mh[: , 2 : H, :], m (0) )

for f = 1 to F − 1 do 

Extract recent dynamic window: 

X(f ) 

> dyn

← Xdyn [: , −H :, :] 

Refine latent: ˜zf ← FWSR (z0, M (f −1)  

> h

, X (f ) 

> dyn

)

Decode refined future segment: ˜Mf ← Dθ (M (0)  

> h

, ˜zf )

Take next frame: m(f ) ← ˜Mf [: , 1 + f, :] 

Update history: M (f ) 

> h

← concat (M (f −1)  

> h

[: , 2 : H, :], m (f ))

return ˆMf = concat (m(0) , m (1) , . . . , m (F −1) )

ment (FWSR), a lightweight module that provides per-frame corrective updates on top of the segment-level pre-diction. Instead of re-running the full generative process, FWSR efficiently adjusts the latent space. This is achieved using a lightweight version of our Meta-Interaction Block, applying a similar Modulate function with attention lay-ers and FiLM. It uses the most recent dynamic context to refine the initial segment latent z0:

ˆzf = Modulate  z0, concat (M (f −1)  

> h

, X (f )dyn ), (8) where z0 is the latent predicted by the main generator at the start of the segment. The dynamic context is formed by concatenating the most recent motion history M (f −1) 

> h

and newly observed interaction cues X(f )dyn . This refinement updates only the current frame, preserving long-horizon dy-namics from the segment predictor while enabling immedi-ate reaction to new observations. FWSR is trained independently with the universal prior and all Meta-Interaction Modules frozen, ensuring it acts as a stable, local adapter that injects dynamic corrections with-out altering global motion structure. By iteratively refin-ing frame-level predictions and updating the history buffer (Algorithm 1), FWSR achieves the responsiveness required for real-time interaction without sacrificing the quality of segment-level generation. 

## 4. Experiments 

We evaluate ReMoGen on real-time interaction-to-reaction generation across human-human (HHI), human-scene (HSI), and mixed human-human-scene settings. Our exper-iments are designed to answer four key questions: • Q1: Does our universal motion prior enable data-efficient adaptation to heterogeneous interaction domains? • Q2: Do the Meta-Interaction Modules improve motion quality for conditioned interaction across HHI and HSI tasks? • Q3: Can our composable design generalize to unseen mixed-modality interaction settings? • Q4: Does Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR) en-hance real-time responsiveness without degrading motion quality? 

4.1. Experimental Setup 

Task and Datasets. We evaluate ReMoGen in a real-time interaction-to-reaction setting, where at each timestep, the model observes past context and autoregressively gen-erates the entire future motion sequence. The universal single-person prior is pretrained on HumanML3D [12]. The Meta-Interaction Modules are trained independently: the HHI module on Inter-X [41], and the HSI module on LINGO [16]. Mixed-modality generalization and fine-tuning efficiency are tested on EgoBody [47], which fea-Method FID ↓ R-Precision   

> (Top-3) ↑

MM Dist. ↓ Diversity → Peak Jerk ↓ Collision(%) ↓ Latency 

> (s/frame) ↓

GT 0.000 0.472 4.051 4.084 0.343 – –ReGenNet [42] 11.622 0.269 6.092 3.452 2.321 0.665 0.210 FreeMotion [8] 3.383 0.284 5.438 3.394 2.207 0.545 0.221 

FreeMotion off  [8] 0.492 0.417 4.330 3.913 0.304 1.220 –SymBridge [2] 2.569 0.355 4.955 3.598 0.212 0.646 0.040 Ours 0.181 0.464 4.076 3.911 0.222 0.989 0.042 Ours+FWSR 0.166 0.462 4.076 4.003 0.218 0.961 0.047   

> Table 1. Human–Human Interaction results on Inter-X. Bold indicates the best and underlined indicates the second-best. Reported latency is end-to-end inference time. Green latency values meet the 0.1 s/frame real-time threshold (equivalent to 10 FPS), while red values do not.

tures mixed human-human-scene interactions. All se-quences are downsampled to 10 FPS in dataset preprocess-ing. 

Metrics. We report standard metrics for realism and se-mantic alignment (FID, R-Precision, MM-Dist.), Diversity, smoothness (Peak Jerk), Collision(%) and per-frame infer-ence latency under online autoregressive rollout. We pro-vide more detailed contact-based metrics in the supplemen-tary material. 

Implementation Details. The prior uses a latent autore-gressive diffusion backbone, trained on HumanML3D with a history length  H = 2 , future length  F = 8 , and 10 diffu-sion steps. The HHI and HSI modules are trained for 65k it-erations each on Inter-X and LINGO, respectively, while the prior remains frozen. The Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR) module is trained for an additional 65k steps, with all other components frozen. We use AdamW ( 1 × 10 −4

learning rate), a batch size of 1024, gradient clipping (1.0), and EMA (0.999). All experiments are conducted on a sin-gle NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. 

4.2. Comparison with State-of-the-Art Methods 

Human-Human Interaction (HHI). On the Inter-X dataset, ReMoGen demonstrates superior performance compared to specialized HHI methods, as shown in Tab. 1. We compare against ReGenNet [42] (action-to-reaction), 

SymBridge [2] (real-time Human-Robot Interaction), and 

FreeMotion [8] (diffusion-based). For a fair comparison, FreeMotion is trained under the same configuration as our model. ReMoGen outperforms all baselines across nearly all metrics, including FID, R-Precision, and MM-Dist, in-dicating higher realism and semantic accuracy. Crucially, it achieves this while maintaining a low per-frame latency (0.042s), successfully avoiding the fidelity-latency trade-off common in other real-time systems. This result affirms that our prior-guided modular design enables high-quality, real-time reaction generation. 

Human-Scene Interaction (HSI). In the HSI task on the LINGO dataset, ReMoGen again surpasses strong, scene-aware baselines. As detailed in Tab. 2, we outperform both TRUMANS [17] and LINGO [16], which use the same segment-based rollout protocol and voxelized scene representation. ReMoGen not only achieves the best per-formance across all metrics but also records the lowest latency (0.042s), comfortably meeting the 0.1 s real-time threshold that one baseline fails to meet. These results val-idate that our Meta-Interaction Modules effectively condi-tion generation on interaction cues ( Q2 ) without compro-mising real-time efficiency. 

4.3. Generalization to Unseen Mixed-Modality In-teraction Settings 

On EgoBody (Tab. 3), which contains mixed HHI and HSI scenarios unseen during training, using either the HHI or HSI module alone in a zero-shot manner yields poor per-formance due to the domain mismatch. However, a sim-ple symmetric composition ( αHHI = αHSI = 0 .5) improves FID and MM-Dist. Initializing from our universal prior and fine-tuning on EgoBody accelerates adaptation. With 2k-10k steps, we already surpass a from-scratch model trained for 500k steps. By 65k steps, its performance approaches ground-truth statistics. 

4.4. Ablation Studies 

We conduct targeted ablations to validate the main compo-nents of our framework. 

Impact of the Universal Prior. To answer Q1 , we an-alyze the contribution of our pretrained universal prior in Tab. 4. A model using the Prior Only struggles to gen-erate coordinated interactive motion, confirming a distribu-tion mismatch. Training a model from Scratch on Inter-X alleviates this but suffers from unstable kinematics due to the limited dataset size. Joint-Finetuning of the entire model improves semantic alignment but degrades motion Method FID ↓ R-Precision 

(Top-3) ↑ MM Dist. ↓ Diversity → Peak Jerk ↓ Collision(%) ↓ Latency 

(s/frame) ↓

GT 0.000 0.609 1.954 7.678 0.161 – –TRUMANS [17] 4.731 0.178 10.822 6.543 0.279 10.754 0.074 LINGO [16] 3.633 0.218 9.597 5.503 0.252 10.610 0.189 Ours 1.201 0.530 3.408 7.421 0.169 7.822 0.042 

Table 2. Human-Scene Interaction results on LINGO. Bold indicates best performance. Green latency values meet the 0.1 s/frame real-time threshold. Ours outperforms both baselines across all evaluation metrics. 

Type Step FID ↓ MM Dist. ↓ Div. →

GT 0.000 2.894 1.399 HHI Zeroshot 18.377 8.665 3.140 

HSI Zeroshot 15.087 8.669 4.360 Compose Zeroshot 14.740 8.333 4.557 From Scratch 500k 2.341 4.474 2.718 Use Prior 2k 2.757 4.479 2.908 5k 0.569 3.536 2.038 10k 0.418 3.413 1.867 65k 0.292 3.040 1.429 

Table 3. Mixed-modality results on EgoBody. Zero-shot com-position provides complementary priors but reflects clear domain mismatch. Prior-initialized finetuning rapidly adapts to the tar-get domain, outperforming scratch training within a few thousand steps.                             

> Method FID ↓R-Prec. ↑MM Dist. ↓Div. →
> GT 0.000 0.472 4.051 4.084 Prior Only 3.735 0.231 5.736 3.235 Scratch (No Prior) 0.270 0.412 4.385 3.907 Joint-Finetune 0.298 0.439 4.188 3.862 Ours 0.181 0.464 4.076 3.911

Table 4. Ablation on different ways of using the universal prior. 

quality by eroding the rich kinematic knowledge from the large-scale pretraining. In contrast, our approach of keeping the universal prior 

frozen and adapting via Meta-Interaction Modules strikes the optimal balance. It preserves the strong, generaliz-able motion structures from the prior while enabling tar-geted adaptation to interaction cues. This strategy is key to achieving superior realism and semantic consistency. 

Efficacy of Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR). 

To address Q4 , we evaluate the impact of FWSR on respon-siveness in Tab. 5. The standard segment-based rollout is real-time but has limited reactivity, as updates occur only once per segment. Conversely, a naive frame-wise diffu-sion approach (Slide) reacts instantly but incurs prohibitive Train Infer FID ↓ R-Prec. ↑ MM Dist. ↓ Div. → Latency ↓                             

> GT 0.000 0.472 4.051 4.084 –
> Seg. Seg. 0.181 0.464 4.076 3.911 0.042 Slide Slide 4.136 0.289 5.519 3.700 0.305
> Seg. Slide 1.785 0.380 4.789 3.832 0.305
> Seg. FWSR 0.166 0.462 4.076 4.003 0.047

Table 5. Ablation on Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR). 

Seg. denotes standard segment-based autoregressive rollout, which updates once per segment. Slide regenerates a full segment at ev-ery frame and uses only the first predicted frame. The gray row shows the baseline segment rollout, and the highlighted row shows our FWSR, which performs per-frame refinement while keeping segment-level generation unchanged. 

latency and introduces temporal artifacts. FWSR resolves this trade-off. By applying a lightweight, per-frame refinement adapter on top of a stable segment-level prediction, it injects fine-grained adjustments based on the latest interaction cues. This design significantly im-proves responsiveness to dynamic events while keeping run-time nearly constant, thereby enhancing real-time interac-tion without sacrificing the temporal stability provided by the powerful backbone generator. 

## 5. Conclusions 

We introduced ReMoGen, a modular framework for real-time interaction-to-reaction motion generation that combines a universal single-person motion prior, Meta-Interaction Modules, and an efficient Frame-wise Segment Refinement mechanism. By decoupling universal motion dynamics from domain-specific interaction cues, ReMoGen leverages modular learning to adapt data-efficiently across diverse HHI and HSI datasets, generalizes to unseen mixed-interaction scenarios, and rapidly specializes to new envi-ronments. The frame-wise refinement mechanism further improves responsiveness under dynamic conditions while preserving the temporal coherence of segment-based gen-eration. Extensive experiments show that ReMoGen pro-duces high-quality, semantically aligned, and real-time re-active motion across diverse interaction scenarios, provid-ing a scalable foundation for downstream applications. 6. Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration (KLIP-HuMaCo), Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI). 

## References 

[1] German Barquero, Sergio Escalera, and Cristina Palmero. Seamless human motion composition with blended posi-tional encodings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. 3 [2] Haoran Chen, Yiteng Xu, Yiming Ren, Yaoqin Ye, Xin-ran Li, Ning Ding, Yuxuan Wu, Yaoze Liu, Peishan Cong, Ziyi Wang, Bushi Liu, Yuhan Chen, Zhiyang Dou, Xiaokun Leng, Manyi Li, Yuexin Ma, and Changhe Tu. Symbridge: A human-in-the-loop cyber-physical interactive system for adaptive human-robot symbiosis. In Proceedings of the SIG-GRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2025. 2, 3, 5, 7, 6 [3] Jianqi Chen, Panwen Hu, Xiaojun Chang, Zhenwei Shi, Michael Kampffmeyer, and Xiaodan Liang. SITCOM-CRAFTER: A plot-driven human motion generation system in 3D scenes. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2, 3 [4] Rui Chen, Mingyi Shi, Shaoli Huang, Ping Tan, Taku Ko-mura, and Xuelin Chen. Taming diffusion probabilistic mod-els for character control. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Confer-ence Papers , pages 1–10, 2024. 2, 3 [5] Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, and Gang Yu. Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 18000–18010, 2023. 2, 3 [6] Peishan Cong, Ziyi Wang, Zhiyang Dou, Yiming Ren, Wei Yin, Kai Cheng, Yujing Sun, Xiaoxiao Long, Xinge Zhu, and Yuexin Ma. Laserhuman: Language-guided scene-aware hu-man motion generation in free environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13307 , 2024. 2 [7] Rishabh Dabral, Muhammad Hamza Mughal, Vladislav Golyanik, and Christian Theobalt. Mofusion: A framework for denoising-diffusion-based motion synthesis. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9760–9770, 2023. 3 [8] Ke Fan, Junshu Tang, Weijian Cao, Ran Yi, Moran Li, Jingyu Gong, Jiangning Zhang, Yabiao Wang, Chengjie Wang, and Lizhuang Ma. Freemotion: A unified framework for number-free text-to-motion synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 93–109, 2024. 2, 3, 7, 6 [9] Mihai Fieraru, Mihai Zanfir, Elisabeta Oneata, Alin-Ionut Popa, Vlad Olaru, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Three-dimensional reconstruction of human interactions. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7214–7223, 2020. 2 [10] Anindita Ghosh, Rishabh Dabral, Vladislav Golyanik, Chris-tian Theobalt, and Philipp Slusallek. Remos: 3d motion-conditioned reaction synthesis for two-person interactions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 418– 437, 2024. 3 [11] Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Shihao Zou, Qingyao Sun, Annan Deng, Minglun Gong, and Li Cheng. Ac-tion2motion: Conditioned generation of 3d human motions. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 2021–2029, 2020. 3 [12] Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse and natural 3d human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 5152–5161, 2022. 2, 3, 6, 4, 5 [13] Mohamed Hassan, Duygu Ceylan, Ruben Villegas, Jun Saito, Jimei Yang, Yi Zhou, and Michael J Black. Stochas-tic scene-aware motion prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 11374–11384, 2021. 3 [14] Mohamed Hassan, Yunrong Guo, Tingwu Wang, Michael Black, Sanja Fidler, and Xue Bin Peng. Synthesizing phys-ical character-scene interactions. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings , pages 1–9, 2023. 3 [15] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 3[16] Nan Jiang, Zimo He, Zi Wang, Hongjie Li, Yixin Chen, Siyuan Huang, and Yixin Zhu. Autonomous character-scene interaction synthesis from text instruction. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1, 4 [17] Nan Jiang, Zhiyuan Zhang, Hongjie Li, Xiaoxuan Ma, Zan Wang, Yixin Chen, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Scaling up dynamic human-scene interaction mod-eling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1737–1747, 2024. 2, 3, 7, 8, 1 [18] Korrawe Karunratanakul, Konpat Preechakul, Emre Aksan, Thabo Beeler, Supasorn Suwajanakorn, and Siyu Tang. Opti-mizing diffusion noise can serve as universal motion priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1334–1345, 2024. 3 [19] Jihoon Kim, Jiseob Kim, and Sungjoon Choi. Flame: Free-form language-based motion synthesis & editing. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,pages 8255–8263, 2023. 3 [20] Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music conditioned 3d dance generation with aist++. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , pages 13401– 13412, 2021. 3 [21] Han Liang, Wenqian Zhang, Wenxuan Li, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Intergen: Diffusion-based multi-human motion genera-tion under complex interactions. International Journal of Computer Vision , 132(9):3463–3483, 2024. 2, 3 [22] Sheng Liu, Yuanzhi Liang, Jiepeng Wang, Sidan Du, Chi Zhang, and Xuelong Li. Uni-inter: Unifying 3d human mo-tion synthesis across diverse interaction contexts. In Pro-ceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers ,pages 1–11, 2025. 3 [23] Yun Liu, Chengwen Zhang, Ruofan Xing, Bingda Tang, Bowen Yang, and Li Yi. Core4d: A 4d human-object-human interaction dataset for collaborative object rearrangement. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , pages 1769–1782, 2025. 2 [24] Naureen Mahmood, Nima Ghorbani, Nikolaus F Troje, Ger-ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Amass: Archive of motion capture as surface shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 5442–5451, 2019. 3 [25] Zolt´ an ´ A Milacski, Koichiro Niinuma, Ryosuke Kawamura, Fernando De La Torre, and L´ aszl´ o A Jeni. Ghost: Grounded human motion generation with open vocabulary scene-and-text contexts. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Ap-plications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 4108–4118. IEEE, 2025. 2, 3 [26] Chong Mou, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Yanze Wu, Jian Zhang, Zhongang Qi, and Ying Shan. T2i-adapter: Learning adapters to dig out more controllable ability for text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 4296–4304, 2024. 3 [27] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10975–10985, 2019. 4 [28] Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and G¨ ul Varol. Action-conditioned 3d human motion synthesis with transformer vae. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 10985–10995, 2021. 3 [29] Mathis Petrovich, Michael J Black, and G¨ ul Varol. Temos: Generating diverse human motions from textual descriptions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 480– 497, 2022. 2, 3 [30] Matthias Plappert, Christian Mandery, and Tamim Asfour. The kit motion-language dataset. Big data , 4(4):236–252, 2016. 3 [31] Abhinanda R Punnakkal, Arjun Chandrasekaran, Nikos Athanasiou, Alejandra Quiros-Ramirez, and Michael JBlack. Babel: Bodies, action and behavior with english la-bels. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pages 722–731, 2021. 2, 3 [32] Zhiyuan Ren, Zhihong Pan, Xin Zhou, and Le Kang. Dif-fusion motion: Generate text-guided 3d human motion by diffusion model. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2023. 3 [33] Mengyi Shan, Lu Dong, Yutao Han, Yuan Yao, Tao Liu, Ifeoma Nwogu, Guo-Jun Qi, and Mitch Hill. Towards open domain text-driven synthesis of multi-person motions. In Eu-ropean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 67–86, 2024. 3[34] Yi Shi, Jingbo Wang, Xuekun Jiang, Bingkun Lin, Bo Dai, and Xue Bin Peng. Interactive character control with auto-regressive motion diffusion models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–14, 2024. 3 [35] Yiwen Tang, Ray Zhang, Zoey Guo, Xianzheng Ma, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong Wang, and Xuelong Li. Point-peft: Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for 3d pre-trained mod-els. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial In-telligence , pages 5171–5179, 2024. 3 [36] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano. Human motion dif-fusion model. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 2, 3 [37] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Setareh Cohan, Daniele Reda, Zhengyi Luo, Xue Bin Peng, Amit Haim Bermano, and Michiel van de Panne. CLoSD: Closing the loop between simulation and diffusion for multi-task character control. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2025. 3 [38] Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, Stefano Ermon, and Nikhil Naik. End-to-end diffusion latent optimization improves classifier guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision , pages 7280–7290, 2023. 3 [39] Zan Wang, Yixin Chen, Baoxiong Jia, Puhao Li, Jinlu Zhang, Jingze Zhang, Tengyu Liu, Yixin Zhu, Wei Liang, and Siyuan Huang. Move as you say, interact as you can: Language-guided human motion generation with scene af-fordance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 433–444, 2024. 3 [40] Zhenzhi Wang, Jingbo Wang, Yixuan Li, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Intercontrol: Zero-shot human interaction generation by controlling every joint. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:105397–105424, 2024. 2, 3 [41] Liang Xu, Xintao Lv, Yichao Yan, Xin Jin, Shuwen Wu, Congsheng Xu, Yifan Liu, Yizhou Zhou, Fengyun Rao, and Xiaokang Yang. Inter-x: Towards versatile human-human interaction analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 22260–22271, 2024. 2, 6, 4 [42] Liang Xu, Yizhou Zhou, Yichao Yan, Xin Jin, Wenhan Zhu, Fengyun Rao, Xiaokang Yang, and Wenjun Zeng. Regennet: Towards human action-reaction synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1759–1769, 2024. 2, 3, 7, 6 [43] Ye Yuan, Jiaming Song, Umar Iqbal, Arash Vahdat, and Jan Kautz. Physdiff: Physics-guided human motion diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 16010–16021, 2023. 2, 3[44] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3836–3847, 2023. 3 [45] Mingyuan Zhang, Huirong Li, Zhongang Cai, Jiawei Ren, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Finemogen: Fine-grained spatio-temporal motion generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:13981–13992, 2023. 3 [46] Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Motiondif-fuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(6):4115–4128, 2024. 3 [47] Siwei Zhang, Qianli Ma, Yan Zhang, Zhiyin Qian, Taein Kwon, Marc Pollefeys, Federica Bogo, and Siyu Tang. Ego-body: Human body shape and motion of interacting people from head-mounted devices. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 180–200, 2022. 6, 4 [48] Kaifeng Zhao, Yan Zhang, Shaofei Wang, Thabo Beeler, and Siyu Tang. Synthesizing diverse human motions in 3d in-door scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14738–14749, 2023. 3[49] Kaifeng Zhao, Gen Li, and Siyu Tang. Dartcontrol: Adiffusion-based autoregressive motion model for real-time text-driven motion control. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2, 3, 4, 5, 1 ReMoGen: Real-time Human Interaction-to-Reaction Generation via Modular Learning from Diverse Data 

# Supplementary Material 

## A. Overview 

This supplementary material provides a detailed descrip-tion of the ReMoGen framework for real-time human interaction-to-reaction generation. Due to space constraints, the main paper only briefly summarizes a number of design choices and implementation details. Here we expand all core components so that the framework is fully specified and reproducible. 

## B. Representations 

B.1. Motion Representation 

We adopt a SMPL-X-based motion representation aligned with our backbone design [49]. For each frame t, we con-struct a compact feature vector mt using physically mean-ingful quantities derived from the root motion and the first 22 SMPL-X body joints. Specifically, we extract: • Root translation tt in the canonical frame. • Joint rotations Rt in continuous 6D form for the root and body joints. • Root motion deltas, including translation changes ∆tt

and orientation changes ∆Rt between consecutive frames. • Joint positions Jt obtained from the SMPL-X forward pass. • Joint velocities ∆Jt computed as per-frame differences. The final per-frame representation mt is formed by con-catenating all components above, and is used throughout the training and inference stages of our autoregressive latent-diffusion backbone. 

Canonicalization and Normalization. Before comput-ing features, all SMPL-X sequences {tt, Rt, Jt}Tt=1 are transformed into a consistent ego-centric canonical frame .The pelvis joint of the first frame defines the canonical origin p0.The body facing direction is estimated from the left and right hip joints (e.g., joints j1 and j2), which determines the canonical horizontal axes. A rigid transform (Rego , tego ) is then constructed from this reference frame and applied to the root translation tt,root orientation Rt, and joint positions Jt of the entire se-quence, producing the canonicalized quantities ˜tt, ˜Rt, and 

˜Jt.For human-human interaction scenarios, both the ego and the partner sequences are transformed using the same ego-defined frame, ensuring that all agents’ trajectories are expressed consistently relative to the canonicalized ego. After canonicalization, we compute the global mean and standard deviation of all feature channels using only the training split and subsequently normalize every motion ten-sor. 

History and Future Segmentation. We operate in a segment-based autoregressive regime. Each internal step i

of the generator operates on: • a history window M ih ∈ RH×D of length H, and • a future segment ˆM if ∈ RF ×D of length F .After generating the i-th future segment, we update the next history by sliding a window of size H:

M i+1  

> h

= concat (M ih, ˆM if )

> −H:

. (1) This corresponds to the update rule described in the main paper. 

B.2. Scene Representation 

Our framework supports human-scene and human-human-scene interactions by encoding the environment as a volu-metric voxel occupancy grid [16, 17]. We adopt a unified 3D representation across all scene-aware datasets. 

Voxel Occupancy. For datasets that natively provide vox-elized scenes (e.g., LINGO), we directly use their occu-pancy volumes. Each scene is represented as a dense grid of size x × y × z with a spatial voxel resolution vsize . The voxel grids are loaded and cached in the dataset loader, and queried during training using point-based lookup. 

Ego Voxel Representation. The Scene Encoder receives an ego-centric voxel occupancy volume that describes the local spatial layout around the moving subject. The ego voxel grid is defined over a fixed bounding box: 

x ∈ [−0.6, 0.6] , y ∈ [−0.6, 0.6] , z ∈ [0 .1, 1.2] ,

resulting in a compact 32 × 32 × 32 occupancy volume. This bounding box corresponds to a localized workspace around the body. To construct ego voxels, we query the un-derlying scene occupancy grid at the projected 3D locations of the root joint (or goal positions). B.3. Ego Alignment. 

All motion features are represented in our ego-centric canonical coordinate frame for consistent modeling across datasets. Before being fed into the network, any other motions or goal positions associated with the ego are also transformed into this canonical frame, ensuring that the model interprets all positional objectives relative to the ego-centered coordinate system. However, scene occupancy queries must be performed in the global scene coordinate system. Thus, although the model operates in the canonical space, we temporarily con-vert the canonicalized ego motion back to world coordi-nates using the stored inverse canonical transform whenever querying the ego voxel grid. The reconstructed global root positions are then used to sample occupancy values from the corresponding voxel vol-umes. This two-space design maintains consistent interac-tion between ego motion, partner motion, and scene geom-etry while enabling stable canonical-frame learning inside the model. 

## C. Supplement Method Details 

C.1. Meta-Interaction Modules LayerNorm 

> hidden
> features

Meta-Interaction Block 

> SelfAttn
> Relation CrossAttn
> LayerNorm
> FilM
> LayerNorm
> FFN
> output
> hidden

Figure A. Architecture of Meta-Interaction Block. 

The universal prior does not model interactions by con-struction. To inject dynamic context from other agents and the scene while keeping the prior frozen, we intro-duce Meta-Interaction Modules (MIMs). Each MIM is an adapter that modulates intermediate activations in the latent denoiser via FiLM-style conditioning on external context. 

Meta-Interaction Block. A Meta-Interaction Block (Fig. A) receives ego features h ∈ RB×T ×d and context tokens ccontext ∈ RB×Tc×D (from other agents or from the scene encoder). The block outputs a context-induced residual that is added to the ego features. 

Self-Attention. We first apply standard self-attention to capture intra-sequence dependencies: 

h′ = h + SelfAttn(LayerNorm( h)) . (2) 

Relation-aware Cross-attention. Given contextual em-beddings ccontext , we compute cross-attention using Qh =LayerNorm( h′)WQ, K c = ccontext WK , V c = ccontext WV

where WQ, W K , W V are learned projections. The relation-aware cross-attention output is 

r = Softmax 

 QhK⊤ 

> c

+ Brel 

√d



Vc, (3) where Brel ∈ RT ×Tc is a learnable relative positional bias encoding temporal or spatial offsets. Each bias element is computed using a sinusoidal em-bedding of the relative index ∆t = i − j:

bij = Wb[sin( ω∆t), cos( ω∆t)] , (4) with a fixed frequency ω = 0 .25 and a learned projection 

Wb.

FiLM-style Modulation. The cross-attention output r is mapped to FiLM parameters  (γ, β )via a linear layer. We modulate h′ using 

hmod = (1 + tanh γ) ⊙ h′ + tanh β.  (5) 

Feed-Forward Network (FFN). A transformer-style FFN refines the modulated features: 

hffn = hmod + FFN (LayerNorm( hmod )) , (6) The final context-induced residual is 

∆context = hffn − h.  (7) This residual is injected into the denoiser at predefined transformer layers, enabling interaction-aware modulation. 

C.2. Compose MIMs During Inference 

Composable Inference. Multiple Meta-Interaction Mod-ules (e.g., HHI and HSI branches) can be activated simul-taneously. At each injection layer, the system first pro-duces per-branch residuals ∆i ∈ RB×T ×d, such as ∆others 

and ∆scene . Their contributions are combined through a weighted sum: 

∆total = X

> i

αi ∆i, (8) where each coefficient αi controls the strength of a mod-ule. These weights may be set manually by the user or 

predicted automatically by an external model , such as a task-specific rule system or a large language model that interprets textual instructions. L2-Norm Clamping for Stability. A na¨ ıve weighted sum can produce overly large residuals, especially when multi-ple modules reinforce each other. To ensure stable interac-tion conditioning while preserving the frozen prior’s motion manifold, we normalize ∆total using a per-sample L2 norm clamp .Let 

∥∆total ∥2 = ∥∆total ∥2,flatten ,

where the norm is computed over the (T × d) dimensions for each sample. Similarly, let m be the largest norm among the individual modules: 

m = max  

> i

∥∆i∥2,flatten .

We compute a scale factor 

s = min 



1, m

∥∆total ∥2 + ε



, (9) with ε a small constant for numerical stability. The fused modulation is then: 

∆final = s · ∆total . (10) 

Effect of the Clamp. This operation guarantees that the fused residual never exceeds the magnitude of the strongest individual branch, preventing runaway updates and ensur-ing that the decoded motion remains on the prior’s learned manifold. The model therefore supports arbitrary com-binations of HHI and HSI cues—including user-driven, programmatic, or LLM-derived scaling—while maintain-ing temporal stability and preserving the geometry of the pretrained motion prior. 

C.3. Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR) 

Segment-based autoregressive rollout provides strong long-horizon stability, but the model updates its reaction only once per segment, introducing latency. To improve respon-siveness under real-time constraints, we adopt a lightweight 

Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR) module that ap-plies per-frame latent corrections without re-running the full diffusion process. FWSR operates directly on the clean VAE latent z0 ∈ Rdz predicted for the segment by the uni-versal prior. 

FWSR Module Overview. The FWSR module receives the clean latent z0, the ego-dynamic feature sequence Mh,and dynamic context Xdyn such as other-agent motion. Dy-namic context tokens are first processed by a lightweight refinement block consisting of a projection layer and a self-attention encoder to obtain cdyn . The processed dynamic tokens, together with Mh, are then fed into a relation-aware cross-attention layer followed by a FiLM head. The archi-tectural components mirror the Meta-Interaction Modules (MIM), but operate directly in the decoder latent space. 

Relation-Aware Attention. At each refinement step, the module constructs relation features jointly from the ego-dynamic features Mh and each processed dynamic context token cdyn . Let 

Q = z0WQ, K = cdyn WK , V = cdyn WV ,

where WQ, W K , W V ∈ Rdz ×dz are learned projections. Relation features (Mh, X dyn ) are used to compute relative positional bias Brel . Cross-attention is then computed as: 

∆attn = RelAttn( Q, K, V, RelBias( Mh, X dyn )) ,

allowing the ego latent to incorporate fine-grained, interaction-dependent refinements. 

FiLM Latent Modulation. The attention output is mapped to FiLM parameters (γ, β ), and applied to refine the latent: 

∆FWSR = (1 + tanh γ) ⊙ z0 + tanh β − z0.

Safe Latent Scaling via Decoder Sensitivity. Directly adding ∆FWSR may push the latent into directions where the decoder is overly sensitive. To stabilize the refinement, we use a decoder sensitivity vector s ∈ Rdz , estimated us-ing finite-difference gradients of the decoder with respect to each latent dimension. We apply per-dimension scaling: 

∆safe ,d = ∆FWSR ,d 

1 + βs d

,

where β is a hyper-parameter controlling suppression strength. We use β = 1 .0. This protects highly sensitive la-tent dimensions, suppressing artifacts while leaving robust directions expressive. 

Final Latent Refinement. The refined latent is obtained as: 

˜z = z0 + ∆ safe .

FWSR performs this refinement once per frame at negli-gible cost, enabling low-latency adjustments and improved responsiveness while keeping all backbone and interaction modules frozen. 

## D. Experimental Setup Details 

D.1. Datasets and Pre-processing 

We summarize datasets used for different stages and the pre-processing steps that standardize them into a unified repre-sentation. HumanML3D. The Universal Single-Person Prior is trained on HumanML3D [12]. We use the official train/val/test splits and its original text annotations. 

Inter-X. The Meta-Interaction Module for Human-Human Interaction is trained on Inter-X [41], which con-tains paired SMPL-X sequences of two interacting subjects. We use its official train/val/test splits. To increase coverage and balance role diversity, we per-form data augmentation by treating both p1 and p2 as the ego in separate passes. For each choice of ego, the remain-ing person is treated as the conditioning partner, and we construct history-future motion segments for the ego while using the partner’s motion as dynamic context. Inter-X provides only global textual descriptions for each two-person interaction, without distinguishing the roles of each person. To obtain ego-specific conditioning texts, we use the DeepSeek V3 large language model to au-tomatically decompose each original dual-person descrip-tion into two separate role-specific descriptions. We supply the LLM with the raw Inter-X action label and multiple dataset-provided textual descriptions, and in-struct the model to identify the actor and reactor and rewrite the interaction into two independent third-person declara-tive sentences follows the style of HumanML3D. The fi-nal assignment of actor/reactor descriptions to p1 or p2 

follows the dataset’s official interaction order an-notation. This process allows Inter-X’s coarse two-person textual descriptions to be converted into well-aligned, role-specific conditioning signals for training our HHI Meta-Interaction Module. 

LINGO. The Meta-Interaction Module for Human-Scene Interaction is trained on LINGO [16], which provides SMPL-X motions paired with detailed 3D indoor scenes. We use the dataset’s original text annotations as the se-mantic descriptions for each motion sequence without ad-ditional rewriting. For scene representation, we follow the Z-up-aligned of-ficial LINGO protocol and use the provided voxelized oc-cupancy grids . Each indoor environment is represented as a dense occupancy volume defined over the following axis-aligned bounds: 

x ∈ [−3.0, 3.0] , y ∈ [−4.0, 4.0] , z ∈ [0 .0, 2.0] ,

which is discretized into a grid of size 300 ×400 ×100 with a spatial resolution of 0.02 m . This large scene-centric voxel structure captures room-scale spatial layouts, obstacles, and affordances and is used as the conditioning input for our scene encoder. Since LINGO does not release ground-truth motions for a held-out test set, we construct our own splits by randomly partitioning the available training data into 70% training ,

10% validation , and 20% testing . All reported HSI results in our paper are based on this split. 

EgoBody. We use EgoBody [47] to evaluate Human-Human-Scene generalization and compositionality. For tex-tual conditioning, we adopt the sequence-level motion de-scriptions provided by Motion-X, which offers annotations aligned with each full interaction sequence. To maintain consistency with our HHI preprocessing, we apply the same data augmentation strategy used in Inter-X by swapping the ego and the other agent . In each aug-mented version, the chosen ego is canonicalized and the partner is treated as the conditioning sequence. EgoBody only provides scene geometry in mesh format .To convert the scenes into a unified voxel representation, we first normalize each scene by translating the mesh such that its XY center lies at the (0 , 0) and its lowest Z coordinate aligns with the ground plane (z = 0) . We then voxelize the normalized mesh using the same occupancy configu-ration as LINGO .

General Pre-processing. For all datasets, we directly use the provided SMPL-X parameters and convert motions into a consistent Z-up coordinate convention. All SMPL-X models are loaded with the neutral gender configuration for consistency across datasets. We then obtain body joints by forwarding the SMPL-X parameters through the neutral-gender model. For all ego sequences, we discard the dataset-provided body shape and set β = 0 to eliminate cross-subject shape variation. For interaction scenarios involving other agents, we retain the original SMPL-X  β parameters for the part-ner(s) to preserve their identity and body proportions as pro-vided in each dataset. All datasets are uniformly downsampled to 10 FPS using equal-interval sampling to match the real-time generation setting of our framework. For single-person datasets (HumanML3D) and human-human interaction datasets (Inter-X), we shift the mesh vertically such that the lowest vertex of the first-frame mesh lies exactly on the ground plane. For interaction datasets that include scenes (LINGO, EgoBody), we do not modify the absolute spatial placement; the original world-coordinate positions and contact relationships with the en-vironment are strictly preserved. 

D.2. Training Details 

Our model is trained in a progressive manner that first learns a universal motion prior, then incorporates interaction-specific conditioning through Meta-Interaction Modules, and optionally adds a Frame-wise Segment Refinement module for enhancing responsiveness to dynamic contexts. Universal Single-Person Motion Prior. We begin by training a universal motion prior on HumanML3D under a purely single-person setting. The model predicts future motion segments using an autoregressive latent diffusion process with a history window of H = 2 frames and a prediction length of F = 8 frames. We adopt a DDPM-based denoising formulation with 10 diffusion steps . All feature mean and standard deviation statistics used for normalization are computed exclusively during this stage and reused unchanged across all subsequent interaction datasets (Inter-X, LINGO, EgoBody), ensuring consistent feature scaling throughout training. This phase consists of 

250k steps for VAE training and 400k steps for training the diffusion denoiser. 

Meta-Interaction Learning. Once the universal prior is learned, we introduce Meta-Interaction Modules that incor-porate external interaction cues such as other agent’s motion (Inter-X) or scene occupancy (LINGO). During this pro-cess, the universal backbone remains frozen . Each Meta-Interaction module is trained for 65k steps using its respec-tive dataset. 

Frame-wise Segment Refinement (FWSR). This mod-ule refines autoregressive predictions through per-frame residual updates while keeping both the universal prior and Meta-Interaction parameters fixed. As FWSR is not re-quired for training the core interaction model, it is applied only when there are dynamic contexts like others motion. The refinement module is trained for 65k steps. 

D.3. Evaluation Protocol and Metrics 

Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate all models in an On-line Interaction-to-Reaction setting, where the ego agent continuously observes interaction cues (other-agent motion or scene occupancy) and produces an immediate reaction. To ensure fair comparison, we strictly follow each base-line’s original inference procedure: • Baselines with autoregressive rollout. If a baseline pro-vides an online or autoregressive generation mechanism, we use it unchanged. The model receives the same his-tory window as specified by its official implementation, without adding any auxiliary history embeddings. • Baselines without autoregressive rollout. If a baseline does not support online generation, we follow the “seg-ment prediction and stitching” protocol: the model pre-dicts motion in fixed-length segments, and consecutive segments are stitched together by recursively feeding the end of the previous segment into the next prediction win-dow. No modifications or additional temporal encodings are introduced beyond what the baseline originally sup-ports. • Models without history conditioning. For baselines that do not learn history embeddings or do not accept tempo-ral context explicitly, we do not introduce any additional history mechanism. They receive only the inputs allowed by their native design. All evaluations are conducted at 10 FPS after canoni-calization and standardization, consistent with our training setup. 

Metrics. We adopt a comprehensive set of quantitative metrics widely used in human motion synthesis and inter-action modeling. These metrics cover semantic alignment, distributional realism, motion diversity, physical smooth-ness, and real-time system performance. 

Embedding-based Metrics. Following standard prac-tice in HumanML3D, we extract normalized motion and text features using the pretrained t2m motion and language encoders [12]. The following metrics are computed in this embedding space: • FID. compares the embedded feature distributions of gen-erated and ground-truth motions, measuring distributional realism. Lower FID indicates that the generated motion better matches the statistics of natural human movement. • R-Precision. evaluates semantic alignment by retrieving the correct textual description of a motion among a batch of 64 candidates. We report top-3 accuracy, reflecting how often the ground-truth description ranks among the three most similar texts based on cosine similarity. • Diversity. quantifies variation among generated motions by computing the average embedding-space distance be-tween multiple samples, indicating the model’s ability to avoid mode collapse. • MM-Dist. measures motion-text semantic consistency by computing the embedding-space distance between a gen-erated motion and its paired textual description. Lower MM-Dist. corresponds to stronger alignment between generated motion and intended semantics. 

Peak Jerk. This metric captures high-frequency artifacts by measuring the maximum time derivative of joint accel-eration. Lower jerk values correspond to smoother, more physically plausible motion trajectories. 

Latency. We report the average per-frame computation time (in seconds) under our Online Interaction-to-Reaction protocol, measured over 1,000 generated frames. This re-flects the model’s responsiveness and suitability for real-time deployment. 

Contact-based Metrics. We report Collision Rate and other contact-based metrics in Tab. A. Collision Rate is de-fined as the ratio of frames in which body joints intersect with the scene mesh or other agents’ meshes. For other contact-based metrics, we follow SymBridge [2], which adopts contact-related metrics from the human-object inter-action (HOI) setting. Specifically, we report Contact Preci-Method FID ↓ R-Precision   

> (Top-3) ↑

MM Dist. ↓ Diversity → Contact  

> Precision ↑

Contact   

> Recall ↑

Collision(%) ↓

GT 0.000 0.472 4.051 4.084 – – –ReGenNet [42] 11.622 0.269 6.092 3.452 0.549 0.505 0.665 FreeMotion [8] 3.383 0.284 5.438 3.394 0.497 0.321 0.545 

FreeMotion off  [8] 0.492 0.417 4.330 3.913 0.496 0.484 1.220 SymBridge [2] 2.569 0.355 4.955 3.598 0.614 0.447 0.646 Ours 0.181 0.464 4.076 3.911 0.527 0.415 0.989 Ours+FWSR 0.166 0.462 4.076 4.003 0.533 0.423 0.961 

> Table A. Evaluation with contact-based metrics on HHI.

sion and Contact Recall , which measure the alignment be-tween predicted and ground-truth contact patterns. 

## E. Additional Experimental Results 

E.1. Contact-based Metrics Results 

We provide additional contact-based evaluation to comple-ment the main results (Tab. A). ReMoGen achieves substan-tially better motion quality (FID) while maintaining com-petitive contact alignment compared to prior methods. We note that contact outcomes in interaction scenarios are inherently multi-modal . Multiple distinct contact pat-terns can correspond to equally plausible interactions de-pending on timing, spatial configuration, and agent behav-ior. As a result, metrics that directly compare predicted contacts to a single ground-truth pattern may underestimate valid alternative interactions. 

E.2. Latency Breakdown 

We provide a detailed breakdown of runtime (Tab. B) to complement the end-to-end latency reported in the main paper. The total latency corresponds to end-to-end infer-ence time measured on a single GPU. Time not explicitly assigned to the listed components is attributed to data I/O and other implementation overhead. 

## F. Robustness Analysis 

We analyze the robustness of ReMoGen along two dimen-sions: (i) sensitivity to semantic inputs, and (ii) sensitivity to different context encoder choices. 

F.1. Robustness to Semantic Inputs 

We evaluate the robustness of ReMoGen to high-level se-mantic inputs by testing two settings: (i) no-text , where no semantic signal is provided, and (ii) shuffled-text , where the input text conflicts with the physical interaction context. As shown in Fig. B, ReMoGen remains stable in both settings. When semantic inputs are absent or inconsistent,              

> Component Time (s) Denoising (total, 10 cond + 10 uncond) 0.29 Denoiser 0.067 Meta-Interaction Modules 0.069 per step 0.0136 Decoding 0.005 Frame-wise Segment Refinement 0.047 decoding 0.005 FWSR module 0.0017 per iteration 0.0067 Pre/Post-processing (canonicalization) ∼0.02 Total (8 frame or less) ∼0.36 per frame ∼0.047 Table B. Latency breakdown of ReMoGen.

interaction-driven cues dominate motion generation, lead-ing to physically plausible reactions. This behavior is con-sistent with our design, where text is consumed only by the universal prior, while Meta-Interaction Modules are text-agnostic and react directly to dynamic interaction cues. Encoder Type FID ↓ R-Precision ↑ MM Dist. ↓ Div. →                

> GT 0.000 0.472 4.051 4.084 MLP 0.236 0.464 4.109 3.890 Transformer 0.223 0.457 4.135 3.816 TCN (Ours) 0.181 0.464 4.076 3.911
> Table C. Encoder sensitivity evaluation on HHI.

F.2. Robustness to Encoder Design 

We evaluate the sensitivity of ReMoGen to different con-text encoders by replacing the TCN encoder with alterna-tive architectures, including MLP and Transformer-based encoders. As shown in Tab. C, almost all variants consistently out-perform baselines (in Tab. 1), and the performance differ-ences between encoder choices are relatively small. This indicates that the effectiveness of ReMoGen does not de-no-text shuffled-text Figure B. Results under no-text and shuffled-text settings. In no-text , the original intent is “Shake hands”. In shuffled-text , the original intent is “Help others up” while the input is “Standing still”. 

pend on a specific encoder design, but rather on the pro-posed modular framework and training strategy. 

## G. Qualitative Experimental Results 

This section presents extended qualitative evaluations of ReMoGen across Human-Human, Human-Scene, and Human-Human-Scene interaction scenarios. These visual-izations complement the quantitative results summarized in Tab. 1, Tab. 2, Tab. 3, Tab. 4, and Tab. 5, and further il-lustrate how our modular learning design achieves stable, responsive, and semantically aligned motion generation. 

G.1. Comparison Results 

Human-Human Interaction. We present two represen-tative examples: “One person approaches and opens their arms to embrace the back and waist of another person” and 

“One person supports the lower part of the other person’s left arm with both hands” . These cases require fine-grained interpersonal coordination, accurate contact modeling, and temporally coherent reaction timing. As shown in Fig. C and quantitatively validated in Tab. 1, ReMoGen consistently produces more coordinated, seman-tically accurate, and physically plausible reaction motions than competing methods. Baselines often exhibit unnat-ural timing, misaligned contact, or unstable body dynam-ics, whereas ReMoGen preserves interpersonal coordina-tion and better matches ground-truth behavior. 

Human-Scene Interaction. Fig. D, together with the quantitative scores in Tab. 2, demonstrates ReMoGen’s strong scene awareness. We present two representative examples: “stand up from seat” and “walk back left while holding small plant in right hand” . Our model produces spatially consistent behav-iors—such as standing up, walking with objects, or navigat-ing around obstacles—while preserving motion coherence. Baselines struggle with scene grounding and often generate misaligned or unstable movements. 

G.2. Human-Human-Scene Results 

Zero-shot Results. Fig. E demonstrates the zero-shot re-sults. We present an example of the textual input “The per-son explains on the blackboard” . Due to the significant do-main gap, all three zero-shot results show limited seman-tic alignment. Using only the HHI branch or only the HSI branch leads to incomplete behavior. However, the com-position of interaction modules generates coherent in-scene interactions. 

Few-step Adaptation Results. We present an example: 

“Two people are engaged in a casual chat.” This exam-ple includes motion implicitly involving the action of sitting down. This scenario requires the model to recognize mixed human-human-scene cues, maintain conversational posture alignment, and correctly represent the subtle transition into a seated position. As shown in Fig. F and quantitatively verified in Tab. 3, ReMoGen rapidly adapts to the EgoBody dataset when ini-tialized from the universal prior. With only 2k-10k fine-tuning steps, our model surpasses scratch-trained baselines that require hundreds of thousands of updates. The qualita-tive results illustrate that the adapted model produces stable, well-coordinated mixed-domain interactions. 

Results in Diverse Scene. We present four representa-tive examples illustrating the diversity and robustness of ReMoGen across complex multi-agent and scene-rich envi-ronments: “Two individuals are engaged in a casual chat” ,

“The woman is learning TaiChi” , “A woman stretches her arms above her head” , and “A teacher is explaining on the blackboard” . These scenarios span a wide range of interac-tion types—from individual scene-aware motions to multi-person collaborative activities. Fig. G showcases ReMoGen’s ability to generate diverse, semantically rich interactions in complex scenes, including Taichi movements, stretching, teaching, and conversation. These results qualitatively reflect the strong mixed-modality generalization trends reported in Tab. 3. 

G.3. Ablation Study Results 

Universal Prior Ablation. Fig. H visualizes the effects observed quantitatively in Tab. 4. Models trained from scratch suffer from limited data and exhibit low diversity and unstable dynamics. Joint finetuning erodes pretrained kinematic knowledge. Only our modular prior-guided ap-proach preserves both natural motion structure and interac-tion semantics. 

Frame-wise Segment Refinement Ablation. The quali-tative comparisons in Fig. I correspond directly to the la-tency and accuracy trends in Tab. 5. Slide-style inference re-acts quickly but introduces artifacts, while segment-only in-ference lacks responsiveness. Our Frame-wise Segment Re-finement achieves a favorable balance—real-time respon-siveness with stable, coherent motion. 

## H. Limitations 

While ReMoGen achieves effective performance across het-erogeneous interaction domains and supports real-time re-action generation, several limitations warrant further ex-ploration. Our framework is built upon a latent diffusion prior that abstracts motion into a compressed latent space. While effective for generalization, this design may com-promise fine-grained spatial accuracy, particularly in close-contact or high-precision interactions between humans and scene objects. While our current module composition strat-egy is simple and intuitive, more effective training-free fu-sion methods may further improve performance in mixed-interaction settings. ReGenNet FreeMotion 

(offline) 

Ours GT SymBridge 

embrace 

embrace 

embrace 

embrace 

embrace support arms support arms support arms support arms support arms Figure C. Qualitative comparisons on Human–Human Interaction tasks. For typographical reasons, we have presented the optimal offline version of FreeMotion. Our method produces smoother and more coordinated reactions aligned with the intent, whereas baselines exhibit unnatural timing, misaligned contact, or unstable body dynamics. TRUMANS LINGO Ours GT 

stand up 

stand up 

stand up 

walk back left walk back left walk back left walk back left 

stand up Figure D. Qualitative comparisons on Human-Scene Interaction tasks. All methods are evaluated with goal location provided. HHI Only HSI Only Compose Figure E. Zero-shot Human–Human–Scene Interaction results. Train from Scratch 2000 step 5000 step 10000 step Figure F. Few-step finetuning on EgoBody. Initializing from our universal prior enables rapid adaptation, producing natural reactions after only a small number of updates. Discussing Learning Taichi Stretching Teaching Figure G. Results in diverse Human–Human–Scene settings. ReMoGen generates semantically rich and varied interaction behaviors across different scenes and activity types. We present the results of finetuning 65k steps. Scratch (No Prior) Joint-Finetune Ours GT Prior Only Figure H. Ablation on the Universal Motion Prior. We present ”One person walks behind the other person and strikes a pose by extending both hands above the head.” Training from scratch or joint finetuning leads to unnatural or unstable reactions, while our prior-guided modular learning produces natural, coherent motion. Train Seg. & Infer Slide Train Seg. & Infer Seg. Train Seg. & Infer FWSR (Ours) GT Train Slide & Infer Slide Figure I. Ablation on Frame-wise Segment Refinement. We present ”A person runs towards someone and passes by them.” FWSR provides fine-grained updates that improve responsiveness without sacrificing stability, outperforming both segment-only and naive slide-style inference.