Title: Learning Dexterous Grasping from Sparse Taxonomy Guidance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04138v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:17:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
PREPRINT VERSION. UNDER REVIEW. 

# Learning Dexterous Grasping from Sparse Taxonomy Guidance 

Juhan Park 1, Taerim Yoon 1, Seungmin Kim 1, Joonggil Kim 2, Wontae Ye 2, Jeongeun Park 3, Yoonbyung Chai 1,Geonwoo Cho 2, Geunwoo Cho 2, Dohyeong Kim 4, Kyungjae Lee 5, Yongjae Kim 2,6, and *Sungjoon Choi 1,7

Abstract — Dexterous manipulation requires planning a grasp configuration suited to the object and task, which is then executed through coordinated multi-finger control. However, specifying grasp plans with dense pose or contact targets for every object and task is impractical. Meanwhile, end-to-end reinforcement learning from task rewards alone lacks controllability, making it difficult for users to intervene when failures occur. To this end, we present GRIT, a two-stage framework that learns dexterous control from sparse taxonomy guidance . GRIT first predicts a taxonomy-based grasp speci-fication from the scene and task context. Conditioned on this sparse command, a policy generates continuous finger motions that accomplish the task while preserving the intended grasp structure. Our result shows that certain grasp taxonomies are more effective for specific object geometries. By leveraging this relationship, GRIT improves generalization to novel objects over baselines and achieves an overall success rate of 87.9%. Moreover, real-world experiments demonstrate controllability, enabling grasp strategies to be adjusted through high-level taxonomy selection based on object geometry and task intent. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Dexterous manipulation requires the ability to select and execute appropriate hand movements in accordance with the task context. Humans naturally exhibit this capability by flexibly adapting their grasp strategies to the context, including the object’s geometry and the intended use. For a deformable object such as a sponge, humans may initially adopt a tripod grasp, which provides precise control of the thumb, index, and middle fingers for stable handling. As the task shifts to squeezing out water, humans transition to a power grasp, enabling stronger force generation and whole-hand engagement. Moreover, humans can switch to alternative grasp strategies when a chosen grasp proves ineffective, demonstrating controllability in manipulation. Developing such a system poses three key challenges. First, the system must generate appropriate grasp configura-tions, comprising a discrete taxonomy and a wrist orientation that are suitable for the object geometry and task context. Second, the policy must translate this sparse grasp configu-ration into consistent finger-level control despite the absence                         

> *: corresponding author. 1Juhan Park, Taerim Yoon, Seungmin Kim, Yoonbyung Chai, and Sungjoon Choi are with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. 2Joonggil Kim, Wontae Ye, Geonwoo Cho, Geunwoo Cho, and Yongjae Kim are with the Korea Univer-sity of Technology and Education, Cheonan, Korea. 3Jeongeun Park is with Naver AI Lab, Korea. 4Dohyeong Kim is with the Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. 5Kyungjae Lee is with the Department of Statistics, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. 6Yongjae Kim is also with WIRobotics, Korea.
> 7Sungjoon Choi is also with RLWRLD, Korea. This work was supported by Institute of Information &Commu-nications Technology Planning &Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2019-II190079, Artificial Intelli-gence Graduate School Program(Korea University)). The project page is
> Grit.github.io .“Hand me the sponge” “Squeeze the sponge” “Pour the water”

Fig. 1: Our framework selects appropriate grasp taxonomies based on object geometry and task context, and executes them through a taxonomy-conditioned control policy. of explicit motion trajectories. Finally, the system should enable controllable adjustment of grasp strategies when a chosen grasp proves unsuccessful. One possible approach is to use large-scale object-grasp data to learn manipulation policies from demonstrations [1, 2, 3]. However, collecting demonstrations covering the com-binatorial space of object geometries and task contexts is costly. Instead, we aim to learn from sparse supervisory signals without requiring explicit motion demonstrations. Specifically, the policy learns to use grasp taxonomies as high-level guidance for generating detailed finger motions. To this end, we propose GRIT (Grasp Reinforcement with Intended Taxonomies), a two-stage framework that infers an appropriate grasp configuration and then executes dexterous grasping under sparse grasp taxonomy guidance. To achieve this, we construct a structured library of grasp taxonomies encompassing a diverse range of human finger-engagement patterns [4]. This allows the framework to incorporate representative grasp types, providing a versatile foundation for learning dexterous grasping. In particular, the key contribution of GRIT is learning a control policy conditioned on these grasp configurations, thereby bridging high-level grasp intent and low-level finger execution. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our frame-work. We first evaluate generalization to novel objects in dexterous grasping tasks and show that taxonomy-guided planning and conditioned control outperform baseline meth-ods. Next, we analyze our system’s ability to generate grasp configurations tailored to the object geometry and assess their impact on task performance. We further examine how faithfully the taxonomy-conditioned policy adheres to the prescribed grasp specification during execution. Finally, real-world experiments demonstrate controllable dexterous grasping via grasp taxonomies aligned with task intention and object geometry, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our contributions are summarized below.  

> •

We propose GRIT, a two-stage framework that generates grasp taxonomies aligned with the context and performs 

> arXiv:2604.04138v1 [cs.RO] 5 Apr 2026

dexterous grasping under sparse taxonomy guidance.  

> •

We empirically show that grasp taxonomy effectiveness depends on object geometry, and leveraging this im-proves dexterous grasping on novel objects.  

> •

We demonstrate controllability in real-world experi-ments by adapting grasp taxonomies according to task intention and object geometry. II. R ELATED WORK 

Dexterous manipulation is commonly decomposed into 

grasp generation and control [5]. Our approach follows this line of research by structuring the decomposition around grasp taxonomies as an intermediate representation. From another perspective, our system focuses on generating mo-tor control with sparse taxonomy guidance, addressing the appropriate level of autonomy that balances human control-lability and autonomous execution. In the following sections, we review related work from these two perspectives. 

A. Grasp Generation and Control 

Humans adapt grasp configurations across diverse ob-ject–task combinations, making the joint problem of grasp selection and execution central to dexterous manipulation research [5]. One line of work leverages human demonstrations to by-pass explicit grasp generation. For instance, Herzog et al. [6] retrieves grasp configurations based on local shape similarity, while Chen et al. [7] retargets demonstrations to train multi-finger control policies. Although these approaches simplify structural modeling, they often struggle to generalize to diverse and novel objects. Recent studies instead learn grasp strategies from large-scale datasets. For example, Zhang et al. [2] learns grasp behaviors from large-scale annotations indicating valid and invalid contact regions, while Chen et al. [3] synthesizes grasp configurations using hand templates aligned with object geometry. However, covering the combi-natorial space of object–task variations remains costly. To address this challenge, several works decompose manipulation into high-level grasp planning and grasp-conditioned control. For example, Christen et al. [8] gener-ates grasp taxonomies and interaction locations to condition low-level policies, and Zhang et al. [9] uses object affordance maps to produce grasp candidates and constrain policy learning. Our method follows this decoupled structure but additionally incorporates user intention into grasp planning. 

B. Level of Autonomy in Dexterous Manipulation 

Dexterous manipulation systems can also be categorized by their level of autonomy. Fully autonomous approaches, such as end-to-end reinforcement learning methods [10, 11, 12, 13], learn a direct mapping from observations to actions to optimize task performance. While effective across many tasks, these systems provide limited controllability after training, making it difficult to adjust behaviors during deployment. At the other extreme, teleoperation-based sys-tems provide fine-grained control by directly specifying hand motions. For example, Handa et al. [14] tracks human hand poses using multi-view vision and retargets them to a robotic hand, while Zhang et al. [15] uses a wearable glove to map human finger and wrist motions to robot joints. Although these methods enable precise joint-level control, they require continuous human involvement. To balance automation and controllability, recent work adopts semi-autonomous frameworks that separate high-level grasp specification from low-level control execution. For instance, Christen et al. [8] conditions control policies on externally provided grasp poses, and Huang et al. [16] infers grasp poses from RGB observations to serve as high-level guidance. However, these methods rely on dense grasp representations, such as continuous hand poses or object-specific contact targets. Our approach adopts a similar semi-autonomous structure consisting of a vision-language model (VLM) [17] based grasp planner and a grasp-conditioned controller. Unlike prior work, we represent grasp intent using a sparse, discrete set of human grasp taxonomies rather than continuous pose specifications. This allows detailed finger motions to be learned by the low-level policy while enabling flexible high-level guidance across tasks. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

Dexterous grasping requires selecting an appropriate grasp configuration according to the scene and task context, and executing it through coordinated finger motions. We formu-late this process as a policy learning problem where a robot receives high-level grasp intent and generates continuous control actions to accomplish the manipulation. Let C denote the global task context, C = {I, T }, where I

represents an RGB-D observation of the scene and T denotes a task description specifying the user’s intent. The robot interacts with the environment through a control policy π that produces actions based on the current state and the task context. The objective is to learn a policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

Eτ ∼π

" TX

> t=0

γtrt(st, a t, g )

#

, (1) where st denotes the robot state at time t, at is the control action, rt is the reward function encouraging successful task completion and stable grasping, and γ is the discount factor. 

A. Decoupling Grasp Generation and Control 

Directly learning a policy that maps the task context C to dexterous actions is challenging due to the high dimension-ality of both perception and control. Instead, we decompose the problem into two stages: high-level grasp selection and low-level conditioned control. First, we define a taxonomy τi ∈ T as a grasp template. Let ˜q ∈ RD denote the reference joint configuration of the hand, and ˜b ∈ { 0, 1}L denotes a binary mask indicating the engagement of each of the L hand and palm links ( 1: active, 

0: resting). Let ˜p, ˜n ∈ RL×3 denote the reference contact positions and corresponding surface normals in the local hand frame, providing object-agnostic geometric guidance. Thus, τi = {˜q, ˜b, ˜p, ˜n}.Grasp Generation Taxonomy Library Active Contact Link Inactive Contact Link (bref = 0)  

> (bref = 1)

Taxonmy-conditioned Control Task Intent    

> Random Selection Grasp Planner
> Vision-Language Model
> “Hand me the paper cup”
> Scene Image
> Large Diameter Ventral Grasp
> Ring Pinch Precision Disk Training Wrist. Orient. Taxonomy Config. Hand State
> Priv. Contact. Grasp Config. Priv. Visual.

¯at

> at

Distillation    

> Hand State
> History Grasp Config. Partial Visual.
> (¯ ct,¯ft)
> (τ)
> ( ¯Ot)
> (qt)
> (Ot)
> (at−h:t−1,
> qt−h:t−1)
> Environment (Dynamics)
> (τ)
> (qt)
> Environment (Dynamics) Student Policy
> Teacher Policy
> 87654321

Fig. 2: The proposed framework consists of three main components. 1) A taxonomy library providing canonical grasp templates defined by reference hand configurations and contact structures. 2) A grasp generation module that randomly samples a taxonomy during training, while at inference, a vision–language model selects one from the scene and task description. 3) A taxonomy-conditioned control policy learned via teacher–student distillation, where the teacher uses privileged information and the student relies on action–state history and partial visual observations. Using this template, a planner selects a grasp configuration 

g = πplan (C), where g = (τ, ¯ww) consists of a grasp taxonomy τ selected from the predefined taxonomy set T

and a target wrist orientation ¯ww.Given the selected grasp configuration g, the taxonomy-conditioned controller produces continuous control actions conditioned on the current state and the grasp specification, 

at = πcontrol (st, g ). This decomposition enables the use of large perception models for grasp selection while focusing learning on the control policy, formulated as 

J(π) = Eπ

" TX

> t=0

γtrt(st, g )

#

. (2) Note that the grasp configuration g provides only sparse guidance, making stable dexterous control challenging to learn. To address this, we incorporate reward design and feature-extraction strategies to facilitate policy learning under sparse-taxonomy conditioning. Further details are provided in Section IV-D. 

B. State and Action Representation 

At each timestep t, the controller observes a state st =

{sht , s ot } and produces an action at, where sht denotes the hand proprioceptive and contact-aware state and sot repre-sents the object state. Let q ∈ RD denote the current joint configuration and 

¯q− the target joint configuration predicted by the policy at the previous timestep. The hand state is defined as sh =[q, ¯q− − q, v w, ω w, v o, ω o, c, f ], where (vw, ω w) and (vo, ω o)

denote the linear and angular velocities of the wrist and object, respectively, and c, f represent contact indicators and contact forces. The object state sot is represented by a partial point cloud O ∈ Rn×3 obtained from a single RGB-D camera and expressed in the wrist frame. The policy predicts desired joint and wrist configurations 

(¯ q, ¯pw, ¯ww). The joint target ¯q is tracked using a PD con-troller, while the wrist pose is enforced by applying correc-tive forces that reduce the pose error following Baumgarte stabilization [18]. This formulation ensures that wrist control remains compatible with inverse kinematics approaches [19] widely adopted in real-world deployment. The policy outputs an action at = [∆ wt, ∆qt], where 

∆wt ∈ R7 denotes the delta pose of the wrist (Cartesian dis-placement and quaternion rotation) and ∆qt ∈ RD represents the joint displacement for the D degrees of freedom of the hand. The target configurations are obtained by accumulating the predicted deltas with the current state as ¯wt = wt + ∆ wt

and ¯qt = qt + ∆ qt.IV. M ETHOD 

As illustrated in Fig. 2, our framework uses grasp tax-onomies to bridge high-level semantic intent and low-level control. We first describe how canonical grasp templates are constructed, and then introduce a planner that selects an appropriate taxonomy from the scene and task context. Next, we present the feature extraction process used to construct policy observations and the reward design for training the controller. Finally, we describe a distillation procedure that enables deployment in the real-world. 

A. Taxonomy-Based Grasp Templates 

We construct grasp templates based on the human grasp taxonomy of Feix et al. [4]. We select a subset of 30 types, excluding three highly object-specific patterns, and construct grasp templates for robotic manipulation using the representation in Section III-A. Each template specifies a reference joint configuration, the engaged fingers, and the intended contact structure. Contact locations are defined at the center of each fingerpad, while contact directions fol-low the fingertip surface normals, providing object-agnostic geometric guidance for control. 

B. Grasp Selection 

The grasp selection module serves as a high-level planner that predicts the grasp configuration g = ( τ, ¯ww) tailored to the given task T and current scene image I. During policy learning, we uniformly sample the grasp taxonomy and target wrist orientation. In inference, we utilize a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to perform zero-shot grasp selection. To overcome the difficulty VLM faces in reasoning about 3D spatial relationships from 2D images [20]. In detail, we sample candidate wrist and overlay a 3D coordinate axis directly onto the scene image to represent the potential target direction toward the object, as illustrated in the Grasp Generation module in Fig. 2. By processing the augmented image and the task description (e.g., ”Pick up the sponge to squeeze it”) simultaneously, the VLM selects the appropriate taxonomy τ . Detailed evaluation is provided in Section V-E. 

C. Feature Extraction 

To condition the policy on the grasp configuration and ob-ject geometry, we construct features from the grasp command 

g and the partial object point cloud O.First, we define the grasp command feature og = [˜ q −

q, ˜b, ¯ww], where ˜q and ˜b denote the reference joint configu-ration and link engagement mask of the selected taxonomy, and ¯ww represents the target wrist orientation. From the point cloud O, we extract geometric features describing the spatial relationship between the hand and the environment. We compute the wrist–object displacement 

xrel ∈ R3, where the object position is defined as the mean of the partial point cloud. Following [13], we further compute distance-based features, including the displacement from each hand link to the nearest object surface point and the distance to the table, denoted by dhand and dtable . Finally, we encode local object geometry using a wrist-centered Basis Point Set (BPS) [21]. The effectiveness of this representation is evaluated in Section V-G. 

D. Taxonomy-condition Control Policy 

To learn dexterous grasping from sparse taxonomy guid-ance, the controller must simultaneously satisfy several ob-jectives: (1) approaching the object reliably, (2) interacting with it according to the selected grasp taxonomy, and (3) avoiding unstable or physically invalid behaviors such as unintended collisions or excessive motion. Balancing these objectives within a single reward formulation is challenging. Inspired by recent findings [22] showing that simplified re-ward structures scale effectively in large-scale reinforcement learning, we adopt a multiplicative composite reward :

r = rh · αh + ro · αo − rpen (3) where rh and ro denote the hand-centric and object-centric progressive rewards, αh and αo ∈ [0 , 1] are multiplicative constraint coefficients that attenuate rewards under undesir-able behaviors, and rpen represents explicit penalty terms. TABLE I: Summary of Multiplicative Composite Reward Terms in GRIT                   

> Category Term Symbol
> Overall Hand Reward rh
> Object Reward ro
> Coefficients αh, α o∈[0 ,1]
> Penalty rpen
> Approach ( αh)Proximity xrel , d link ,l
> Alignment αdir
> Stability αvel , α act
> Grasp ( αo)Contact nt,l , c t,l , f t,l
> Obj. Stability αobj =αvel αxy
> Adherence αmimic
> Margins τact , τ rest

We evaluate this reward formulation in Section V-G and Section V-F. 

1) Approach Phase and Constraints: The hand-centric reward rh guides the approach phase by encouraging the hand to move toward the object surface: 

rh = exp( −γr ∥xrel ∥) + 1

L+

> L

X

> l=1

bref ,l exp( −γl∥dlink ,l ∥),

where γr and γl control hand-center proximity and link-wise object distance, respectively, and L+ = Σ bref denotes the number of active links. The multiplicative constraint coefficient is defined as 

αh = αdir αvel αact , which suppresses unstable behaviors during the approach phase. To elaborate each term, αdir =exp( −γdir ∥dw − dtrgt ∥) encourages wrist alignment with the target direction dtrgt , αvel = exp( −γv (∥vw∥2 + η∥ωw∥2)) 

penalizes excessive linear and angular wrist motion, and 

αact = exp( −γa∥∆at − ∆at−1∥2) regularizes abrupt action changes to encourage smooth control updates. 

2) Grasp Execution and Taxonomy Adherence: Our framework is designed to encourage both stable object inter-action and adherence to the selected taxonomy. We achieve this through a multiplicative reward structure with tolerance margins for the selected taxonomy. In more detail, the object-interaction reward ro is defined as 

ro = X

> l∈L

bref ,l 

λd(n⊤

> t,l

nref ,l ) + λcct,l + λift,l 

 , (4) where nt,l denotes the contact normal at link l, and λd, λc,and λi weight normal alignment, contact status, and impulse magnitude. To jointly enforce stable object interaction and taxonomy-consistent grasping, we introduce the multiplicative con-straint αo = αobj αmimic , where αobj stabilizes object motion and αmimic enforces taxonomy-consistent hand synergies. The object stability term is defined as αobj = αvel αxy ,where αvel = exp( −γov (∥vo∥2 + ηo∥ωo∥2)) penalizes exces-sive object motion and αxy = exp( −γxy ∥xxy 

> obj

∥) discourages lateral displacement in the grasp frame. We further define αmimic = exp( −γmLmimic ), where 

Lmimic measures the deviation from the reference taxonomy configuration: 

Lmimic = 1

Nact 

> L

X

> i=1

(max( |qi − qref ,i | − τact , 0)) 2

+ 1

Nrest 

> L

X

> i=1

(max( |qi − qref ,i | − τrest , 0)) 2 .

(5) Importantly, the margins τact and τrest allow controlled deviations from the taxonomy template, enabling flexibility while preserving the intended grasp structure. 

3) Unintended Interaction Penalties: We introduce ex-plicit penalties to suppress physically invalid or taxonomy-inconsistent contacts: 

rpen = X

> l∈L

h

λc

> un

cun  

> t,l

+ λi

> un

f un  

> t,l

+ (1 − bref ,l ) λcct,l + λift,l 

i

.

(6) In detail, λc 

> un

and λi 

> un

weight penalties for unintended contacts and impulse magnitudes. The taxonomy boolean 

bref ,l indicates an interaction between the object and the lth link; contacts on links with bref ,l = 0 are therefore penalized. 

E. Policy Distillation 

To enable real-world deployment, we distill a teacher policy trained with privileged simulation signals into astudent policy that uses only accessible observations. The teacher observes the full object point cloud ¯Ot and ground-truth contact states ¯ct and ¯ft, whereas the student uses a single-view partial point cloud Ot. We reconstruct the contact signals from the student observations using an LSTM encoder over the past k = 10 steps of joint states and actions, similar to [13]. Training follows a curriculum: we first perform DAgger-style behavior cloning [23] with contact reconstruction and action imitation losses, and then transition to PPO with an asymmetric critic that retains privileged inputs for the critic while the actor relies only on student observations. V. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed two-stage frame-work from four complementary perspectives. First, we ex-amine its ability to generalize dexterous manipulation to novel objects compared to baseline methods. Second, we analyze whether the taxonomy planner successfully captures meaningful object–taxonomy relationships. Third, we evalu-ate how faithfully the taxonomy-conditioned policy adheres to the prescribed grasp specification during execution. Fi-nally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our taxonomy-conditioned framework in real-world manipulation scenarios. 

A. Baselines 1) RDG [13]: To evaluate the effect of taxonomy con-ditioning, we compare our framework against RDG , which learns grasping behaviors without any explicit grasp-level conditioning. RDG does not incorporate taxonomy or high-level grasp specifications, and instead learns grasp mo-tions directly from geometric and contact-based signals. The teacher policy takes the previous action at−1, joint angles 

q, contact states c, and the hand-centric distance vector 

dhand , d table as inputs. The reward is defined as r = rdis + rcontact + rheight + rreg ,where rdis encourages hand-object proximity, rcontact enforces desired contacts while penalizing undesired collisions, rheight 

prevents table collision, and rreg regularizes motion. 

2) GraspXL [2]: To evaluate the benefit of explicit grasp specification compared to geometric reward shaping, we compare our framework against GraspXL. GraspXL does not condition the policy on predefined grasp types, but instead provides indirect guidance about desirable grasp regions via graspable and non-graspable surface annotations. The state features include joint angles q, PD tracking error d, hand and object velocities (uh, u o), contact information (c, f ),objective errors (˜ v, ˜ω, ˜m), and distance vectors to graspable and non-graspable surfaces (l+, l −). These non-graspable surface labels are provided in their official repository and are used during training. The reward is defined as r = rgoal + rgrasp , where rgoal 

enforces positional and rotational alignment, and rgrasp pro-motes stable contact, force distribution, anatomical plausibil-ity, and motion regularization. 

3) GRIT (Ours): GRIT differentiates itself through Basis Point Set (BPS)-based geometric features and a multiplica-tive reward structure that ensures strict taxonomy adherence. We train a single universal policy by randomly sampling 30 taxonomies at each reset, enabling diverse dexterous behaviors within a single model. Performance is reported via two protocols: Ours (Oracle), which establishes an upper bound by averaging the top-3 taxonomies for each category, and Ours, which utilizes the specific grasp configuration selected by Gemini 3 [17] during inference. 

B. Training Details. 

We train all methods using 30 YCB objects [24] using PPO [25] within the MuJoCo-Warp [26] simulation environ-ment. To maximize data diversity despite the limited object set, we randomly sample the initial wrist rotation relative to the object’s canonical frame. Hyperparameters are kept consistent across all methods to ensure a fair comparison. Training is conducted on a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU. 

C. Performance Metric 

Success Rate (unit: %): A trial is considered successful if the robot achieves stable object acquisition by lifting the object at least 5 cm above its initial resting height and maintaining the lifted state for 3 seconds. 

Contact Precision (Prec.): This metric measures the ratio of intended contacts to total object contacts. A high-precision score indicates that the robot manipulates the object using only the designated links, distinguishing between fingertips and other finger segments, without exhibiting semantically inconsistent or arbitrary contacts. 

Mean Joint Error (MJE) (unit: rad): Measures the devi-ation from the reference posture qref with tolerance τ eval =Fruits & Veg. Household Packed Goods Overall   

> 60 70 80 90 100 86.9 79.5 87.5 92.2 77.3 74.4 77.2 82.8 88.9 87.2 92.9 96.5 86.0 81.9 87.9 92.3 Success Rate [%] GraspXL Ours RDG Ours (Oracle)

Fig. 3: The object pose is fixed while the wrist orientation is sampled from eight directions around the object. For each direction, 30 trials are performed with randomized initial wrist positions. 

0.3 during object holding: MJE = 1

D

> D

X

> i=1

(max( |qi − qref,i | − τeval , 0)) 2 (7) where q and q ref denote the current and reference joint configurations, respectively, and τeval = 0 .3.

D. Evaluating Generalization to Novel Objects 

We evaluate trained models on the Objaverse dataset [27]. Since the full Objaverse collection is extremely large, we restrict our evaluation to the RoboCasa [28] subset and reorganize the object labels into three categories charac-terized by their distinct geometric shapes and affordances: 

fruit vegetable , household utensil tool , and packed goods & drink & bread food . After filtering, the evaluation set con-tains 373 objects in total, including 135 fruit vegetable ,82 household utensil tool objects, and 156 packed goods & drink & bread food objects. Policy robustness is evaluated with 240 trials per object, consisting of 30 randomized trials for each of 8 approach directions ( 45 ◦ intervals). We report the mean success rate across all trials. As shown in Fig. 3, our method achieves the best perfor-mance among learned policies across all categories. Com-pared to RDG, which does not use taxonomy conditioning, our approach improves the overall success rate from 81.9% to 87.9% (+6.0%). It also outperforms GraspXL, which relies on geometric reward shaping, by +1.9%. These results indicate that explicit grasp taxonomy conditioning provides stronger structural guidance for grasp generation. The gap to oracle selection remains small (87.9% vs. 92.3%), suggesting that predicted taxonomies are often near-optimal. Performance is lower for household utensil tool 

objects due to thin or flat geometries that make stable contact difficult, while packed goods & drink & bread food objects yield higher success rates due to their regular shapes and larger graspable volumes. 

E. Object-Taxonomy Alignment and Sensitivity Analysis 

To understand the impact of grasp selection, we exhaus-tively evaluate all 30 taxonomies across three object cate-                                                      

> Grasp Taxonomy Object Category Fruit & Vegetable Household Packed Goods
> Large Diameter 88.38 76.71 94.19 Medium Diameter 88.55 76.80 94.31
> Small Diameter 86.67 78.65 93.76 Adducted Thumb 86.14 75.18 93.13 Prismatic 4 Finger 84.50 75.68 92.06 Prismatic 3 Finger 82.75 72.60 90.56 Prismatic 2 Finger 82.09 72.00 89.82 Palmar Pinch 84.81 74.28 91.96 Tip Pinch 63.71 66.53 79.46 Power Sphere 88.78 76.16 93.74 Tripod 81.53 71.07 89.01 Lateral 70.40 67.78 83.54 Extension Type 83.97 73.22 90.71 Sphere 4 Finger 85.97 73.38 92.74 Sphere 3 Finger 77.55 70.66 87.33 Ventral 87.22 75.25 93.42
> Performance Spread (Best–Worst) 25.07 12.12 14.85

TABLE II: Success rates (%) across grasp taxonomies (rows) and object categories (columns). Bold indicates the best performance and underline indicates the worst. 5 10 20 30 

> wmimic
> 0.18 0.14 0.12 0.10 0.16 GraspXL* RDG* GRIT (Ours)

(a) Joint Error ( ↓)5 10 20 30 90 87.5 85.0 80 77.5 92.5 82.5 

wmimic (b) Contact precision ( ↑)5 10 20 30 

wmimic  

> 92 91 90 89 88 87 86

(c) Success Rate ( ↑)

Fig. 4: performance comparison according to the mimic reward weight wmimic . Ours maintains superior performance without hyperparameter tuning. ∗ Methods retrained with the same taxonomy condition and rewards for a fair comparison. gories. As shown in Table II, success rates vary significantly depending on the taxonomy-object pair, revealing structured preferences. For instance, Packed Goods achieve robust suc-cess (94.31%) with “medium /Large Diameter” grasps. In contrast, Fruit & Vegetable show the highest sensitivity to selection, with a 25.07% performance gap between the effec-tive “Power Sphere” (88.78%) and the struggling “Tip Pinch” (63.71%), likely due to the instability of minimal-contact points on highly curved surfaces. These results confirm that object geometry and required contact area necessitate precise taxonomy selection, with power-oriented grasps generally outperforming precision-based ones. 

F. Evaluating Taxonomy Adherence 

We evaluate the policy’s adherence to prescribed tax-onomies and analyze the trade-off between task success and adherence under different reward formulations. Baseline methods such as RDG and GraspXL use a standard additive reward formulation. To incorporate taxonomy supervision, we follow the same formulation and add the mimic term Fig. 5: Qualitative examples of generated grasps in simulation and real-world settings. TABLE III: Impact of Visual Features and Reward Formu-lation                          

> Finger Usage Method SR [%] ↑Prec. ↑MJE ↓
> 2–3 fingers W.o BPS 76.2 0.55 0.12 Naive sum 80.6 0.49 0.23
> Ours 79.5 0.63 0.097
> 4–5 fingers W.o BPS 83.3 0.91 0.15 Naive sum 81.1 0.90 0.39
> Ours 85.7 0.93 0.19

αmimic ∈ [0 , 1] with a weighting coefficient wmimic , requiring careful tuning to balance taxonomy adherence and task per-formance. In contrast, GRIT employs a multiplicative formu-lation that treats taxonomy adherence as a gating coefficient for the task reward. This design naturally encourages the policy to satisfy the taxonomy constraint without requiring additional hyperparameter tuning. To evaluate this effect, we retrained baselines with varying 

wmimic and compared them against our fixed formulation. As shown in Fig. 4, baseline performance is sensitive to the choice of wmimic , leading to unstable trade-offs between joint error, contact precision, and success rate. In contrast, our method maintains consistently strong performance across all metrics without hyperparameter tuning, demonstrating that the multiplicative reward formulation provides a more stable mechanism for enforcing taxonomy adherence while preserving task success. 

G. Ablation Study 

To further investigate the contribution of each compo-nent in our framework—specifically visual features and the multiplicative reward formulation—we conduct an ablation study. We categorize the 30 grasping taxonomies into two groups based on the number of digits involved: 2–3 fingers (e.g., pinch, tripod) and 4–5 fingers (e.g., power sphere, large diamter), as summarized in Table III. While a ’naive sum’ reward achieves comparable success rates for simple 2–3 fin-ger grasps, it fails to maintain precise finger configurations. Fail Geometry: Rod-like objects   

> Task Result Scene Grasp  Pris. 4 f. Small Dia. Sim Real Success Success Medium Dia. Prec. Sphere Fail Fail
> Fail
> Geometry: Spool-like objects
> Success
> Success

Fig. 6: We demonstrate that suitable grasp taxonomies de-pend on object geometry. Across two object geometries, cer-tain taxonomies succeed while others fail in both simulation and real-world experiments. In contrast, our multiplicative reward significantly improves adherence, yielding 28.57% higher Contact Precision and 57.83% lower joint error, effectively balancing task success with taxonomy adherence. Furthermore, removing BPS re-sults in a consistent performance drop across all metrics, confirming that dense geometric features are essential for the spatial awareness required in high-precision grasping. 

H. Real-World Deployment 

We deploy GRIT on a real-world bimanual humanoid robot using the right-hand and waist joints, where the policy outputs are used as IK targets for the robot wrist. As shown in Fig. 5, GRIT demonstrates successful real-world deployment across a diverse set of grasp taxonomies and objects. Furthermore, we show that the success of each taxonomy depends on both object geometry and task intent, as detailed below. 

Geometry-Dependent Adaptation As shown in Fig. 6, the success of each grasp taxonomy depends strongly on object geometry. For rod-like objects such as a knife, the geometry is thin and flat when placed on the table. In this case, diameter-based grasp taxonomies such as small-diameter often fail, as the fingers attempt to close around the object but cannot establish stable contact, resulting in empty grasps. In contrast, the precision 4-finger taxonomy, which relies primarily on fingertip contacts, successfully grasps the object by pinching the thin geometry. For spool-like objects with a circular cross-section, cylindrical grasp taxonomies such as medium-diameter provide stable enclosure and suc-ceed in lifting the object, whereas fingertip-based grasps tend to slip and fail. 

Task-Specific Selection As shown in Fig. 1, GRIT also enables intent-driven control via text prompts beyond geo-metric fit. When interacting with a sponge, the policy selects a Precision grasp for stable transport with minimal deforma-tion. However, when prompted to “squeeze,” it switches to a Power grasp, utilizing the palm and fingers to maximize force generation. This demonstrates that GRIT can adapt grasp strategies not only to object geometry but also to high-level task context. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

We presented GRIT , a two-stage framework for con-trollable dexterous manipulation that separates grasp tax-onomy planning from low-level control. A taxonomy plan-ner predicts context-appropriate grasp specifications, and a taxonomy-conditioned policy executes them during ma-nipulation. Experiments show that taxonomy conditioning improves generalization to novel objects and enables struc-tured object–taxonomy alignment. We further demonstrate that the proposed reward design and object representation improve adherence to the specified grasp during execution, and validate the approach in real-world experiments. Despite these results, several limitations remain. The cur-rent policy relies on the initial visual observation and lacks real-time feedback to adapt to dynamic scene changes or object displacements. In addition, while taxonomy control provides effective high-level guidance, it remains difficult to specify fine-grained targets such as grasping a specific functional part (e.g., a drill handle). Future work will focus on integrating reactive visual feedback and more precise control strategies for robust functional manipulation. REFERENCES [1] S. An, Z. Meng, C. Tang, Y. Zhou, T. Liu, F. Ding, S. Zhang, Y. Mu, R. Song, W. Zhang et al. , “Dexterous manipulation through imitation learning: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03515 , 2025. [2] H. Zhang, S. Christen, Z. Fan, O. Hilliges, and J. Song, “Graspxl: Generating grasping motions for diverse objects at scale,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2024, pp. 386–403. [3] J. Chen, Y. Ke, L. Peng, and H. Wang, “Dexonomy: Synthesiz-ing all dexterous grasp types in a grasp taxonomy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18829 , 2025. [4] T. Feix, J. Romero, H.-B. Schmiedmayer, A. M. Dollar, and D. Kragic, “The grasp taxonomy of human grasp types,” IEEE Transactions on human-machine systems , vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 66–77, 2015. [5] X. Song, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, and L. Jiang, “An overview of learning-based dexterous grasping: recent advances and future directions,” Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 58, no. 10, p. 300, 2025. [6] A. Herzog, P. Pastor, M. Kalakrishnan, L. Righetti, T. Asfour, and S. Schaal, “Template-based learning of grasp selection,” in 2012 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation . IEEE, 2012, pp. 2379–2384. [7] Z. Q. Chen, K. Van Wyk, Y.-W. Chao, W. Yang, A. Mousavian, A. Gupta, and D. Fox, “Dextransfer: Real world multi-fingered dex-terous grasping with minimal human demonstrations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14284 , 2022. [8] S. Christen, M. Kocabas, E. Aksan, J. Hwangbo, J. Song, and O. Hilliges, “D-grasp: Physically plausible dynamic grasp synthesis for hand-object interactions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 20 577–20 586. [9] L. Zhang, S. Mondal, Z. Bing, K. Bai, D. Zheng, Z. Chen, A. C. Knoll, and J. Zhang, “Dora: Object affordance-guided reinforcement learning for dexterous robotic manipulation,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Cyborg and Bionic Systems (CBS) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 674–681. [10] I. Akkaya, M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin, B. McGrew, A. Petron, A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas et al. , “Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113 ,2019. [11] Y. Chen, T. Wu, S. Wang, X. Feng, J. Jiang, Z. Lu, S. McAleer, H. Dong, S.-C. Zhu, and Y. Yang, “Towards human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, pp. 5150–5163, 2022. [12] T. Chen, J. Xu, and P. Agrawal, “A system for general in-hand object re-orientation,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp. 297–307. [13] H. Zhang, Z. Wu, L. Huang, S. Christen, and J. Song, “Robustdex-grasp: Robust dexterous grasping of general objects,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05287 , 2025. [14] A. Handa, K. Van Wyk, W. Yang, J. Liang, Y.-W. Chao, Q. Wan, S. Birchfield, N. Ratliff, and D. Fox, “Dexpilot: Vision-based tele-operation of dexterous robotic hand-arm system,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 9164–9170. [15] H. Zhang, S. Hu, Z. Yuan, and H. Xu, “Doglove: Dexterous manip-ulation with a low-cost open-source haptic force feedback glove,” in 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [16] L. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Wu, S. Christen, and J. Song, “Fungrasp: functional grasping for diverse dexterous hands,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [17] Google DeepMind, “Gemini 3 pro model card,” Google DeepMind, Tech. Rep., 2025. [Online]. Available: https://storage.googleapis.com/ deepmind-media/Model-Cards/Gemini-3-Pro-Model-Card.pdf [18] J. Baumgarte, “Stabilization of constraints and integrals of motion in dynamical systems,” Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 1972. [19] S. Chiaverini, B. Siciliano, and O. Egeland, “Review of the damped least-squares inverse kinematics with experiments on an industrial robot manipulator,” IEEE Transactions on control systems technology ,vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 123–134, 1994. [20] D. Liu, C. Wang, P. Gao, R. Zhang, X. Ma, Y. Meng, and Z. Wang, “3daxisprompt: Promoting the 3d grounding and reasoning in gpt-4o,” 

Neurocomputing , vol. 637, p. 130072, 2025. [21] S. Prokudin, C. Lassner, and J. Romero, “Efficient learning on point clouds with basis point sets,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2019, pp. 4332–4341. [22] B. Jaeger, D. Dauner, J. Beißwenger, S. Gerstenecker, K. Chitta, and A. Geiger, “Carl: Learning scalable planning policies with simple rewards,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17838 , 2025. [23] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635. [24] B. Calli, A. Singh, A. Walsman, S. Srinivasa, P. Abbeel, and A. M. Dollar, “The ycb object and model set: Towards common benchmarks for manipulation research,” in 2015 international conference on ad-vanced robotics (ICAR) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 510–517. [25] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [26] K. Zakka, B. Tabanpour, Q. Liao, M. Haiderbhai, S. Holt, J. Y. Luo, A. Allshire, E. Frey, K. Sreenath, L. A. Kahrs et al. , “Mujoco playground,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08844 , 2025. [27] M. Deitke, D. Schwenk, J. Salvador, L. Weihs, O. Michel, E. Vander-Bilt, L. Schmidt, K. Ehsani, A. Kembhavi, and A. Farhadi, “Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2023, pp. 13 142–13 153. [28] S. Nasiriany, A. Maddukuri, L. Zhang, A. Parikh, A. Lo, A. Joshi, A. Mandlekar, and Y. Zhu, “Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024.