Title: Do Audio-Visual Large Language Models Really See and Hear?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02605v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:23:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Do Audio-Visual Large Language Models Really See and Hear? 

# Ramaneswaran Selvakumar * Kaousheik Jayakumar * S Sakshi Sreyan Ghosh Ruohan Gao # Dinesh Manocha #*Equal contribution #Equal advising 

# University of Maryland, College Park 

Project webpage: ramaneswaran.github.io/avllm interpretability 

# Abstract 

Audio-Visual Large Language Models (AVLLMs) are emerging as unified interfaces to multimodal perception. We present the first mechanistic interpretability study of AVLLMs, analyzing how audio and visual features evolve and fuse through different layers of an AVLLM to produce the final text outputs. We find that although AVLLMs encode rich audio semantics at intermediate layers, these capabili-ties largely fail to surface in the final text generation when audio conflicts with vision. Probing analyses show that use-ful latent audio information is present, but deeper fusion layers disproportionately privilege visual representations that tend to suppress audio cues. We further trace this im-balance to training: the AVLLM’s audio behavior strongly matches its vision-language base model, indicating limited additional alignment to audio supervision. Our findings re-veal a fundamental modality bias in AVLLMs and provide new mechanistic insights into how multimodal LLMs inte-grate audio and vision. 

# 1. Introduction 

Audio-Visual Large Language Models (AVLLMs) [12, 35, 51, 56, 63] extend large language models (LLMs) to pro-cess real-world multimodal inputs such as audio and video. Audio conveys information that vision alone cannot: off-screen events, speech, music, and ambient cues are primar-ily auditory. By combining these signals with the reason-ing capabilities of LLMs, AVLLMs achieve a more holistic understanding of complex scenes–enabling applications in multimedia analysis, education [3], human–computer inter-action [11, 66], robotics [22, 60], healthcare [38], and bio-diversity monitoring [40]. Despite rapid progress, current AVLLMs remain black-boxes in terms of how they process and utilize audio-visual information. While interpretability has been explored for text-only LLMs [16, 19, 62], vision-language [7, 27, 42], and audio-language models [36, 47, 59], the mechanisms of 

Figure 1. Illustration of visual bias. AVLLMs exhibit a critical modality bias, often prioritizing visual cues over vital audio cues. The diagram illustrates a counterfactual scene, visible objects (a blue car and a woman walking a dog) are silent and the only au-dible sound is an out-of-view ambulance siren. When prompted to describe the scene, the AVLLM hallucinates audio events (car engine, dog barking) and misses the actual siren sound. 

audio-visual integration have not been studied. This opac-ity raises reliability concerns, particularly in safety-critical settings— e.g ., an autonomous vehicle should respond to an out-of-view ambulance siren even when it is not visible. To illustrate this, consider Fig 1: a scene where a blue car and a woman walking a dog are visible, while an ambulance siren is heard off-screen. When prompted to “describe what you see and hear,” existing AVLLMs frequently halluci-nate sounds from visible but silent objects and ignore the siren. We observe that for current AVLLMs (Fig 2) relative performance drops by up to 56% on such counter-factual samples with conflicting modalities, as compared to factual samples where both modalities are aligned, indicating that current AVLLMs rely heavily on vision and underutilize au-dio cues.        

> arXiv:2604.02605v1 [cs.AI] 3 Apr 2026 010 20 30 40 50 60
> Audio Caption Fidelity
> Qwen2.5-Omni (3B)
> Qwen2.5-Omni (7B)
> Qwen3-Omni
> VideoLLaMA 2.1
> MiniCPM-o 2.6
> 53.58
> 57.36
> 58.27
> 53.02
> 47.46
> 23.1
> 25.94
> 36.72
> 22.61
> 20.74 Factual
> CTR-Factual

Figure 2. Audio Understanding Performance. Audio under-standing severely degrades under audio-visual conflict. 

To address these issues, we systematically analyze why AVLLMs fail to utilize audio inputs effectively. Most AVLLMs adopt an adapter-based architecture [9], where pretrained audio and vision encoders feed representa-tions through learned adapters into the LLM token space-extending designs such as Llava [33]. We focus on the LLM backbone, the largest and most influential component, to examine how audio and visual representations evolve, interact, and influence text generation across layers. Un-like prior interpretability work on single-modality mod-els [7, 27, 42, 59], AVLLMs present unique challenges: audio and vision interact through complex cross-modal pathways, and their complementarity makes isolating each modality’s contribution far more difficult. Using this testbed, we perform a multi-stage mechanis-tic interpretability analysis to understand where and why audio information fails to manifest in generation: (1) We analyze attention patterns across layers to identify where AVLLMs allocate focus between modalities and whether audio receives sufficient attention. (2) We then probe au-dio representations to determine if they encode meaningful information. (3) To establish causal relationships between modality representations and outputs, we design attention knockout experiments that selectively block audio or visual pathways, allowing us to trace how each modality influ-ences generation. (4) Finally, to investigate the origin of any observed bias, we compare output token distributions with base vision-language models, testing whether visual dominance stems from inherited training artifacts or archi-tectural constraints. Together, these analyses provide the first mechanistic evidence of how and where modality im-balance arises in AVLLMs. To summarize, our main contri-butions are: 1. We present the first systematic mechanistic analysis of Audio-Visual Large Language Models, dissecting how audio and visual representations are encoded, integrated, and manifested in text generation. 2. We show that AVLLMs’ audio understanding drastically deteriorates by upto 56% when audio and visual cues conflict–revealing a strong modality preference despite architectural capacity for multimodal reasoning. 3. By probing audio token representations in intermediate layers we demonstrate that they evolve into interpretable onomatopoeic tokens which describe sound events, indi-cating that AVLLMs encode strong latent audio seman-tics that remain untapped at generation time. 4. Using causal mediation via attention knockouts, we find that deeper layers prioritize visual features and actively suppress audio information. Blocking visual signals at these layers restores audio reasoning, providing direct causal evidence of cross-modal interference. 5. We show that the output token distributions of AVLLMs strongly mirror those of their base vision-language mod-els, suggesting that the visual bias potentially originates from its alignment tuning and data rather than architec-tural limitations. 

# 2. Related Work 

Audio Visual Large Language Models (AVLLMs). 

AVLLMs aim to integrate auditory and visual perception in large language models, thus enabling reasoning across audio, vision, and text. Most AVLLMs follow an adapter-based architecture, popularized by Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) [8, 9] where frozen audio and visual en-coders are connected to a pretrained language backbone through learned projection modules (adapters). Early sys-tems such as Video-LLaMA [63] and PandaGPT [50] adopt simple MLP adapters to map modality embeddings into the LLM token embedding space. More recent AVLLMs such as Qwen2.5-Omni [56], Qwen3-Omni [58], and MiniCPM [24] have dedicated modules that temporally align audio and visual features before mapping to the LLM embedding space, improving synchronization and contextual ground-ing. While most approaches build on top of base LLMs, others, such as InternOmni [1] build on existing LVLMs like InternVL [13]. This extension strategy improves train-ing efficiency and leverages strong vision-language foun-dations, but may introduce visual bias from the underlying LVLM. 

Mechanistic Interpretability of LLMs. Mechanistic in-terpretability seeks to understand the internal mechanisms within neural networks. For LLMs, this has revealed how models store factual knowledge [18, 37, 41], localize spe-cific capabilities [45, 54], and process information across layers [17]. While well-established for text-only models, mechanistic interpretability remains nascent for multimodal LLMs. [42] show that object information is localized in to-ken representations and gradually aligns with language rep-resentations, while [27] and [65] trace cross-modal image token flow, revealing a distinct two-step processing pattern. Tools For Mechanistic Interpretability. Understanding and explaining neural networks, particularly language mod-els is crucial for identifying their behavior and limita-tions. A widely used approach is causal mediation analy-sis [39, 53], which attributes the contribution of key com-ponents, often employing knock-out techniques to assess the impact of removing specific elements. Another ap-proach is to probe the internal representations using linear classifiers [2, 30], an extension of which is logit lens [44] where the the language model’s unembedding layer is used to probe representations. In our work, we use the logit lens to probe whether semantic audio information is preserved in intermediate representations and further utilize attention knockout, a form of causal mediation analysis to trace the cross-modal flow of audio-visual information in the LLM. 

# 3. Preliminary 

Transformer Language Models. Transformer-based lan-guage models consist of: a tokenizer, an embedding layer, a transformer backbone comprising stacked transformer lay-ers and an unembedding layer. An auto-regressive trans-former language model takes as input a tokenized sequence 

X = ( x1, ..., x n) and outputs a probability distribution over vocabulary V to predict the next token xn+1 .The embedding layer maps each input token xi to a cor-responding vector eti ∈ Rdm forming the sequences of text embeddings Et = ( et

> 1

, ..., e tn). These embeddings are then refined through a series of transformer layers, each consist-ing of Multi-head Self-Attention (MHA) and Feed-forward Network (FFN) sublayers with residual connections: 

h′li = hl−1 

> i

+ ali (1) 

hli = h′li + f li (2) where hli is the representation of token xi at layer l, ali is the output from the MHA sublayer, and f li is the output from the FFN sublayer. All vectors hli, a li, f li ∈ Rdm .The MHA sublayer enables information flow between tokens by computing weighted aggregations based on learned query-key similarities. Each token selectively at-tends to tokens from other positions in the sequence, allow-ing the model to build contextualized representations: MHA (Q, K, V ) = softmax 

 QK T

√dk

+ M



V. (3) Here Q, K, V are query, key and value matrices derived through learned projections and M is a mask applied to en-force the causal nature of the auto-regressive model, where each position can only attend to previous positions and it-self. The mask is defined as: 

Mij =

(

0 if i ≥ j

−∞ otherwise (4) After passing through L transformer layers, the final repre-sentation hLi of each token is passed through an unembed-ding layer (language modeling head) to produce logits over the vocabulary zi given by: 

zi = WU hLi + b, (5) where WU ∈ R|V |× dm is the unembedding matrix and b is a bias term. A softmax operation converts these logits into a probability distribution over the vocabulary to predict the next token. 

Audio-Visual LLMs extend transformer language models to process audio and visual inputs alongside text. They consist of: (i) a pre-trained vision encoder that processes images by dividing them into patches, with each patch em-bedded into a vector (ii) a pre-trained audio encoder that similarly processes audio spectrograms by dividing them into patches and embedding each patch, and (iii) learned adapter modules that project these modality-specific fea-tures into the LLM’s representation space. Formally, visual features are projected to obtain visual embeddings EV =(eV 

> 1

, ..., e Vm) and audio features are projected to obtain au-dio embeddings EA = ( eA 

> 1

, ..., e Ak ) where eVi , e Ai ∈ Rdm .These are concatenated with Et to form the complete input sequence: 

E = [ EV , E A, E t] (6) In practice, audio and visual embeddings are often in-terleaved within the sequence. This architecture allows AVLLMs to process multimodal information within a uni-fied framework, leveraging the powerful reasoning capabil-ities of large language models to integrate and reason over audio-visual inputs. 

# 4. Experimental Setup 

Evaluation Task. We evaluate AVLLMs using the audio-visual captioning task with an input prompt: “describe what you see and hear”. This fundamental task directly probes a model’s ability to perceive and integrate information from both modalities. Alternative tasks such as multi-choice or binary question answering offer limited insight into under-lying reasoning processes, and their outputs can often be explained by superficial pattern matching rather than gen-uine reasoning [4, 5, 25]. In contrast, natural language cap-tions are directly interpretable: outputs are human-readable, allowing us to assess what information each modality con-tributes and identify specific failure modes. Later in our analysis we further probe modality-specific capabilities us-ing targeted instructions such as “describe what you see” and “describe what you hear” to isolate visual and audio reasoning independently. 

Evaluation Dataset. In natural videos, audio and visual content are highly correlated, making it difficult to deter-Figure 3. Caption evaluation. We use an open-source reason-ing LLM to evaluate audio-visual captions by assessing temporal sequences, object attributes, and cross-modal relationships. This approach is interpretable (explicit reasoning for scores) and flexi-ble, we can calibrate it using in-context examples. 

mine whether models genuinely process each modality in-dependently or rely predominantly on one to infer the other. Ideally, we would test scenarios where all audible sounds originate from out-of-view sources. While such cases oc-cur naturally, they are rare and difficult to scale for system-atic evaluation. Following prior work [14, 52] we instead construct counterfactuals by deliberately mismatching au-dio and visual content by swapping original audio track with an alternative. Such counterfactual samples have been used successfully to stress-test LLMs [26, 34, 43]. We source our samples from AudioCaps [29], a standard benchmark for audio captioning where videos are derived from YouTube and audio captions annotated by humans. In the end, we curate an evaluation set of 500 samples, with equal number of factual and counter-factual videos. We note that existing audio-visual benchmarks are insufficient for our analysis. For instance, benchmarks like DailyOmni [66] couple per-ception with reasoning, making it difficult to isolate percep-tual capabilities. Other perception based benchmarks like AVHBench [52] does not require genuine cross-modal rea-soning, as outputs can often be derived from a single modal-ity. (Refer to Supplementary A for more details). 

Evaluation Models. We primarily use Qwen2.5-Omni 3B [56] in our main experiments. We further validate the generalizability of our findings on additional models such as Qwen3-Omni [57], Video-LLaMA [63], and MiniCPM-o [24] (Refer to Supplementary D for additional results). 

Audio Visual Caption Evaluation. Evaluating generated captions requires measuring fidelity to ground-truth audio 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35   

> Transformer Layer
> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Attention Fraction (%)
> Video
> Audio
> Text
> Figure 4. Mean attention from generated to input tokens. Gen-erated tokens allocate high attention to audio in early layers (40-50% in layers 0-5), which drops to near-zero afterward. Video at-tention steadily increases through deeper layers, reaching 20-40% in layers 15-30.

and visual captions. Traditional metrics (BLEU [48], ME-TEOR [6], CIDEr [6], ROUGE [32]) fail to capture se-mantic variability, while embedding-based approaches like CLIP-score [20] behave as bag-of-words models [61], miss-ing compositional structure [28]. On the other hand, meth-ods for evaluating static image captions [27, 49] do not transfer to videos, which involve temporal dynamics, state changes, and audio-visual correspondence that cannot be evaluated using highly-engineered approaches. Prior work shows that LLMs can serve as effective judges for evaluating free-form text when given clear rubrics and references [10]. Building on this, we employ an LLM judge to evaluate caption fidelity by reasoning over ground-truth audio and visual captions (Fig. 3). We prompt the model to assess generated descriptions by giving a score between 0 and 1 for each modality separately. Before scor-ing, the judge first performs deep reasoning over specific details such objects, actions, temporal ordering, and audio events. We calibrate ratings using few-shot in-context ex-amples and request summarized reasoning alongside scores, resulting in interpretable fidelity measurements. We imple-ment this LLM-as-judge using Qwen3-32B [58]. Human study on this metric shows strong correlation with human judgements: Spearman ρ = 0 .816 for audio caption fidelity and Spearman ρ = 0 .732 for video caption fidelity. (Refer to Supplementary B for more details) 

# 5. Investigating Attention Pattern 

We observed severe degradation in audio understanding per-formance for counterfactual samples, suggesting that in nat-urally aligned videos, performance may be largely driven by vision. This raises a fundamental question: do AVLLMs attend to audio inputs at all, or do they effectively ignore au-dio representations during generation? To investigate this, we analyze attention patterns across transformer layers dur-Figure 5. Probing Audio Representations. We decode interme-diate layer audio representations using the base LLM’s unembed-ding matrix and observe that they decode into meaningful concepts describing sound events and their sources, in multiple languages (e.g., 键盘/keyboard, typing). 

ing audio-visual captioning. We prompt models to ”de-scribe what you see and hear” and track the average at-tention allocated by generated tokens to three input token types: video tokens, audio tokens, and query text tokens. We compute these patterns across all layers over our evalu-ation set and visualize the results in Figure 4. We observe three key patterns. First, query tokens dom-inate attention across all layers, capturing 60-100% despite comprising the fewest tokens. Second, audio tokens receive surprisingly high attention (40-50%) in early layers (0-5), but this attention drops to near-zero in subsequent layers. Third, video tokens show the opposite pattern, their atten-tion steadily increases through middle layers (15-30), reach-ing 20-40%. This creates a striking asymmetry in deeper layers, where vision receives substantial attention while au-dio is largely ignored. 

Key Takeaways: The high audio attention in early layers confirms that AVLLMs do attend to audio representations. However, this attention is concentrated in early layers (0-5) and drops to near-zero afterward. In contrast, vision re-ceives increasing attention in deeper layers (15-30). This reveals an asymmetry: audio is primarily attended to in the early layers, while vision dominates attention in the later layers. 

# 6. Probing Audio Representations 

While attention analysis confirms that AVLLMs attend to audio in early layers, it does not reveal whether these rep-resentations contain meaningful audio information. To in-vestigate this, we directly probe audio representations using logit lens (Fig. 5). This technique decodes hidden states at each audio token position using the model’s unembedding matrix WU , projecting them into probability distributions over the vocabulary. For each layer l, we extract the token with the highest logit at each audio token position i from the hidden state hli.We observe that these decoded tokens meaningfully cap-ture sound sources and event attributes present in the au-dio. These representations evolve primarily in the later layers, with meaningful audio information emerging in the last 5 layers. We observe that sound sources (e.g., ’drill’, ’engine’, ’horse’, ’keyboard’) are more consistently repre-sented, while actions (e.g., ’drilling’, ’typing’, ’neighing’) appear less consistently and sound attributes (e.g., ’light music’, ’rock music’) are rare. Interestingly, these sound related tokens often appear in multiple languages, such as 马 (horse), 键盘 (keyboard), and 门 (door). Consistent with [42], we note that this is surprising as prior work [21, 55] indicates that LVLMs pre-dominantly use English as the latent language in their inter-mediate representations. However, in our experiment, the base model (Qwen) is multilingual and pre-trained on sub-stantial Chinese data, and as a consequence, the learned au-dio representations map to concepts in multiple languages. These decoded tokens enable us to measure latent audio understanding. We extend our LLM-as-judge framework to evaluate whether decoded tokens capture reference au-dio events, providing a measure of recall using internal rep-resentations. Earlier, we observed Qwen2.5Omni achieves only 23% audio caption fidelity on counterfactual samples (compared to 60% on factual samples), suggesting models fail to understand audio when visual cues conflict. How-ever, we observe that Qwen2.5Omni achieves a latent au-dio understanding score of 61.4%. Moreover, we observe that even in cases where generated text completely omits the correct audio events, these events are present in internal rep-resentations. This gap between latent and manifested audio understanding suggests that the poor understanding does not stem from lack of meaningful representations rather a failure to incorporate them during the generation process. 

Key Takeaways: Probing representations of audio to-ken reveals that AVLLMs encode meaningful audio se-mantics internally (61.4% latent understanding), yet gen-erated captions achieve only 23% audio fidelity for coun-terfactual samples. This gap reveals that poor audio per-formance doesn’t stem from lack of meaningful represen-tations, but from a failure to integrate these during the generation process. 

# 7. Investigating Information Flow 

Our probing experiments reveal that meaningful audio rep-resentations are present in AVLLMs, but they do not con-sistently manifest in final generated text. To understand where audio information fails to propagate, we trace its flow through the network layers. In transformer-based models, attention mechanisms serve as the primary pathways for in-formation flow [17]. In AVLLMs, these pathways enable Figure 6. Blocking audio-visual information flow to generated tokens We block attention from generated tokens to vision (G ↛V) or audio (G ↛A) and measure impact on caption fidelity. 1) G ↛A for factual samples does not degrade video understanding A ⃝ as expected (ideally audio cues should not be used for video understanding) 2) surprisingly audio understanding B ⃝ does not degrade either, (AVLLM instead correlates audio cues from vision). On the contrary, G ↛V, especially in deeper layers, in counterfactual samples, improves audio understanding D ⃝ (misleading vision features dominate over audio in cross-modal integration to generated text) 

cross-modal interactions between audio, visual, and text representations. By analyzing these attention pathways, we can identify where audio information integrates into the out-put and where this integration fails. To trace information flow, we conduct causal mediation analysis using attention knockout. We block attention from source tokens to target tokens at different layers. If blocking this attention causes the output text to change, this indicates information from the source was influencing the generation. We apply this method to both audio and video tokens as sources, targeting text generation tokens. This allows us to identify where each modality integrates into the final output and potentially reveals whether one modality interferes with the other during cross-modal integration. Formally, we implement attention knockout by modi-fying the attention mask to prevent queries at target posi-tions from attending to keys and values at source positions. Let S denote the set of source token positions (tokens be-ing blocked from being attended to) and T denote the set of target token positions (tokens whose attention is being blocked). To prevent information flow from S to T at layer 

l and attention head j, we modify the attention mask by setting M (l,j ) 

> s,t

= −∞ for all s ∈ S and t ∈ T , which causes the softmax attention weights to become approxi-mately zero: 

M (l,j ) 

> s,t

=

(

−∞ if s ∈ S and t ∈ T

0 otherwise (7) We denote this intervention as T ↛ S, indicating that tokens at positions T cannot attend to tokens at positions S.For example, G ↛ A represents blocking generated text to-kens from attending to audio tokens, where S and T contain audio and generated text token positions respectively. 

Experimental Setup We block attention from generated text tokens to either audio or video tokens at different lay-ers. For each layer l, we apply the knockout over a window of 9 consecutive layers centered around l and measure the impact on the generated caption. To better isolate and study individual modalities, we use modality-specific prompts to measure video understanding (“describe what you see”) and audio understanding (“describe what you hear”). We evalu-ate on both factual (aligned audio-visual) and counterfactual (mismatched audio-visual) samples. 

7.1. Factual Audio-Visual Understanding 

Video Understanding Figure. 6A shows attention knock-out results for video understanding in the factual setting. As expected, blocking audio (G ↛A) produces no signifi-cant degradation as the model appropriately relies on visual information for visual tasks. Blocking video (G ↛V), we observe a moderate drop of ∼ 10% starting from middle layers (L15). However, this degradation is largely mitigated as the model compensates by leveraging audio information to describe the scenes, demonstrating audio-visual comple-mentarity in action. 

Audio Understanding Figure. 6B reveals more intriguing patterns. When we block audio pathways (G ↛A), perfor-mance drops by only ∼ 10% which is far less than expected for an audio-specific task. This indicates the model infers audio content from visual cues rather than directly using au-dio cues. More surprisingly, G ↛V also produces a ∼ 10% 

drop, contrasting with the video understanding case where blocking audio had no effect. This asymmetry suggests that vision influences audio processing even in naturally aligned settings, hinting at systematic visual dominance. Moreover, these results reveal strong audio-visual com-plementarity: each modality compensates when the other is blocked, making it difficult to isolate genuine modality-specific processing. This further motivates our counter-factual evaluation, where mismatched audio-visual content forces the model to rely on each modality independently. 

7.2. Counter-Factual Audio-Visual Understanding 

Video Understanding Figure 6C shows counterfactual video understanding results. In this setting, mismatched audio-visual content eliminates complementary information between modalities. As expected, blocking audio (G ↛A) produces no performance degradation, and audio does not mislead or interfere with visual information processing even when semantically unrelated. Blocking video (G ↛V), how-ever, reveals clear evidence of video integration patterns. Performance degrades gradually starting in middle layers (L15), with severe drops ( ∼ 40% ) in the final layers. With-out audio compensation available, these results confirm that cross-modal video information transfer begins in middle layers and concentrates heavily in deeper layers. 

Audio Understanding Figure 6D exposes the critical asymmetry in modality processing. Upon blocking au-dio (G ↛A), audio understanding degrades substantially-gradually in middle layers and severely in final layers (los-ing up to ∼ 50% relative performance). This confirms that audio information also transfers primarily in the deep-est layers of the network, mirroring the integration pat-tern observed for video. However, blocking video( G ↛V) produces a striking result: audio understanding actually improves, recovering approximately 50% relative perfor-mance in the final layers and approaching factual-setting levels. This demonstrates that vision actively interferes with audio processing in these deep integration layers and blocking visual pathways recovers the model’s latent audio understanding capabilities. We observe similar results on other models too which can be found in Supplementary D. 

Key Takeaways: Both audio and video integrate in deeper layers of the network. However, vision actively dominates audio in the final integration stage. Blocking visual pathways in these layers recovers the model’s la-tent audio understanding capabilities. 

# 8. Investigating Origins of Visual Bias 

Our attention knockout experiments demonstrate that vision representations dominate over audio during cross-modal in-formation flow and AVLLMs rely predominantly on visual information even when answering audio-related questions. In this section, we investigate the origin of this systematic vision bias. We investigate whether this visual bias could potentially originate from the training paradigm of AVLLMs. Cur-rent AVLLMs typically initialize from pretrained LVLM checkpoints and add audio adapters, or undergo instruction-tuning on datasets dominated by vision-language exam-ples, often the same datasets used to train the base LVLMs themselves. In both cases, the model inherits strong pri-ors toward visual information processing. To test whether AVLLMs retain LVLM-like behavior despite audio input, we compare their token distributions with base LVLMs. High similarity would indicate that alignment training failed to establish balanced multimodal processing, with audio contributing minimally to generation. 

Method. To test this hypothesis, we perform the token-distribution analysis proposed by [31]. Given an instruc-tion i = {i1, i 2, . . . }, we first generate a response r =

{r1, r 2, . . . } from the AVLLM using greedy decoding. For each token position t in the response, we define the con-text as xt = i+{r1, . . . , r t−1}—comprising the instruction and all previously generated tokens. We feed this context to both the AVLLM (with audio and visual input) and its base LVLM (with only visual input) to obtain their respective probability distributions over the vocabulary: PAVLLM and 

PLVLM .

Metrics. We measure two aspects of distributional similar-ity. First, (1) KL Divergence between PLVLM and PAVLLM 

which quantifies overall distribution similarity. Second, we compute Base Rank η: the rank η in PLVLM of the token selected by the AVLLM. We categorize tokens as unshifted (η = 1 ), marginal ( 1 < η ≤ 3), and shifted ( η > 3). As before, we use Qwen2.5Omni as the main AVLLM, and Qwen2.5VL as its base LVLM. We use the instruction ”Describe what you hear” to study its audio understanding. We analyze token distributions across all the samples in our evaluation set. Overall, we observe a low KL divergence of 0.4 between AVLLM and base LVLM distributions, in-dicating high similarity in output distributions despite the presence of audio information. Focusing on tokens describ-ing audio events, we find that the median base rank is just 1 and that 66.06% are unshifted ( η = 1 ), 19.30% are marginal (1 < η ≤ 3), and only 14.63% are shifted ( η > 3). This means that 85.36% of audio-related tokens generated by the AVLLM are predictable from the top three choices of the vision-only base model. This demonstrates that even when AVLLMs generate audio descriptions, they are largely pre-dictable from vision alone and audio contributes minimally to the final output. Figure 7A (left) illustrates this pattern with an exam-ple where the input video depicts a visible helicopter flying over a cityscape, but the audio contains only a crying baby and child speaking. When prompted to describe the audio, a young boy talking as a baby is yelling In  the video,  I hear the sound of a helicopter flying over a city scape .                      

> The helicopter is moving from left to right, and the city buildings
> are visible in the background. The sound of the helicopter is clear
> and distinct, and there is also some background noise that includes
> a child speaking and some music playing Instruction: Describe what you hear Instruction: Describe what you hear In the video, I hear a man speaking into a microphone while standing
> at a table . The table is adorned with a large bouquet of white
> flowers, abottle of champagne, and several wine glasses. The man is
> dressed in a white shirt and appears to be addressing an audience ... several motor vehicles accelerating

Figure 7. Illustration of AVLLM captions and comparison with LVLMs. We compare token distributions between Qwen2.5Omni and Qwen2.5VL, and measure shift ( η) in token distribution unshifted tokens ( η = 1 ), marginal tokens ( 1 < η ≤ 3), and shifted tokens ( η > 3)(Refer Sec 8). Left: The model strongly attends to visual cues and predicts “helicopter” sound event confidently asserting it’s ”clear and distinct.”. Notably, when the model correctly identifies “child speaking” from audio, those tokens shift in LVLM predictions, indicating geuine audio understanding. Right: the model hallucinates that it can ”hear a man speaking”. These outputs are largely unshifted compared to Qwen2.5VL demonstrating that the AVLLM’s predictions remain visually driven despite having access to audio. 

Qwen2.5Omni generates “hear the sound of a helicopter fly-ing” and describes it as “clear and distinct”, entirely hal-lucinating audio from visual cues. The tokens describing these sound events are unshifted ( η = 1 ), matching what the vision-only model Qwen2.5VL would predict. To further confirm this visual dependence, we aggregate attention this phrase allocates to input tokens (aggregated across middle and deeper layers) and find strong, localized attention on the helicopter, indicating that the model relies on visual priors to respond to audio queries. Notably, when Qwen2.5Omni does correctly identify the “child speaking”, those tokens shift away from Qwen2.5VL’s distribution, demonstrating that genuine audio processing produces shifted tokens while visually-driven predictions remain unshifted. Figure 7B (right) illustrates another example where Qwen2.5Omni hallucinates sound events based on visual cues. Interestingly, most of the predicted tokens are un-shifted when compared to Qwen2.5VL. Moreover, even when explicitly instructed to describe audio, the model starts describing visual content of the scene, such as the man and the table, despite it not being relevant to the sound, in-dicating a strong bias towards vision. Detailed qualitative analysis can be found in Supplementary C. 

Key Takeaways: Token distributions of AVLLMs re-sponses closely align with base LVLM responses, and AVLLMs show strong visual grounding to objects when describing sounds, even in counterfactual settings. These patterns suggest that AVLLMs develop strong vision pri-ors during training, potentially from LVLM initialization or vision-heavy instruction data. 

# 9. Conclusion, Limitations, and Future Work 

We presented the first mechanistic interpretability study of AVLLMs, using the task of audio-visual captioning. Our key finding is that audio understanding in frontier AVLLMs severely degrades in scenarios where audio and visual in-formation conflict. Our analysis reveals the presence of la-tent audio understanding in intermediate audio token rep-resentations. However, during cross-modal transfer to gen-erated text in deeper layers, vision representations signif-icantly dominate over audio representations. We demon-strate that, selectively blocking vision in these layers largely recovers audio understanding. We then show that the output token distribution of AVLLMs is very similar to their base LVLMs, suggesting that visual bias could potentially stem from vision-heavy data used during training. Through our findings, we demonstrate that while AVLLMs can see and hear, they systematically prefer vi-sual cues even for audio understanding. To address this, we first highlight the need to adopt counterfactual evaluation to stress-test AVLLMs, as naturally aligned audio-visual inputs can mask these biases. Second, AVLLM training must address modality imbalance through either balanced data mixtures or introducing counterfactual samples to pe-nalize visual shortcuts. Note that we limit our analysis to open-source AVLLMs and mainly focus on examining non-speech audio events. As future work, we aim to develop strategies for large-scale curation of counterfactual training data and strategies to regularize this modality bias within the transformer layers. References 

[1] Internomni: Extending internvl with audio modality, 2024. Accessed: 2025-11-12. 2, 14 [2] Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding inter-mediate layers using linear classifier probes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01644 , 2016. 3 [3] Rana AlShaikh, Norah Al-Malki, and Maida Almasre. The implementation of the cognitive theory of multimedia learn-ing in the design and evaluation of an ai educational video assistant utilising large language models. Heliyon , 10(3): e25361, 2024. 1 [4] Nishant Balepur and Rachel Rudinger. Is your large language model knowledgeable or a choices-only cheater? ArXiv ,abs/2407.01992, 2024. 3 [5] Nishant Balepur, Abhilasha Ravichander, and Rachel Rudinger. Artifacts or abduction: How do llms answer multiple-choice questions without the question? In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10308–10330, 2024. 3 [6] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with hu-man judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on in-trinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine trans-lation and/or summarization , pages 65–72, 2005. 4 [7] Gabriela Ben Melech Stan, Estelle Aflalo, Raanan Yehezkel Rohekar, Anahita Bhiwandiwalla, Shao-Yen Tseng, Matthew Lyle Olson, Yaniv Gurwicz, Chenfei Wu, Nan Duan, and Vasudev Lal. Lvlm-intrepret: An interpretability tool for large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8182–8187, 2024. 1, 2 [8] Florian Bordes, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Anurag Ajay, Alexander C. Li, Adrien Bardes, Suzanne Petryk, Oscar Ma˜ nas, Zhiqiu Lin, Anas Mahmoud, Bargav Jayaraman, Mark Ibrahim, Melissa Hall, Yunyang Xiong, Jonathan Lebensold, Candace Ross, Srihari Jayakumar, Chuan Guo, Diane Bouchacourt, Haider Al-Tahan, Karthik Padthe, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Megan Richards, Samuel Lavoie, Pietro Astolfi, Reyhane Askari Hemmat, Jun Chen, Kushal Tirumala, Rim Assouel, Mazda Moayeri, Ar-jang Talattof, Kamalika Chaudhuri, Zechun Liu, Xilun Chen, Quentin Garrido, Karen Ullrich, Aishwarya Agrawal, Kate Saenko, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Vikas Chandra. An introduc-tion to vision-language modeling, 2024. 2 [9] Davide Caffagni, Federico Cocchi, Luca Barsellotti, Nicholas Moratelli, Sara Sarto, Lorenzo Baraldi, Lorenzo Baraldi, Marcella Cornia, and Rita Cucchiara. The revo-lution of multimodal large language models: A survey. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 13590–13618, Bangkok, Thailand, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. 2 [10] David Chan, Suzanne Petryk, Joseph E Gonzalez, Trevor Darrell, and John Canny. Clair: Evaluating image captions with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12971 , 2023. 4 [11] Kai Chen, Yunhao Gou, Runhui Huang, Zhili Liu, Daxin Tan, Jing Xu, Chunwei Wang, Yi Zhu, Yihan Zeng, Kuo Yang, et al. Emova: Empowering language models to see, hear and speak with vivid emotions. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5455–5466, 2025. 1 [12] Lichang Chen, Hexiang Hu, Mingda Zhang, Yiwen Chen, Zifeng Wang, YANDONG LI, Pranav Shyam, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Boqing Gong. Om-nixr: Evaluating omni-modality language models on reason-ing across modalities. In The Thirteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2025. 1 [13] Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation mod-els and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 24185–24198, 2024. 2, 15 [14] Sanjoy Chowdhury, Sayan Nag, Subhrajyoti Dasgupta, Yaot-ing Wang, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Ruohan Gao, and Dinesh Manocha. Avtrustbench: Assessing and enhancing relia-bility and robustness in audio-visual llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02135 , 2025. 4 [15] Konstantinos Drossos, Samuel Lipping, and Tuomas Virta-nen. Clotho: An audio captioning dataset. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 736–740. IEEE, 2020. 12 [16] Jacob Dunefsky, Philippe Chlenski, and Neel Nanda. Transcoders find interpretable llm feature circuits. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 24375–24410. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 1 [17] Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathemati-cal framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread , 1(1):12, 2021. 2, 5 [18] Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value memories. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5484–5495, 2021. 2 [19] Wes Gurnee, Neel Nanda, Matthew Pauly, Katherine Harvey, Dmitrii Troitskii, and Dimitris Bertsimas. Finding neurons in a haystack: Case studies with sparse probing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01610 , 2023. 1 [20] Jack Hessel, Ari Holtzman, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation met-ric for image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2021 confer-ence on empirical methods in natural language processing ,pages 7514–7528, 2021. 4 [21] Musashi Hinck, Carolin Holtermann, Matthew Lyle Olson, Florian Schneider, Sungduk Yu, Anahita Bhiwandiwalla, Anne Lauscher, Shao-Yen Tseng, and Vasudev Lal. Why do LLaVA vision-language models reply to images in English? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 13402–13421, Miami, Florida, USA, 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. 5 [22] Noriaki Hirose, Catherine Glossop, Dhruv Shah, and Sergey Levine. Omnivla: An omni-modal vision-language-action model for robot navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19480 , 2025. 1 [23] Jack Hong, Shilin Yan, Jiayin Cai, Xiaolong Jiang, Yao Hu, and Weidi Xie. Worldsense: Evaluating real-world omni-modal understanding for multimodal llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04326 , 2025. 13 [24] Shengding Hu, Yuge Tu, Xu Han, Chaoqun He, Ganqu Cui, Xiang Long, Zhi Zheng, Yewei Fang, Yuxiang Huang, Weilin Zhao, et al. Minicpm: Unveiling the potential of small language models with scalable training strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06395 , 2024. 2, 4, 14 [25] Jinsheng Huang, Liang Chen, Taian Guo, Fu Zeng, Yusheng Zhao, Bohan Wu, Ye Yuan, Haozhe Zhao, Zhihui Guo, Yichi Zhang, Jingyang Yuan, Wei Ju, Luchen Liu, Tianyu Liu, Baobao Chang, and Ming Zhang. Mmevalpro: Calibrating multimodal benchmarks towards trustworthy and efficient evaluation. ArXiv , abs/2407.00468, 2024. 3 [26] Kang il Lee, Minbeom Kim, Seunghyun Yoon, Minsu Kim, Dongryeol Lee, Hyukhun Koh, and Kyomin Jung. Vlind-bench: Measuring language priors in large vision-language models. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. 4 [27] Omri Kaduri, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. What’s in the im-age? a deep-dive into the vision of vision language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion Conference , pages 14549–14558, 2025. 1, 2, 4 [28] Amita Kamath, Jack Hessel, and Kai-Wei Chang. Text encoders bottleneck compositionality in contrastive vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4933–4944, 2023. 4 [29] Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee, and Gunhee Kim. Audiocaps: Generating captions for audios in the wild. In NAACL-HLT , 2019. 4, 12 [30] Abhinav Kumar, Chenhao Tan, and Amit Sharma. Prob-ing classifiers are unreliable for concept removal and detec-tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:17994–18008, 2022. 3 [31] Bill Yuchen Lin, Abhilasha Ravichander, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, Melanie Sclar, Khyathi Chandu, Chandra Bhagavat-ula, and Yejin Choi. The unlocking spell on base llms: Re-thinking alignment via in-context learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . 7 [32] Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out , pages 74–81, 2004. 4 [33] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892–34916, 2023. 2 [34] Yi Liu, Lianzhe Huang, Shicheng Li, Sishuo Chen, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Xu Sun. Recall: A benchmark for llms robustness against external counterfac-tual knowledge. ArXiv , abs/2311.08147, 2023. 4 [35] Chenyang Lyu, Minghao Wu, Longyue Wang, Xinting Huang, Bingshuai Liu, Zefeng Du, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. Macaw-llm: Multi-modal language modeling with image, audio, video, and text integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09093 , 2023. 1 [36] Yujian Ma, Jinqiu Sang, and Ruizhe Li. Behind the scenes: Mechanistic interpretability of lora-adapted whis-per for speech emotion recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08454 , 2025. 1 [37] Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Be-linkov. Locating and editing factual associations in gpt. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 35:17359– 17372, 2022. 2 [38] Bertalan Mesk´ o. The impact of multimodal large language models on health care’s future. Journal of medical Internet research , 25:e52865, 2023. 1 [39] Aaron Mueller, Jannik Brinkmann, Millicent Li, Samuel Marks, Koyena Pal, Nikhil Prakash, Can Rager, Aruna Sankaranarayanan, Arnab Sen Sharma, Jiuding Sun, et al. The quest for the right mediator: A history, survey, and the-oretical grounding of causal interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01416 , 2024. 3 [40] J¨ org M¨ uller, Oliver Mitesser, H Martin Schaefer, Sebastian Seibold, Annika Busse, Peter Kriegel, Dominik Rabl, Rudy Gelis, Alejandro Arteaga, Juan Freile, et al. Soundscapes and deep learning enable tracking biodiversity recovery in tropical forests. Nature communications , 14(1):6191, 2023. 1[41] Neel Nanda, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Janos Kramar, and Rohin Shah. Fact finding: Attempting to reverse-engineer factual recall on the neuron level. In Alignment Forum ,page 6, 2023. 2 [42] Clement Neo, Luke Ong, Philip Torr, Mor Geva, David Krueger, and Fazl Barez. Towards interpreting visual in-formation processing in vision-language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations . 1, 2, 5 [43] Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Shrey Pandit, Senthil Purushwalkam, Austin Xu, Hailin Chen, Yifei Ming, Zixuan Ke, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xong, and Shafiq Joty. Sfr-rag: Towards contextually faithful llms. ArXiv , abs/2409.09916, 2024. 4 [44] Nostalgebraist. Interpreting gpt: The logit lens. 

https : / / www . alignmentforum . org / posts / AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting- gpt- the-logit-lens , 2020. Accessed: 2024-09-23. 3 [45] Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, et al. In-context learning and induction heads. CoRR , 2022. 2 [46] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. 12 [47] Nathan Paek, Yongyi Zang, Qihui Yang, and Randal Leis-tikow. Learning interpretable features in audio latent spaces via sparse autoencoders. In Mechanistic Interpretability Workshop at NeurIPS 2025 . 1 [48] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 311–318, 2002. 4 [49] Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. Object hallucination in image cap-tioning. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4035–4045, 2018. 4 [50] Yixuan Su, Tian Lan, Huayang Li, Jialu Xu, Yan Wang, and Deng Cai. Pandagpt: One model to instruction-follow them all. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16355 , 2023. 2 [51] Guangzhi Sun, Wenyi Yu, Changli Tang, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, Yuxuan Wang, and Chao Zhang. video-salmonn: Speech-enhanced audio-visual large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15704 , 2024. 1 [52] Kim Sung-Bin, Oh Hyun-Bin, JungMok Lee, Arda Senocak, Joon Son Chung, and Tae-Hyun Oh. Avhbench: A cross-modal hallucination benchmark for audio-visual large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18325 , 2024. 4, 13 [53] Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Simas Sakenis, Jason Huang, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. Causal mediation analysis for in-terpreting neural nlp: The case of gender bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12265 , 2020. 3 [54] Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations . 2 [55] Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. Do llamas work in English? on the latent language of multilingual transformers. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15366– 15394, Bangkok, Thailand, 2024. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. 5 [56] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, et al. Qwen2. 5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215 , 2025. 1, 2, 4, 14 [57] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Yongqi Wang, Dake Guo, He Wang, Linhan Ma, Pei Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Baosong Yang, Bin Zhang, Ziyang Ma, Xipin Wei, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Peng Wang, Mingkun Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Xingzhang Ren, Bo Zheng, Rui Men, Fan Zhou, Bowen Yu, Jianxin Yang, Le Yu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen3-omni technical report, 2025. 4 [58] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. 2, 4 [59] Chih-Kai Yang, Neo Ho, Yi-Jyun Lee, and Hung-yi Lee. Audiolens: A closer look at auditory attribute percep-tion of large audio-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05140 , 2025. 1, 2 [60] Yiqun Yao, Xiang Li, Xin Jiang, Xuezhi Fang, Naitong Yu, Aixin Sun, and Yequan Wang. Roboego system card: An omnimodal model with native full duplexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01934 , 2025. 1 [61] Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Pratyusha Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. When and why vision-language models behave like bags-of-words, and what to do about it? In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations . 4 [62] Fred Zhang and Neel Nanda. Towards best practices of ac-tivation patching in language models: Metrics and methods. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16042 , 2023. 1 [63] Hang Zhang, Xin Li, and Lidong Bing. Video-llama: An instruction-tuned audio-visual language model for video un-derstanding. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 543–553, 2023. 1, 2, 4, 14 [64] Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen3 em-bedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models, 2025. 13 [65] Zhi Zhang, Srishti Yadav, Fengze Han, and Ekaterina Shutova. Cross-modal information flow in multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 19781–19791, 2025. 2[66] Ziwei Zhou, Rui Wang, and Zuxuan Wu. Daily-omni: Towards audio-visual reasoning with temporal alignment across modalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17862 , 2025. 1, 4 Do Audio-Visual Large Language Models Really See and Hear? 

# Supplementary Material 

# Contents 

1. Introduction 12. Related Work 23. Preliminary 34. Experimental Setup 35. Investigating Attention Pattern 46. Probing Audio Representations 57. Investigating Information Flow 5

7.1. Factual Audio-Visual Understanding . . . . 67.2. Counter-Factual Audio-Visual Understanding 7

8. Investigating Origins of Visual Bias 79. Conclusion, Limitations, and Future Work 8A. Dataset 12 

A.1. Data Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 A.2. Counterfactual Sample Curation . . . . . . . 13 A.3. Existing Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

B. Evaluation 14 

B.1. Human Evaluation Study . . . . . . . . . . . 14 B.2. LLM Judge Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

C. Qualitative Analysis 14 D. Additional Results 14 

D.1. Probing Audio Representations . . . . . . . 14 D.2. Investigating Information Flow . . . . . . . 14 D.3. Investigating Origins of Visual Bias . . . . . 15 

# A. Dataset 

A.1. Data Source 

For audio-visual captioning, while video captioning datasets are abundant, it is challenging to find datasets with human-annotated audio captions. Audio captioning is ex-pensive and takes a lot of manual effort compared to visual captioning. We source our samples from AudioCaps [29], a standard benchmark for audio captioning derived from YouTube videos. Each clip is paired with human-written captions describing the sounds present, with 5 annotations per sample. AudioCaps has become a de facto standard for evaluating audio captioning alongside Clotho [15].     

> Figure 8. Factual Sample A video where the visual content and audio content are highly correlated. The audio events in a factual sample can potentially be inferred by using visual cues
> Figure 9. Counterfactual Sample A video where the visual con-tent and audio content are in conflict. The audio events cannot be inferred from visual cues

To obtain visual descriptions, we generate captions us-ing GPT-4.1 [46]. We manually review and correct these generated captions where necessary. However, we find that videos in AudioCaps tend to feature relatively simple vi-sual scenes, and GPT-4.1’s outputs are generally accurate Figure 10. World Sense Task An example task from World Sense. These tasks couple perception and reasoning. 

with minimal intervention required. Fig 8 depicts a sample with ground truth video and audio captions. 

A.2. Counterfactual Sample Curation 

To evaluate whether AVLLMs genuinely process audio in-dependently of vision, we construct counterfactual samples where audio content conflicts with visible objects. While such cases occur naturally ( e.g ., out-of-view sirens, back-ground conversations), they are rare and difficult to scale for systematic evaluation. We therefore create them synthetically. To construct a counterfactual sample, we take a video and pair it with an audio track that cannot plausibly be inferred from the vis-ible objects. Fig 9 depicts a counterfactual sample with ground truth video and audio captions. We use audio and video captions as a proxy for semantic content: by find-ing audio-video pairs with dissimilar captions, we ensure their soundscapes are likely incompatible with the visual scene. Specifically, we embed all audio captions and GPT-4 generated video captions using the Qwen3-Embedding-8B [64] model. For audio, we compute embeddings for all 5 ground-truth captions per sample and average them. We then compute the cosine similarity matrix between all audio–video caption pairs and apply the Hungarian match-ing algorithm to find one-to-one assignments that minimize similarity. This ensures paired audio and video samples are semantically dissimilar. Finally, we use FFmpeg to swap the original audio track of each video with its matched dissimilar audio. The com-plete procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1. From all gen-erated pairs, we select 250 samples with lowest cosine similarity ( ≈ 0.498), ensuring strong counterfactual mis-matches. This yields 250 factual samples (original audio-video pairs) and 250 counterfactual samples (mismatched pairs) for evaluation. 

A.3. Existing Benchmarks 

Existing audio-visual benchmarks are insufficient for our analysis. Benchmarks such as World Sense [23] (exam-

Algorithm 1 Counterfactual Dataset Construction 

Require: Videos V = {vi}, Audios A = {ai}, Captions 

C = {cij }, Encoder E

Ensure: Counterfactual pairs S 

> 1:

Step 1: Compute Semantic Embeddings  

> 2:

for i ← 1 to N do  

> 3:

eai ← 15

P5 

> j=1

E(cij ) ▷ Centroid of 5 audio captions  

> 4:

evi ← E(GPT-4.1 (vi)) ▷ Vision-only caption embedding  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Step 2: Global Assignment  

> 7:

M ∈ RN ×N ← CosineSimilarity matrix between {ea}

and {ev } 

> 8:

π ← HungarianMatching (M ) ▷ Optimal 1-to-1 mapping indices  

> 9:

Step 3: Filter and Construct  

> 10:

Scandidates ← { (A[π(i)] , V [i]) | i ∈ 1..N } 

> 11:

Sort Scandidates by similarity score Mi,π (i) 

> 12:

S ← Select 250 pairs from Scandidates with score ≈

0.498  

> 13:

return Synthesize videos for S (swap audio tracks)   

> Figure 11. AVHBench Task An example task from AVHBench. These tasks evaluate perception capabilities.

ple in Fig 10) couple perception with reasoning, requiring AVLLMs to first perceive audio-visual events and then ap-ply world knowledge to answer questions. Since we aim to isolate perceptual capabilities and identify modality biases, such reasoning-dependent tasks conflate multiple AVLLM capabilities. Other benchmarks like AVHBench [52] (example in Fig 11) focus on perception through targeted questions about specific audio or visual events, while the correspond-ing video or audio cues attempt to mislead the AVLLM and induce hallucinations. However, we observe that these misleading cues are not sufficiently adversarial. For in-stance, in AVHBench’s video-induced audio hallucination category, models achieve 75.6% accuracy with both modal-ities present. Removing the video component yields 73.0% accuracy, indicating that the visual modality fails to mislead the model. Such tasks do not create sufficient modality con-flict to stress-test whether models genuinely process and in-tegrate both modalities independently or exhibit bias toward one modality over the other. 

# B. Evaluation 

B.1. Human Evaluation Study 

To validate our LLM-as-a-judge approach, we conduct a hu-man evaluation study on 200 stratified samples (100 factual, 100 counterfactual). Two graduate students familiar with audio-visual content independently rate each generated cap-tion on a 0-1 scale for audio and visual fidelity separately. Annotators are briefly introduced to the same rubric used by the LLM judge and given the opportunity to clarify any am-biguities. Following the LLM judge setup, annotators eval-uate only the text captions (generated description, ground-truth audio captions, and ground-truth video captions) with-out access to the actual videos, ensuring scalability and con-sistency with the automated evaluation. We compute the correlation between human ratings and LLM judge scores using Spearman’s ρ, obtaining ρ = 0 .816 

for audio caption fidelity and ρ = 0 .732 for video caption fidelity, demonstrating strong alignment between the LLM judge and human judgment. 

B.2. LLM Judge Prompts 

We design prompts with in-context examples to calibrate LLM-as-judge rating with human judgement. Fig 13 de-tails the prompt used to measure audio caption fidelity and Fig 14 details the prompt used to measure video caption fi-delity. 

# C. Qualitative Analysis 

In this section, we include additional qualitative results (Fig 15 and Fig 16 of the existing AVLLMs in different sce-narios, such as counterfactual samples and under the effect of attention knockouts. 

# D. Additional Results 

To demonstrate the generalizability of our findings beyond Qwen-Omni [56] series of AVLLMs, we extend our analy-sis to other representative AVLLMs, specifically MiniCPM-o2.6 [24], VideoLLaMA 2.1 [63], and InternOmni [1]. 

D.1. Probing Audio Representations 

We probe the intermediate audio representations of MiniCPM-o2.6 and VideoLLaMA 2.1 to verify if the ”com-petence gap”, where latent audio information exists but fails to manifest in generation is generalizable to more AVLLMs. Consistent with our main results, we observe a significant difference between latent capabilities and generated out-put. For MiniCPM-o2.6, in counterfactual samples we mea-sure a latent audio recall of 75.4 % compared to a gener-ated caption fidelity of 22.1 %. Similarly, VideoLLaMA 2.1 achieves a latent recall of 59.9 % against a generated fidelity of 34.1 %. Qualitatively, we observe that the decoded audio to-kens in these models accurately describe sound events (e.g., ”siren”, ”barking”). However, unlike Qwen2.5-Omni, we do not observe multilingual token representations in the in-termediate layers of MiniCPM-o2.6 or VideoLLaMA 2.1. This suggests that the multilingual audio representations observed in Qwen are likely specific to the model’s train-ing data. 

D.2. Investigating Information Flow 

We replicate the attention knockout experiments on MiniCPM-o2.6 and VideoLLaMA 2.1 to trace the cross-modal information flow. The results are visualized in Fig-ure 12b and Figure 12a. We observe integration patterns very similar to those reported in the main paper: both au-dio and visual information are processed primarily in the deeper transformer layers. Crucially, we confirm the phe-nomenon of visual interference: blocking the visual path-ways ( G ↛ V ) in these deep layers results in a recovery of audio understanding performance, further validating that visual representations actively interfere with audio cues dur-ing the final stages of generation. 

VideoLlama 2.1 : Figure 12a shows the results of atten-tion knockout experiments for VideoLlama 2.1. In video understanding for factual samples, we observe that block-ing audio has no observable impact. However, blocking video does have minor impact, which is largely recovered by compensating using audio cues. We see a similar trend with audio understanding in factual samples. In video un-derstanding for counterfactual samples, we observe almost complete loss of video understanding upon blocking video. For audio understanding in counter-factual, blocking video in fact drastically improves audio understanding. 

MiniCPM-o2.6 : Figure 12b shows the results of attention knockout experiments for MiniCPM-o2.6. In video under-standing for factual samples, we observe a similar pattern as before. Interestingly, even in factual samples, blocking video leads to improvement in audio understanding perfor-mance. Surprisingly, the drop in video understanding per-formance in counterfactual suggests that cross-modal trans-fer might not be restricted in deeper layers and the window for this transfer stretches beyond the window size of 9 that we use for knockouts. We observe a similar pattern in au-dio understanding for counterfactual scenarios, where audio understanding does improve, but not as drastically as in pre-vious models. D.3. Investigating Origins of Visual Bias 

Finally, we investigate the origin of this visual bias by an-alyzing InternOmni and its base model, InternVL [13]. In-ternOmni is particularly relevant for this analysis as it is ex-plicitly initialized from the InternVL checkpoint. We com-pare the output token distributions of InternOmni (given audio-visual input) against InternVL (given vision-only in-put) using the metrics defined in Section 8. We observe a low KL divergence of 0.46 between the distributions. Furthermore, regarding audio-related tokens, we find that 70.62 % are unshifted ( η = 1 ) and only 10.07 %are shifted ( η > 3). This strong alignment indicates that In-ternOmni’s generation remains dominated by the priors of its vision-language base model. These findings reinforce our conclusion that the modality imbalance in AVLLMs could potentially be an inherited trait from the initialization and alignment phases. VVVAAAQQGVideo Caption Fidelity Baseline Layer Layer Layer Layer Factual Counter Factual VVVAAAQQGVVVAAAQQGGVGA(Generated to Video) (Generated to Audio) Video Caption Fidelity Audio Caption Fidelity Audio Caption Fidelity ABCD(a) VideoLlama 2.1: Blocking audio-visual information flow, for both factual and counterfactual samples 

(b) MiniCPM-o2.6: Blocking audio-visual information flow, for both factual and counterfactual samples 

Figure 12. Comparison of Information Flow Blocking. Blocking audio-visual information flow, for both factual and counterfactual samples in VideoLlama 2.1 (top) versus MiniCPM-o2.6 (bottom). Figure 13. The prompt used to measure audio caption fidelity. Figure 14. The prompt used to measure video caption fidelity. Figure 15. Qualitative examples . We illustrate some outputs generated by VideoLlama along with its LLM-judge score and reasoning, for factual and counterfactal samples and under attention knockout. The examples in the first row capture audio fidelity and the ones below capture video fidelity Figure 16. Qualitative examples . We illustrate some outputs generated by MiniCPM-2.6-o along with its LLM-judge score and reasoning, for factual and counterfactal samples and under attention knockout. The examples in the first row capture audio fidelity and the ones below capture video fidelity