Title: Grounding Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models Through Explicit Language-Action Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05614v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:47:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Grounding Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models Through Explicit Language-Action Alignment 

## Theodor Wulff * Federico Tavella Rahul Singh Maharjan Manith Adikari Angelo Cangelosi The University of Manchester Manchester, United Kingdom 

## Abstract 

Achieving robot transparency is a critical step toward ef-fective human-robot collaboration. To be transparent, a robot’s natural language communication must be consistent with its actions and explicitly grounded in the task and en-vironment. Existing hierarchical Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models can generate language (e.g., through chain-of-thought) and low-level actions. However, current work does not consider explicit alignment between these modali-ties during training. To address this crucial gap, we propose a novel training framework that explicitly grounds hierar-chical VLA sub-task descriptions with respect to the visual observation and action space. Our framework uses a con-trastive model to assess the alignment between generated language and corresponding action trajectories. This con-trastive model enables direct ranking of different language-trajectory pairs based on their alignment, allowing us to refine the grounding of our hierarchical VLA through of-fline preference learning. We apply our framework to the LanguageTable dataset, a benchmark dataset of human language-annotated trajectories, and provide critical in-sights into multimodal grounding representations, all while establishing a strong baseline that achieves performance comparable to fully supervised fine-tuning and minimizing the need for costly data annotations. 

> *

Corresponding author: theodor.wulff@manchester.ac.uk © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permis-sion from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any cur-rent or future media, including reprinting/republishing this mate-rial for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collec-tive works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

## 1. Introduction 

Humans use natural language to express thoughts, observa-tions, and actions, enabling us to collaborate across unseen scenarios and environments. During human-robot collabo-ration, humans expect robot behavior to be explained, like how humans provide explanations to other humans, offering brief explanations on why it failed and its behavior [16]. Thus, embodied AI systems need to be equipped with ex-pressive communication abilities to pave the way for ef-fective human-robot collaboration. The central challenge lies in ensuring that a robotic agent’s communication is not only coherent in language, but also faithfully grounded in its visual perception and behavior. Specifically, this re-quires solving the problem of symbol grounding [17]. In the context of robotics, grounding describes the ability to relate textual descriptions and visual features to spatial ob-ject relations and actions in the real world [19]. Robotic research is one of many disciplines that is be-ing boosted by the rise of Large Language models (LLM) and Vision-Language models (VLM), affecting robotic tasks like plan generation or control policies for robot ac-tions [27]. Current work leverages the effective process-ing capabilities of VLMs used in Vision-Language-Action models (VLA) for generative tasks that produce diverse out-puts such as text, images, or continuous actions. VLAs benefit from the generalizability of the VLM across a di-verse distribution of language and image inputs. In most cases, their task is to produce actions either by generating discrete tokens as if they represented word tokens [22] or by utilizing specific decoder heads for continuous action gen-eration [6, 7, 38]. However, VLAs leverage powerful VLM backbones, providing an untapped capacity for rich, high-quality language output. Prompting LLMs and VLMs to think step-by-step, com-monly referred to as chain-of-thought prompting [54], has led to improved results in commonsense, arithmetic and symbolic reasoning capabilities. Alongside performance 

> arXiv:2604.05614v1 [cs.RO] 7 Apr 2026

gains, this technique also benefits the human prompting the model, who often can follow the reasoning leading to an answer more easily [54, 60]. Similarly, hierarchical VLAs [4, 8, 45] take a high-level task as input and pro-duce an executable subtask as intermediate output, much like chain-of-thought prompting in LLMs. This intermedi-ate sub-task output provides model transparency, by seman-tic grounding and expression in natural language. However, both the generated sub-steps and the final result carry no certainty of being error-free [52]. Consequently, this in-troduces an additional layer of generation noise in hierar-chical models, since the final output now depends on self-generated, decoupled intermediate outputs [45]. This in-termediate sub-task output provides model transparency, by semantic grounding and expression in natural language; at the cost of the additional problem of learning to align the language and action modalities [43]. Learning objectives of current state-of-the-art VLAs are mainly concerned with the success rate of the model in a given task or the ability to generalize well to a large quantity of expert trajectories across embodiments. However, pure success rates fail to reveal how grounded the intermediate outputs are with respect to the actions and visual observa-tion. One can only assume that the agent understood the instruction, but an evaluation metric that discloses possible misunderstanding is missing. To address this, we propose to train an action-conditioned grounding model on human-annotated language-action-vision data through contrastive learning to explicitly evaluate the grounding of language with respect to actions and visual observations. We test this approach in a benchmark task for VLAs, where a robot, provided with a high-level task description, must generate both sub-task descriptions and physical pushing actions to arrange objects. Inspired by recent work that uses learned rewards for preference optimization [59], we propose a novel framework, called GPLA, for Grounded Preference-based 

Language-action Alignment, to improve the grounding and transparency of hierarchical VLAs. To circumvent the ex-pensive annotation of intermediate outputs, our approach first trains a contrastive model to generate an explicit grounding score based on the alignment between generated natural language sub-goals, visual observations, and subse-quent actions. We then use this learned score to generate preference pairs (i.e., more grounded vs. less grounded out-puts) and employ preference-based fine-tuning to align the VLA towards producing more semantically correct interme-diate steps. We demonstrate our framework on the Lan-guageTable manipulation benchmark [25], providing crit-ical insights into the quality and limitations of language grounding representations within hierarchical VLAs. To summarize, our contributions are the following: • We propose GPLA, a novel framework that uses pref-erence learning to directly ground the intermediate lan-guage outputs of hierarchical VLAs with visual observa-tions and actions, potentially eliminating the need for ex-pensive annotation collection of intermediate outputs. • GPLA achieves comparable performance with respect to the generated trajectories on the LanguageTable manip-ulation benchmark [25] to fully supervised fine-tuning, while uniquely offering applicability to low-data regimes. • Visual analysis of the embedding space shows that pre-trained self-supervised models can be used to generate an explicit grounding score. However, they show clear dis-tinctions between the visual observations and language inputs; our action-conditioned grounding model improves this separation by mapping action-vision and text inputs into overlapping embedding space. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Vision-Language-Action Models 

Foundation models are trained on large-scale data and have achieved outstanding performances across tasks in natu-ral language processing, computer vision, and other do-mains [1]. The same paradigms have started to achieve gen-eralizable results in the field of robotics, where huge collec-tions of data [37] enabled the training of foundation mod-els for action prediction [4, 6–9, 22, 30, 61]. These mod-els are known as Vision-Language-Action models (VLA) and generate robot actions given a visual observation and a language instruction. Promising approaches to use the Vision-Language Model backbone to generate actions vary between discrete action token generation [22, 61] or using a specific decoder head to produce continuous action vectors using a learned linear mapping or a diffusion head [4, 6– 9, 30]. Most of these models utilize a Large Language model to process the visual and text-based inputs. How-ever, many VLAs make little use of the full vocabulary of these models, since the relevant output only exists in the action domain. Other works use hierarchical architecture to produce language to verbally respond using a VLM and create a plan, which is then passed to another VLA [45] or dedicated decoder [4] for policy execution. We identify two shortcomings in the current literature: first, these works rely on separately trained modules with-out a dedicated mechanism to further align the respective outputs; second, evaluation does not consider the quality of the intermediate outputs. 

2.2. Contrastive Representation Learning 

As a form of self-supervised representation learning, con-trastive learning [2] aims to extract information-rich embed-dings from various input domains. This is achieved by map-ping inputs into a latent embedding space such that the dis-tance between similar (positive) pairs is minimized and the LLM Backbone 

Regular VLA 

> Vision Backbone
> Action Decoder

Hierarchical VLA 

> Low-level VLA VLM
> High-level Instruction Instruction

Grounded Preference-based Language-Action Alignment     

> Hierarchical VLA
> Action Language
> Sample N Output Pairs
> Grounding Model
> Alignment Score
> Action Language
> Action Language
> Select Chosen and Rejected Output Pairs Rank Output Pairs
> Update VLA with Preference Data
> High-Level VLM
> Low-level Instruction
> Action Observation Observation
> Action

GPLA Loop Figure 1. Method Overview. We extend a regular VLA (left) into a hierarchical VLA by adding a high-level VLM module to break a high-level instruction down into executable low-level instructions (center), following recent trends on hierarchical VLAs [4, 45]. To align the intermediate low-level instruction and the generated trajectory, we invoke a separately trained ranking model, which ranks N sampled output pairs based on their grounding in the environment. Based on these scores, we select the chosen and rejected output pairs that serve as preference data to update our transparent VLA and increase the alignment of the multimodal outputs. 

distance between dissimilar (negative) pairs is maximized. Contrastive learning has been effective in extracting general representations for various downstream tasks like classifica-tion or object detection [10, 18, 41, 47, 51, 57]. In Robotics, contrastive representation learning is lever-aged to learn generalizable reward functions by establishing a similarity metric: approaches learn representations where latent similarities increase as an agent progresses towards the goal state. The learned similarity scores between ob-servations can then be used to reward an agent in a rein-forcement learning scenario [5, 14, 26, 28, 29, 34, 44, 47]. The strength in contrastive representation learning lies in the ability to learn semantic similarities between modalities as long as positive and negative pairs are available. Besides rewarding task progression, such a reward model can also be used for specific evaluation of aspects like groundedness of the output [15]. To the best of our knowledge, there has not been an application of incorporating a grounding score into the training of hierarchical VLAs. 

2.3. Preference Learning 

Learning from preferences is a key component in reinforce-ment learning from human feedback (RLHF), a method effectively applied to train modern Large Language Mod-els [35, 36]. The original RLHF method [12] involves the explicit training of a reward model that learns the latent rewards of human preference distributions given a human-annotated dataset of chosen/rejected model outputs. Further efforts were made to remove the explicitly trained reward model and train the generative model directly on prefer-ence data [13, 31, 42]. Applications in robotics use prefer-ence learning to learn from teacher models or human prefer-ences [20, 23, 32], rank trajectories based on different costs to extract preferences from a set of trajectories [53, 59], or by learning a reward function by ranking video frames based on their time step [56]. Preference learning has been shown to be effective in improving generative output in settings where quantifying model outputs is difficult [12, 49]. We propose learning from ranked trajectories alongside transparent statements with respect to their quality, grounding in the environment, and language action alignment. 

## 3. Problem Formulation 

We define the problem of combined language action gener-ation in line with previous work [55] by extending language conditioned behavior cloning (LCBC) [33, 48]. LCBC can be defined as an imitation learning approach where an agent is conditioned to predict the subsequent action given an ob-servation of the environment and task description in natural language [48]. The output is learned in a supervised man-ner, with expert action labels serving as ground truth. We extend this problem by considering additional lan-guage output and putting constraints on the high-level task description. The high-level task description must be de-composable into multiple natural language sub-tasks. The overarching goal is to train a model that produces: 1) The subsequent action (the standard LCBC output) and 2) the current sub-task description a short-term, natural language Algorithm 1 GPLA Grounded Preference-based Language-Action Alignment 

Require: Hierarchical VLA πθ with high-level VLM πVLM , dataset D = {(xi, o i)}, grounding model πg , batch size B,sampling limit NS , iteration limit NI

Ensure: Hierarchical VLA π∗ with improved action-language grounding  

> 1:

i = 0  

> 2:

while i ≤ NI do  

> 3:

Sample B instruction-observation pairs (x, o ) from D 

> 4:

for Each sample (x, o ) do  

> 5:

Generate NS language-action candidates {yj }Nj=1 using πθ (x, o ) 

> 6:

Compute grounding scores gj = πg (x, o, y j ) for each yj 

> 7:

Select yc = arg max j gj and yr = arg min j gj as chosen/rejected pair  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Update πVLM using SimPO loss on batch of (yc, y r ) 

> 10:

i += 1  

> 11:

end while 

summary of the current action). Current hierarchical VLAs already provide the outputs required by this definition, since they often use a backbone VLM to break a high-level task down into an executable sub-task before generating the next action [4, 45]. Current VLA action and language outputs are usually learned sep-arately and lack explicit alignment; our framework estab-lishes this explicit, grounded connection during training. 

## 4. Methodology 

GPLA requires a hierarchical VLA ( πθ ) and a grounding model ( πg ). We construct the hierarchical VLA by inte-grating a pre-trained Gemma3 VLM, which decomposes high-level instructions, with a pre-trained VLA that gener-ates executable action trajectories from the resulting low-level instructions (see Section 4.2). Separately, we prepare a grounding model, which learns a shared embedding space across the vision, action, and language modalities, to assess the language-action outputs with respect to their ground-ing in the visual environment (see Section 4.4). Once the VLA and the grounding model are established, we proceed with grounded preference alignment by sampling multiple outputs from πθ , ranking them based on the πg scores, and aligning the VLA towards the highest-ranking outputs (see Section 4.3). The GPLA training loop, based on Zhang et al. [59], is described in Algorithm 1. 

4.1. Dataset 

We use the LanguageTable benchmark suite [25] for its clear annotation into hierarchical steps to complete a given high-level task. An episode in the dataset displays a Franka Research Robot arm 1 pushing blocks into position until the abstract high-level goal like ”put all the blocks in a verti-cal line” is reached. Segments of the episode are associ-

> 1https://franka.de/franka-research-3

ated with a natural language description, describing what the robot’s current action is. These captions, like ”move the green circle near to the green star”, directly represent how a human would break the high-level goal down into shorter executable low-level tasks. As such, we use the captions as the target low-level instructions. Regarding video and action data, a single frame of the dataset is taken from an angled top-down perspective, while actions are represented as a series of 2D-coordinates following the pointer at the end of the robot’s arm. During preprocessing, idle actions are removed by requiring the joint coordinate transposition in a given sample to surpass a certain threshold. We empir-ically found a threshold of 0.1 in any action dimension to be effective in removing idle actions while keeping relevant actions. When training our models, we apply data augmen-tation, including stochastic brightness/contrast adjustments, mild cropping, scaling on the frames, and Gaussian noise on the actions, ensuring transformations preserved task seman-tics (e.g., no left/right mirroring). 

4.2. Vision-Language-Action Model 

At their core, Vision-Language-Action models consist of a Vision-Language model backbone and a detokenization mechanism to map the vision-language output to executable policy actions. Prior work found it useful to break complex 

high-level instructions down into simpler subgoals, which we will refer to as low-level instructions , before passing them to the VLA. This can be done by using the same model which was co-trained on low-level instruction gen-eration [4, 8] or by using a separate high-level module [45]. 

Model Architecture. To create our hierarchical VLA, we fine-tune a pre-trained Vision-Language-Action model and a pre-trained Vision-Language model. In the context of our hierarchical model, we will refer to the fine-tuned VLA as the low-level VLA and the fine-tuned VLM as the high-level VLM . We choose a small Gemma3 2 [21] VLM as our high-level VLM, which breaks the high-level instruc-tion down into low-level instructions. We fine-tune the model to predict the low-level instructions provided by the LanguageTable dataset [25] from the high-level instruction. During fine-tuning, the weights of the Gemma3 vision en-coder are frozen. For the low-level VLA, we independently fine-tune SmolVLA [46] on the ground-truth low-level instructions from the LanguageTable dataset for action generation. Dur-ing training, the low-level VLA learns to generate an 8-step trajectory conditioned on the image observation, end-effector state, high-level instruction, and ground-truth low-level instruction. At inference time, the ground-truth low-level instruction is replaced with the generated instruction of the high-level VLM. 

4.3. Grounded Preference-based Language-Action Alignment 

After fine-tuning the VLA on generating low-level task descriptions alongside the trajectories, we iteratively im-prove the model using a preference-learning-based train-ing scheme, similar to the one used by GRAPE [59]. First, we collect N different options for language-action pairs by prompting the model N times, given the same observation and instruction. We score the options with the ground-ing model and choose the option with the highest score as the preferred option and the one with the lowest as the re-jected option. Using these chosen/rejected preference pairs, we further train our model using SimPO [31]. We chose SimPO over DPO [42] as our training paradigm because SimPO does not rely on a reference model, which reduces the memory and computational requirements of our exper-iments while exhibiting similar performance. The SimPO loss for a single sample is defined as: 

LSimPO (x, y w, y l) = − log σ r(x, y c) − r(x, y r ) − γSimPO 



(1) 

r(x, y ) = βSimPO 

|y| log πg (y|x) (2) With yc and yr as the highest and lowest scoring model out-puts based on the grounding score assignments, σ is the sig-moid function βSimPO and γSimPO are tunable hyperparame-ters, and r(x, y ) represents the reward score of a response y

given a prompt x. Using the SimPO loss, we directly update the high-level VLM of the hierarchical VLA. 

4.4. Action-Conditioned Grounding Model 

Hierarchical VLAs are typically trained with independent objectives for language and action outputs, leading to weak 

> 2Specifically Gemma-3-4B-IT

cross-modal alignment. Evaluation mainly considers task success rates, ignoring the correctness of sub-steps. How-ever, ensuring a hierarchical VLA’s language output is grounded and aligned with the action space is challenging, as there is no established metric for quantifying this align-ment. Established contrastive models like SigLIP [51, 57] or CLIP [41] can be used to score semantic alignment be-tween vision and language modalities but don’t incorporate an action modality. Therefore, we separately train a ground-ing model to map vision-action pairs and language into a shared, aligned embedding space. 

Model Architecture. We train the action-conditioned grounding model to associate text descriptions with vision-action inputs. Its architecture is depicted in Figure 2. Two separate encoder pipelines transform the inputs into a joint embedding space and align the latent representations using a symmetric InfoNCE loss function, as in CLIP [41]. The vision and text encoders are initialized from a pre-trained SigLIP 2 model 3 [51] and kept frozen during training. We follow each pre-trained encoder up with a projection layer to further reduce the dimensionality of the pooled feature outputs. The action encoder is a small transformer network. We condition the projected vision features from the SigLIP 2 vision encoder on the embedded actions through a series of FiLM layers [40] that allow the visual features to be dy-namically modulated based on the action context. Finally, the loss is calculated on the embedded action-vision and language representations. The goal is to ensure that cor-rectly aligned vision-action and text inputs yield closely-matched embeddings. 

Objective Function. We use the symmetric InfoNCE loss as in CLIP [41] as the objective function to align the vision-action embedding EVA with the text embedding ET. Before calculating the loss, we normalize the embeddings and refer to the normalized embeddings as VA and T. The loss is defined as: 

LVA →T = −

> N

X

> i=1

log exp( sim (VA i, Ti)/τ )

PNk=1 exp( sim (VA i, Tk)/τ ) (3) 

LT→VA = −

> N

X

> j=1

log exp( sim (VA j , Tj )/τ )

PNk=1 exp( sim (VA k, Tj )/τ ) (4) 

LC = 12 (LVA →T + LT→VA ) (5) In equations 3, τ is a learned temperature parameter that scales the logits before the softmax and sim is the cosine similarity function. Additionally, to prevent the model from collapsing all embeddings into a single representation and instead encour-age learning separable embeddings, we additionally intro-

> 3Specifically, we use SigLIP 2 ViT B/16.

duce a diversity regularization term Ldiv , which we add to the contrastive loss: 

Ldiv = 1

N (N − 1) 

X

> i̸=j

 max(0 , S ij 

> VA

) + max(0 , S ij  

> T

) (6) 

L = LC + γdiv Ldiv (7) where S = EE T is the cosine similarity matrix for the re-spective embeddings. The hyperparameter γdiv controls the influence of the regularization term. Intuitively, the diver-sity regularization term encourages the model to have low similarity values along the off-diagonal elements of the sim-ilarity matrix. Action Trajectory    

> Visual Observation
> Action Encoder
> SigLIP 2 Vision Encoder
> Action-Conditioning FiLM layer
> Low-level Instruction
> SigLIP 2 Text Encoder
> Contrastive Loss
> Projector
> Projector
> Figure 2. Action-Conditioned Grounding Model. We extend a pre-trained SigLIP 2 by conditioning the visual features of the SigLIP 2 Vision Encoder on the encoded trajectories. Using a contrastive loss, we align the vision-action pairs with the low-level instructions.

## 5. Experimental Setup 

We train all our models on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. The hierarchical VLA is trained to generate actions with a horizon of 8; the grounding model learns to associate tra-jectories (horizon of 8) and visual inputs with low-level in-structions. Training times differ between approaches: To establish the baseline hierarchical VLA, the supervised fine-tuning of the high-level VLM takes 1,500 steps with a learn-ing rate of 10 −5, the AdamW Optimizer and no scheduler; the low-level VLA is trained for 15,000 steps also using a fixed learning rate of 10 −5 and the AdamW optimizer with-out scheduling. Both operate on batches of size of 64. We then apply our framework on the established baseline hier-archical VLA for an additional 100 steps, with a learning rate of 10 −7. The grounding model is trained for 50,000 steps with a fixed learning rate of 10 −4 and a larger effec-tive batch size of 256 after accumulating batches of size 64 for 4 forward-passes. 

## 6. Results 

We investigate the effectiveness of GPLA on the capabil-ity to follow instructions on episodes of the LanguageTable dataset that were withheld during training. We analyze the model’s ability to improve grounding its high-level state-ments to the low-level actions by investigating the state-ment correctness using text-based metrics, like BLEU [39], ROUGE 4 [24], METEOR [3], and BERTScore [58]. We report instruction following capabilities based on the devia-tions from the ground truth trajectories, given as MAE [50], MSE [50], and cosine similarity [50]. The detailed quanti-tative results are summarized in Table 1. 

6.1. Low-level Instruction Generation 

We investigate the impact of the novel GPLA framework on the low-level instruction generation within our hierarchical VLA. While the quantitative results in Figure 3 show a de-crease in token-overlap metrics (BLEU, ROUGE, and ME-TEOR) compared to purely supervised training, this shift is achieved without requiring any additional low-level ground-truth data. Critically, the semantic score (BERTScore) remains stable, suggesting that the model keeps generat-ing semantically coherent outputs which are not necessary captured by token-based measures. Based on the notion that supervised learning remains a crucial component of the training recipe, we incorporate the GPLA objective as a weighted regularization term with a weight of 0.1 into the standard language modeling loss. This change yields mixed results compared to pure supervision or preference-based grounding. Except for the BLEU metrics, ROGUE, BERTScore, and METEOR score display slight increases. Using SigLIP 2 as a grounding model fares better than CLIP and our action-conditioned grounding model, and compares to using the GPLA with the action-conditioned grounding model as a regularization term. The qualitative examples in Table 2 provide crucial context for interpreting the token-based metrics (e.g., BLEU, ROUGE, and METEOR). While these metrics yield comparatively low values due to limited word-overlap with the low-level ground-truth instructions, all three models consistently produce generally compelling-sounding instructions. A detailed analysis highlights that object relations are a strong pathway for generating subse-quent commands. In fact, four out of the twelve analyzed examples featured a movement associated with the relative position of at least one other block. Moreover, the models successfully identified and targeted objects, including shape 

> 4Specifically, ROUGE-1 F 1-measure.

Table 1. Comparison of model variants on the language- and trajectory-based metrics. 

Model BLEU ↑ ROUGE ↑ METEOR ↑ BERTScore ↑ MSE ↓ MAE ↓ CosSim ↓

Low-Level Only N/A N/A N/A N/A 0.043 ± 0.02 0.158 ± 0.04 -0.029 ± 0.22 Supervised 0.111 ± 0.05 0.405 ± 0.12 0.313 ± 0.12 0.984 ± 0.00 0.046 ± 0.02 0.164 ± 0.04 -0.044 ± 0.23 GPLA (CLIP) 0.062 ± 0.04 0.298 ± 0.12 0.217 ± 0.12 0.976 ± 0.00 0.045 ± 0.02 0.164 ± 0.04 -0.036 ± 0.22 GPLA (SigLIP 2) 0.066 ± 0.06 0.307 ± 0.13 0.227 ± 0.12 0.976 ± 0.00 0.045 ± 0.02 0.163 ± 0.04 -0.035 ± 0.22 GPLA (Action-Conditioned) 0.063 ± 0.05 0.300 ± 0.12 0.218 ± 0.12 0.980 ± 0.00 0.045 ± 0.02 0.163 ± 0.04 -0.035 ± 0.22 Supervised + GPLA (Action-Conditioned) 0.051 ± 0.05 0.308 ± 0.12 0.226 ± 0.12 0.980 ± 0.00 0.046 ± 0.02 0.163 ± 0.04 -0.042 ± 0.23 

Table 2. Qualitative Examples on the LanguageTable Dataset [25]. 

High-level Instructions make a ”parallelogram” shape out of all the blocks put all the blocks in the bottom left corner put all the blocks in the center left put all the blocks in a horizontal line on the bottom of the board Low-level Instructions (GT) move the green star diagonal to the hexagon move the blue blocks towards the bottom left keep the yellow heart at the bottom right side of the green star move the blue blocks towards the bottom left 

Supervised move your arm towards the left below the yellow heart push the yellow hexagon into your hand set down the heart slide the blue cube slightly towards the left and the right of the blue triangle 

GPLA (Action-Conditioned) place hexagon above square move your arm towards yellow star move your arm towards front of the board place your arm towards towards left side 

Supervised + GPLA (Action-Conditioned) push the red circle diagonally to the triangle move yellow hexagon into red star drag red circle to the yellow hexagon push blue cube diagonally above green circle BLEU ROUGE METEOR BERTScore 

> Metric
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> Model
> Supervised
> GPLA (CLIP)
> GPLA (SigLIP 2)
> GPLA (Action-Conditioned)
> Supervised + GPLA (Action-Conditioned)

Figure 3. Quantitative Evaluation of Generated Low-level Instruc-tions. 

and color, across most instances; the key challenge lies in accurately determining the correct spatial relationship and ensuring the command is executable. We observed two pri-mary challenges that currently limit performance: First, the supervised training occasionally suggested actions that are physically incompatible with the agent’s embodiment, such as “[...] into your hand” or “set down [...]” - a specific area for refining spatial and embodied grounding in current MSE MAE CosSim 

> Metric
> 0.2
> 0.1
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> Score
> Model
> Low-Level Only
> Supervised
> GPLA (CLIP)
> GPLA (SigLIP 2)
> GPLA (Action-Conditioned)
> Supervised + GPLA (Action-Conditioned)

Figure 4. Quantitative Evaluation of Generated Trajectories. 

VLMs. Second, pure preference grounding introduced iso-lated instances of linguistic noise (e.g., “[...] towards to-wards [...]”). Addressing these specific challenges will en-able the models to fully leverage their strong object-relation and command-generation capabilities. 

6.2. Trajectory Generation 

Considering the generated trajectories, we compare our model variants additionally to the supervised SmolVLA, (a) t-SNE visualization of CLIP embeddings. (b) t-SNE visualization of SigLIP 2 embeddings. (c) t-SNE visualization of action-conditioned grounding model embeddings. 

> Figure 5. t-SNE visualizations of all grounding models on the LanguageTable dataset using visual inputs and low-level instructions.

which receives the ground-truth low-level instructions. While the supervised model performs best given the ground-truth instructions, most GPLA versions exhibit sim-ilar performance. The performance of the VLA remains robust across all GPLA variants, evidenced by both the magnitude-sensitive metrics (MSE and MAE) and the direc-tional metric, cosine similarity. Among these metrics, co-sine similarity demonstrates the best performance for pure GPLA variations. Collectively, these findings highlight that the high-level VLM provides the low-level VLA with se-mantically useful instructions. 

6.3. Contrastive Embedding space 

To gain further insight into the applicability of different con-trastive models for the purpose of grounding language in vision-action outputs, Figure 5 depicts the t-SNE visual-izations with a perplexity of 30 for the pre-trained CLIP and SigLIP 2 models, as well as our action-conditioned grounding model. All models show signs of visually sep-arable clusters in the vision and text domains to varying de-grees. As depicted in Figure 5a, CLIP’s embedding space shows a well-defined separation across visual inputs, indi-cating strong visual discrimination. The language embed-dings, by comparison, mostly form a single cohesive clus-ter with a few internal substructures and one clearly sep-arated group. The only model exhibiting signs of mixing vision and language embeddings is the action-conditioned grounding model. This is evidenced by a small language sub-structure appearing within the main vision-cluster (see lower right corner of Figure 5c). This blending suggests that the action-conditioning encourages the model to learn a unified, multi-modal representation where linguistic and visual elements of the current step are fused, unlike the dis-tinct separation seen in the other models. 

## 7. Discussion 

The GPLA framework offers a compelling solution for data-scarce scenarios. While supervised training methods achieve optimal results, they necessitate costly amounts of annotated data. Crucially, the method presented in this pa-per validates that a preference-based approach can success-fully retain comparable performance levels (see Section 6.2) without relying on expensive expert annotation. Supervised learning inherently struggles to deal with semantic ambigu-ities, often failing to adequately capture the correctness of acceptable, yet diverse, outputs within its rigid loss func-tion. Preference-based methods directly address this diffi-culty by leveraging comparative feedback, which is ideally suited to resolve these subtle semantic differences. Despite the successful application of foundation model-backed VLAs, further work is required to improve their understanding of object relations and embodiment, a dif-ficulty explored in Section 6.1. Even common pre-trained models are largely incapable of inferring grounding direc-tions, colors, and object relations, and infer reasonable steps from the task instructions beyond the recognition of dif-ferent shapes [11]. We continue to hypothesize that VLA and VLM reasoning and planning capabilities need to in-corporate stronger grounding mechanisms into their train-ing paradigm, like those established by our proposed frame-work, GPLA. Regarding the grounding model, contrastive learning has shown to be most effective with vast amounts of data and large batch sizes. Given the necessary con-straint of a relatively small corpus of diverse, language-annotated robotic episodes, GPLA successfully validates the preference-based grounding approach. We hypothe-size that, while current performance is constrained by data scarcity and available compute, our method is ideally po-sitioned to leverage future large-scale multimodal robotic datasets for substantial performance gains. 

## 8. Conclusion 

Grounding natural language in real-world actions remains a challenging task. We propose a preference-based frame-work, GPLA, to improve hierarchical VLAs, which refine a high-level instruction into a low-level instruction before generating a trajectory. Our framework explicitly uses a learned grounding model to ensure the generation of the low-level instruction aligns with the action-trajectory. Ap-plying our novel preference-based framework to the Lan-guageTable benchmark, we establish a strong baseline with performance comparable to fully supervised fine-tuning, critically demonstrating that high-quality action-language grounding can be maintained without the need for costly, extensive data annotation, while simultaneously delivering crucial insights into multimodal grounding representations. 

## Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the EU and UKRI in the context of Horizon Europe under the MSCA grant agreement No 101072488 (TRAIL). Special thanks also the team at the Compu-tational Shared Facility at the University of Manch-ester for providing the resources to train our models. 

## References 

[1] Muhammad Awais, Muzammal Naseer, Salman Khan, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Hisham Cholakkal, Mubarak Shah, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Foundation Models Defining a New Era in Vision: A Survey and Out-look. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 47(4):2245–2264, 2025. 2 [2] Randall Balestriero, Mark Ibrahim, Vlad Sobal, Ari Mor-cos, Shashank Shekhar, Tom Goldstein, Florian Bordes, Adrien Bardes, Gregoire Mialon, Yuandong Tian, Avi Schwarzschild, Andrew Gordon Wilson, Jonas Geiping, Quentin Garrido, Pierre Fernandez, Amir Bar, Hamed Pir-siavash, Yann LeCun, and Micah Goldblum. A Cookbook of Self-Supervised Learning, 2023. arXiv:2304.12210 [cs.LG]. 2[3] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. METEOR: An auto-matic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summarization , 2005. 6 [4] Suneel Belkhale, Tianli Ding, Ted Xiao, Pierre Sermanet, Quan Vuong, Jonathan Tompson, Yevgen Chebotar, De-bidatta Dwibedi, and Dorsa Sadigh. RT-H: Action Hierar-chies using Language. In Robotics: Science and Systems ,2024. 2, 3, 4 [5] Ondrej Biza, Thomas Weng, Lingfeng Sun, Karl Schmeck-peper, Tarik Kelestemur, Yecheng Jason Ma, Robert Platt, Jan-Willem van de Meent, and Lawson L.S. Wong. On-Robot Reinforcement Learning with Goal-Contrastive Re-wards. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4797–4805, 2025. 3 [6] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Casta˜ neda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi Li, Zongyu Lin, Kevin Lin, Guilin Liu, Edith LLontop, Loic Magne, Ajay Mandlekar, Avnish Narayan, Soroush Nasiriany, Scott Reed, You Liang Tan, Guanzhi Wang, Zu Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Yinzhen Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Seonghyeon Ye, Zhiding Yu, Ao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yizhou Zhao, Ruijie Zheng, and Yuke Zhu. GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model for Generalist Humanoid Robots. CoRR ,abs/2503.14734, 2025. 1, 2 [7] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. CoRR , abs/2410.24164, 2024. 1 [8] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dha-balia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szy-mon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0.5: A Vision-Language-Action Model with Open-World Generalization. In 9th An-nual Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2025. 2, 4 [9] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakr-ishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Ju-lian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deeksha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clay-ton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. RT-1: Robotics Transformer for Real-World Control at Scale, 2023. arXiv:2212.06817 [cs.RO]. 2 [10] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Ge-offrey Hinton. A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learn-ing of Visual Representations. In Proceedings of the 37th In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1597– 1607. PMLR, 2020. 3 [11] An-Chieh Cheng, Hongxu Yin, Yang Fu, Qiushan Guo, Rui-han Yang, Jan Kautz, Xiaolong Wang, and Sifei Liu. Spa-tialRGPT: Grounded Spatial Reasoning in Vision-Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , pages 135062–135093. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 8[12] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep Reinforcement Learn-ing from Human Preferences. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. 3[13] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Ab-hishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aur´ elien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Rozi` ere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bob-bie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail, Gr´ egoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Ko-revaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel M. Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bit-ton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua John-stun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, and et al. The Llama 3 Herd of Models. CoRR ,abs/2407.21783, 2024. 3 [14] Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Contrastive Learning as Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 35 - 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS 2022 .Neural information processing systems foundation, 2022. 3 [15] Giorgio Giannone, Ruoteng Li, Qianli Feng, Evgeny Perevodchikov, Rui Chen, and Aleix Martinez. Feedback-Driven Vision-Language Alignment with Minimal Human Supervision, 2025. arXiv:2501.04568 [cs.CV]. 3 [16] Zhao Han, Elizabeth Phillips, and Holly A. Yanco. The Need for Verbal Robot Explanations and How People Would Like a Robot to Explain Itself. J. Hum.-Robot Interact. , 10(4), 2021. 1 [17] Stevan Harnad. The Symbol Grounding Problem. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 42(1):335–346, 1990. 1 [18] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual Rep-resentation Learning. CVPR , 2020. 3 [19] Brian Ichter, Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-nikov, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Carolina Parada, Kanishka Rao, Pierre Sermanet, Alexander T. Toshev, Vincent Van-houcke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Mengyuan Yan, Noah Brown, Michael Ahn, Omar Cortes, Nicolas Sievers, Clay-ton Tan, Sichun Xu, Diego Reyes, Jarek Rettinghouse, Jor-nell Quiambao, Peter Pastor, Linda Luu, Kuang-Huei Lee, Yuheng Kuang, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Kyle Jeffrey, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Jasmine Hsu, Keerthana Gopalakr-ishnan, Byron David, Andy Zeng, and Chuyuan Kelly Fu. Do As I Can, Not As I Say: Grounding Language in Robotic Affordances. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023. 1 [20] Donald Joseph Hejna III and Dorsa Sadigh. Few-Shot Pref-erence Learning for Human-in-the-Loop RL. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. 3 [21] Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovi-cova, Alexandre Ram´ e, Morgane Rivi` ere, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean-Bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Eti-enne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Ga¨ el Liu, Francesco Visin, Kath-leen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, R´ obert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Ben-jamin Coleman, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopalnikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Ku-mar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Bendebury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, Andr´ as Gy¨ orgy, Andr´ e Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia Pa-terson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Char-line Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cor-mac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cat-tle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Divyashree Shivaku-mar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucinska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Harshal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, and Ivan Nardini. Gemma 3 Technical Re-port. CoRR , abs/2503.19786, 2025. 5 [22] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. OpenVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model. In Proceed-ings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2679– 2713. PMLR, 2025. 1, 2 [23] Kimin Lee, Laura M. Smith, and P. Abbeel. PEBBLE: Feedback-Efficient Interactive Reinforcement Learning via Relabeling Experience and Unsupervised Pre-training. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. 3 [24] Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evalu-ation of Summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out ,pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, 2004. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. 6 [25] Corey Lynch, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Tianli Ding, James Betker, Robert Baruch, Travis Armstrong, and Pete Florence. Interactive Language: Talking to Robots in Real Time. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , pages 1–8, 2023. 2, 4, 5, 7 [26] Teli Ma, Jiaming Zhou, Zifan Wang, Ronghe Qiu, and Jun-wei Liang. Contrastive Imitation Learning for Language-guided Multi-Task Robotic Manipulation. In Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 4651–4669. PMLR, 2025. 3 [27] Yueen Ma, Zixing Song, Yuzheng Zhuang, Jianye Hao, and Irwin King. A Survey on Vision-Language-Action Models for Embodied AI, 2025. arXiv:2405.14093 [cs.RO]. 1 [28] Yecheng Jason Ma, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Osbert Bas-tani, and Dinesh Jayaraman. LIV: Language-Image Repre-sentations and Rewards for Robotic Control. In Workshop on Reincarnating Reinforcement Learning at ICLR 2023 , 2023. 3[29] Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Os-bert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy Zhang. VIP: Towards Universal Visual Reward and Representation via Value-Implicit Pre-Training, 2023. arXiv:2210.00030 [cs.RO]. 3 [30] Oier Mees, Dibya Ghosh, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Homer Rich Walke, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, You Liang Tan, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Octo: An Open-Source Generalist Robot Policy. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. 2 [31] Yu Meng, Mengzhou Xia, and Danqi Chen. SimPO: Simple Preference Optimization with a Reference-Free Reward. In 

The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 3, 5 [32] Vivek Myers, Erdem Bıyık, and Dorsa Sadigh. Active re-ward learning from online preferences. In 2023 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 7511–7518, 2023. 3 [33] Suraj Nair, Eric Mitchell, Kevin Chen, Brian Ichter, Sil-vio Savarese, and Chelsea Finn. Learning Language-Conditioned Robot Behavior from Offline Data and Crowd-Sourced Annotation. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1303–1315. PMLR, 2022. 3 [34] Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3M: A Universal Visual Repre-sentation for Robot Manipulation. In 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2022. 3 [35] OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report, 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]. 3 [36] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Car-roll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27730–27744, 2022. 3 [37] Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Ab-hishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Al-bert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexan-der Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg, Aniruddha Kembhavi, An-nie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christo-pher Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter B¨ uchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gau-tam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guanzhi Wang, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Hen-rik I Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Ji-ayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, Jo˜ ao Silv´ erio, Joey Hejna, Jonathan Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Junhyek Han, Kaiyuan Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty El-lis, Krishan Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Kuan Fang, Ku-nal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi Jim Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina, Mateo Guaman Cas-tro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mo-han Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muham-mad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani, Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick Tree Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundare-san, Qiuyu Chen, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, Rohan Baijal, Rosario Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shub-ham Sonawani, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Hal-dar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Mat-sushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liang-wei, Xuanlin Li, Yao Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yoonyoung Cho, Young-woon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang Li, Yun-zhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen Zhang, and Zipeng Lin. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Mod-els: Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. In 2024 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 6892–6903, 2024. 2 [38] Norman Di Palo and Edward Johns. Keypoint Action Tokens Enable In-Context Imitation Learning in Robotics. In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. 1 [39] Kishore Papineni et al. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-tics . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002. 6 [40] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron Courville. FiLM: Visual Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 32(1), 2018. 5 [41] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 3, 5 [42] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Di-rect Preference Optimization: Your Language Model Is Se-cretly a Reward Model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 53728–53741. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. 3, 5 [43] Roya Salehzadeh, Jiaqi Gong, and Nader Jalili. Purposeful Communication in Human–Robot Collaboration: A Review of Modern Approaches in Manufacturing. IEEE Access , 10: 129344–129361, 2022. 2 [44] Lin Shao, Toki Migimatsu, Qiang Zhang, Karen Yang, and Jeannette Bohg. Concept2Robot: Learning Manipulation Concepts from Instructions and Human Demonstrations. In 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2020. 3[45] Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, brian ichter, Michael Robert Equi, Liy-iming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James Tanner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy Groom, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hi-erarchical Vision-Language-Action Models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2025. 2, 3, 4 [46] Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel Ar-actingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, Simon Alibert, Matthieu Cord, Thomas Wolf, and Remi Ca-dene. SmolVLA: A Vision-Language-Action Model for Af-fordable and Efficient Robotics, 2025. arXiv:2506.01844 [cs.RO]. 5 [47] Sumedh Anand Sontakke, Jesse Zhang, S´ eb Arnold, Karl Pertsch, Erdem Biyik, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Lau-rent Itti. RoboCLIP: One Demonstration is Enough to Learn Robot Policies. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems , 2023. 3 [48] Simon Stepputtis, Joseph Campbell, Mariano Phielipp, Ste-fan Lee, Chitta Baral, and Heni Ben Amor. Language-Conditioned Imitation Learning for Robot Manipulation Tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , pages 13139–13150. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 3 [49] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to Summarize with Human Feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3008–3021. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 3 [50] Juan Terven, Diana-Margarita Cordova-Esparza, Julio-Alejandro Romero-Gonz´ alez, Alfonso Ram´ ırez-Pedraza, and E. A. Ch´ avez-Urbiola. A Comprehensive Survey of Loss Functions and Metrics in Deep Learning. Artificial Intelli-gence Review , 58(7):195, 2025. 6 [51] Michael Tschannen, Alexey Gritsenko, Xiao Wang, Muham-mad Ferjad Naeem, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Nikhil Parthasarathy, Talfan Evans, Lucas Beyer, Ye Xia, Basil Mustafa, Olivier H´ enaff, Jeremiah Harmsen, Andreas Steiner, and Xiaohua Zhai. SigLIP 2: Multilingual Vision-Language Encoders with Improved Semantic Understanding, Localization, and Dense Features, 2025. arXiv:2502.14786 [cs.CV]. 3, 5 [52] Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel Bowman. Language Models Don’t Always Say What They Think: Unfaithful Explanations in Chain-of-Thought Prompting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 74952–74965. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. 2[53] Yufei Wang, Zhanyi Sun, Jesse Zhang, Zhou Xian, Erdem Biyik, David Held, and Zackory Erickson. RL-VLM-F: Reinforcement Learning from Vision Language Foundation Model Feedback. In Proceedings of the 41th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. 3 [54] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reason-ing in Large Language Models. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. 1, 2 [55] Theodor Wulff, Rahul Singh Maharjan, Xinyun Chi, and An-gelo Cangelosi. Joint Action Language Modelling for Trans-parent Policy Execution, 2025. arXiv:2504.10055 [cs.RO]. 3[56] Daniel Yang, Davin Tjia, Jacob Berg, Dima Damen, Pulkit Agrawal, and Abhishek Gupta. Rank2Reward: Learning Shaped Reward Functions from Passive Video. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 2806–2813, 2024. 3 [57] Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid Loss for Language Image Pre-Training. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 11941–11952, Paris, France, 2023. IEEE. 3, 5 [58] Tianyi Zhang*, Varsha Kishore*, Felix Wu*, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. 6 [59] Zijian Zhang, Kaiyuan Zheng, Zhaorun Chen, Joel Jang, Yi Li, Siwei Han, Chaoqi Wang, Mingyu Ding, Dieter Fox, and Huaxiu Yao. GRAPE: Generalizing robot policy via prefer-ence alignment. In Workshop on Reasoning and Planning for Large Language Models , 2025. 2, 3, 4, 5 [60] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Sch¨ arli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H. Chi. Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2023. 2 [61] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Vanhoucke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut, Anikait Singh, Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Ser-manet, Pannag R Sanketi, Grecia Salazar, Michael S Ryoo, Krista Reymann, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Igor Mor-datch, Henryk Michalewski, Yao Lu, Sergey Levine, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Isabel Leal, Yuheng Kuang, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Ryan Julian, Nikhil J Joshi, Alex Irpan, brian ichter, Jasmine Hsu, Alexander Herzog, Karol Haus-man, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Chuyuan Fu, Pete Flo-rence, Chelsea Finn, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Danny Driess, Tianli Ding, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Xi Chen, Yev-gen Chebotar, Justice Carbajal, Noah Brown, Anthony Bro-han, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, and Kehang Han. RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control. In 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. 2 A. Prompt 

We use a conversational structure to prompt the high-level VLM for low-level instructions. Figure 6 depicts the corre-sponding prompt template. The answer not provided during inference. 

System: You are controlling arobotic agent. Your task is to <high-level instruction>. User: What should the robot do next? Answer: <low-level instruction> 

Figure 6. Prompt template used for robotic agent instructions. 

## B. Data Augmentation 

The data augmentation techniques we applied during train-ing are listed in Table 3. 

Modality Augmentation Probability 

Images Brightness 0.5 Contrast 0.5 Saturation 0.5 Crop and resize 0.6 Vertical translation 0.4 Horizontal translation 0.4 Scale (zoom in/out) 0.3 Actions Noise 0.7 

Table 3. Data augmentation techniques and their application prob-abilities, grouped by modality. 

## C. Hyperparameters 

Table 4 lists the hyperparameters we applied to during train-ing on the different model variants. 

General 

Gradient norm clipping: 1.0 Action cut-off threshold: 0.1 

High-level VLM (fine-tuning) 

Steps: 1,500 Learning rate: 10 −5

Effective Batch size: 64 Optimizer: AdamW Horizon: 8

Low-level VLA (fine-tuning) 

Steps: 15,000 Learning rate: 10 −5

Effective Batch size: 64 Optimizer: AdamW Horizon: 8

GPLA 

Steps: 100 Learning rate: 10 −7

Batch size: 64 Optimizer: AdamW Horizon: 8

Action-Conditioned Grounding Model 

Steps: 50,000 Learning rate: 10 −4

Effective batch size: 256 Optimizer: Adam Horizon: 8Initial logit scale factor: 0.1 Label smoothing: None Diversity weight: 0.01 Model dimension: 64 N FiLM layers: 4Table 4. Hyperparameters grouped by model variant.