Title: Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00209v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:12:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems 

# Pál András Papp 

pal.andras.papp@huawei.com Computing Systems Lab Huawei Zurich Research Center Zurich, Switzerland 

# Toni Böhnlein 

toni.boehnlein@huawei.com Computing Systems Lab Huawei Zurich Research Center Zurich, Switzerland 

# Albert-Jan N. Yzelman 

albertjan.yzelman@huawei.com Computing Systems Lab Huawei Zurich Research Center Zurich, Switzerland 

## Abstract 

The efficient parallel execution of complex computations requires balancing the workload across processors while minimizing the communication between them. This inherent trade-off is often captured by graph partitioning or DAG scheduling problems. For the sake of model simplicity, most works on these problems assume that nodes can be assigned to only a single processor. However, in reality, replicating an operation on several processors can easily be beneficial: it may increase the computational costs only by a small amount, while significantly reducing the communication requirements. Our goal is to provide a comprehensive analysis of the impact of replication on partitioning and scheduling problems. On the theoret-ical side, we show that for graph partitioning, replication makes the problem significantly harder in terms of approximation complexity, whereas for scheduling, its impact on complexity seems less promi-nent. On the experimental side, we conduct a thorough analysis of the cost reduction obtainable by replication, on a wide range of graphs from real-world applications. For hypergraph partitioning, we use Integer Linear Programming (ILP) formulations to compare the optimal costs; our experiments show that replication can reduce the cost by 17% –65% on average, or even entirely remove the need for communication in some cases. For DAG scheduling, we similarly use ILPs on smaller graphs, and develop a sophisticated heuristic that is also applicable to much larger workloads. Our experiments here demonstrate a mean cost reduction of 11 .61% –23 .13% with replication, or even up to 58 .17% in some cases. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Theory of computation → Parallel computing models .

## Keywords 

Partitioning, Scheduling, Hypergraph, DAG, Replication, Duplica-tion 

## 1 Introduction 

The efficient parallel execution of complex computations on multi-ple devices is a fundamental problem in computer science, and a crucial task in various domains like scientific computing, machine learning or big data. Finding the best parallel execution strategy is often a challenging problem with contradicting objectives, e.g. distributing the computational workload in a balanced way but also minimizing the costly communication steps between the devices. In mathematical terms, these tasks are often best captured as a (hyper-)graph partitioning or scheduling problem. The nodes of the graph represent the operations or subtasks in the computation that need to be executed, and the (hyper-)edges represent data dependencies among specific operations. The goal is to find an assignment of the nodes to the available devices which has an acceptable load balance (in terms of e.g. computational workload, or memory usage), and also minimizes the communication between the devices. Beyond this general idea, the concrete details of the model can vary significantly depending on the application. One prominent setting is graph or hypergraph partitioning, where the goal is simply to find an assignment of the nodes to devices. Here, load balancing is typically handled via an explicit balance constraint, i.e. an upper bound on the number of nodes in each partition. The objective is to minimize the number of cut (hyper-)edges, i.e. those that span multiple partitions. This offers a simple and convenient formulation in many settings where the time dimension of the execution can be ignored due to some modeling choice or external factor. Another related problem is scheduling, where the computation is often captured as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), with the directed edges representing data dependencies between operations. Sched-uling requires us to not only assign each node to a device, but also to a concrete time step. This is indeed crucial in order to capture whether two operations can be executed in parallel when we have precedence constraints. Given an assignment to devices and time steps, a scheduling model defines the time when each operation is finished, based on its predecessors and the potential communi-cation steps needed. This way, a single objective function allows to implicitly combine the goals of load balancing and minimizing communication. DAG scheduling is a general problem model that can capture any static computational task. The main focus of our paper is the concept of replication in these problems, also known as duplication or re-computation in some cases. For simplicity, many works on these problems assume that every node is assigned to a single device only. In contrast, replica-tion means that we are also allowed to assign a node to multiple devices, i.e. redundantly execute the same operation on more than one device. This increases the use of compute resources, but on the other hand, it can also significantly decrease the amount of commu-nication required, and hence result in a lower cost altogether. As such, while forbidding replication leads to more convenient mathe-matical problems, replication is in fact an essential ingredient to realistically capture the optimal costs in these problems. Replication has been considered many times both in theoretical works and in applications, but we are not aware of any compre-hensive study to analyze its impact on partitioning and scheduling problems. Apart from some worst-case examples and lower bounds, many of the fundamental questions remained open. How does repli-cation affect the computational complexity of partitioning or sched-uling? How much can it decrease the cost of the optimal solution in more practical cases, i.e. benchmarks that describe real-world 

> 1
> arXiv:2605.00209v1 [cs.DC] 30 Apr 2026 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

computations? Are there specific kinds of graphs or applications where replication is particularly useful for reducing costs? Our main goal in this paper is to understand how replication impacts partitioning and scheduling problems in general. We first define the extension of the hypergraph partitioning and DAG sched-uling problems with replication, and show simple examples where replication can decrease the optimal cost by a large factor. We then analyze how replication affects the computational complexity of these problems. In hypergraph partitioning, the problem becomes significantly more challenging: we prove that the optimal solution with replication is NP-hard to approximate to any finite factor. In contrast, in scheduling, our observations suggest that replication has a smaller impact on the problem complexity. Our main contribution is a comprehensive experimental study of replication in these problems. In hypergraph partitioning, we discuss two ways to formulate partitioning with replication as an Integer Linear Program (ILP). We use a commercial ILP solver to find (close to) optimal solutions to the problem over a diverse hypergraph benchmark that we derive from Mixture of Experts (MoE) model distribution and sparse matrix–vector multiplication (SpMV). We compare the solutions to the optimal non-replicating partitioning on the same problems; our experiments show that replication can reduce the cost by 17% –65% on different datasets, or even entirely remove the need for communication in a few cases. In DAG scheduling, we focus on the Bulk Synchronous Parallel (BSP) model, a well-established model in parallel computing [ 56 ]. We also consider an ILP-based approach here, but for scheduling, this is only viable for very small graphs. Hence we also consider a more heuristic method: we develop a complex local-search-like algorithm to introduce replication steps into a schedule whenever this decreases the cost altogether. Our results show that this repli-cating algorithm achieves a 11 .61% –23 .13% mean cost reduction compared to an already strong baseline scheduler, or up to a mean of 58 .17% for larger communication cost parameters. 

## 2 Related Work 

Partitioning and scheduling problems have both been extensively studied before. In Section 3, we also discuss some concrete use cases and elaborate on the difference between the two settings. Balanced graph partitioning is a fundamental NP-hard problem that has applications ranging from VLSI design to scientific com-puting [ 42 ]. There is specific line of work on approximation algo-rithms for the perfectly balanced case (bisection problem), resulting in a 𝑂 (log 𝑛 )-factor approximation [ 16 , 49 ]. Others considered bi-criteria approximations of the same problem where the balance constraint can also be violated to some factor [ 29 , 31 ]. There are similar works for hypergraph partitioning, including both approx-imation algorithms and hardness results [ 45 , 50 ]. There are also several works on hierarchical variants of the problems [ 20 , 45 , 51 ]. Due to its practical applications, there are several algorithms and open-source tools to solve the problem in practice, including both exact algorithms [27, 48] and heuristics [9, 25, 52, 55]. DAG scheduling has also been studied in various models, ranging from very simple to more realistic. The simplest model assumes free communication between processors [ 12 , 33 , 54 ]; replication offers no advantage in this setting. A somewhat more complex model assumes fixed communication delays between processors [ 43 , 58 ]; here replication can already be beneficial. There are numerous algorithms and hardness results for this model [14, 21, 30]. There are several more realistic models inspired from practice as well [ 13 , 57 ]; however, these are often too complex with many parameters, and hence are almost exclusively studied for concrete computations (i.e. specific, very structured DAGs). One prominent example for a middle ground is the Bulk Synchronous Parallel (BSP) model [ 56 ], which is accurate enough to be widely used in libraries and applications [ 22 , 60 ], but still simple enough to allow a thorough analysis of its theoretical properties [ 4, 46 ] and the optimal schedules for crucial computations [38]. Using replication to save communication cost is a very natu-ral idea and has been explored in a range of problem variants and specific applications [ 7 , 8 , 23 ]. However, we are not aware of any comprehensive study to analyze the impact of replication on general graphs, either with regard to theoretical properties or experimentally on a range of computational graphs. Specifically, for (hyper-)graph partitioning, to our knowledge, there is no prior work that explicitly considers the extension of the problem with replication, and compares this to the original problem. For DAG scheduling, there are many works that allow replica-tion, and several of them directly discuss its impact on the problem; however, these exhibit key differences from ours. The paper of Maiti et al. [ 36 ] conducts a theoretical analysis of the impact of replication in the communication delay model: they show that the factor of difference between the optimum with and without repli-cation is upper bounded by 𝑂 (log 2 𝑛 log 𝑃 ), and lower bounded by 

Ω(log 𝑛 /log log 𝑛 ), where 𝑛 and 𝑃 are the number of nodes and processors, respectively. Ahmad et al. [ 2 ] study heuristics to in-troduce replications in the communication delay model, assuming 

𝑃 = ∞; while they discuss an idea to adapt their method to finite 

𝑃 , their experiments do not study the cost reduction for this case. Papp et al. [ 47 ] consider a problem variant with I/O costs (red-blue pebbling), and briefly discuss the empirical cost reduction achieved by replication in this model. The work of [ 7 ] studies how to remove replications from a schedule in the communication delay model, in order to decrease the number of processors used. There are also several scheduling papers that do allow replication in their model, but do not study its impact explicitly [32, 34, 39]. 

## 3 Background & problem definitions 3.1 Preliminaries 

In our problems, a computation is modeled either as a simple graph, a hypergraph, or a directed acyclic graph (DAG) 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ), where 

𝑉 is the set of nodes, and 𝐸 is the set of (hyper-)edges. In a simple graph / hypergraph / DAG, each 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 is an unordered pair / subset / ordered pair of nodes from 𝑉 , respectively. We will use 𝑛 = |𝑉 |.In a DAG, directed cycles are also forbidden, and we call the set of nodes with an edge to / from 𝑣 ∈𝑉 the parents / children of 𝑣 . In a hypergraph, a node-hyperedge pair (𝑣, 𝑒 ) with 𝑣 ∈𝑒 is called a pin, and we denote the total number of pins by 𝜅 .A more realistic setting may also have node weights 𝜔 :𝑉 → R+

to express the compute cost of each operation. For a subset 𝑉 ′ ⊆ 𝑉 ,we will use 𝜔 (𝑉 ′) = Í𝑣 ∈𝑉 ′ 𝜔 (𝑣 ). Similarly, we may have weights on the hyperedges 𝜇 : 𝐸 → R+ (in hypergraph partitioning) or on 

> 2Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

the nodes 𝜇 : 𝑉 → R+ (in DAG scheduling) to express the size of the communicated data. The default problem corresponds to all weights being uniformly 1. In our theoretical work, we consider the unweighted problem in order to derive stronger hardness results; however, we do use weights in the benchmarks for our experiments. Another crucial parameter is 𝑃 , the number of available devices (e.g. processors or cores) to execute the operations. Throughout the paper, we refer to these as processors for simplicity, and we identify them with the indices {1, ..., 𝑃 }. We also use the shorthand notation 

[𝑃 ] = {1, ..., 𝑃 }. We assume that 𝑃 is a small constant; indeed, in practice it is typically significantly smaller than 𝑛 .

## 3.2 Graph and Hypergraph Partitioning 

Partitioning problems assign nodes only to processors and not to time steps. Balanced (hyper-)graph partitioning can capture vari-ous parallelization tasks without a time dimension, e.g., streaming settings where a continuous flow of data drives computation. A prime example is the deployment of modern Large Language Models (LLMs), which process a continuous token stream and need to be distributed over multiple devices due to their massive memory footprint. In the recently prominent Mixture of Experts (MoE) LLMs, the optimal distribution of experts to devices can be naturally cap-tured as a partitioning problem based on the co-occurrence pattern of experts [ 19 , 59 ]. In a hypergraph representation, the nodes rep-resent concrete experts (in one or more layers), and hyperedges are formed from groups of experts that are frequently invoked together. Hypergraph partitioning corresponds to a balanced distribution of experts (respecting memory constraints on each device) that minimizes the inter-device communication while serving requests. Similarly, the parallelization of sparse matrix–vector multiplica-tion (SpMV) is often modeled as a hypergraph partitioning problem. For instance, in the so-called fine-grained model, each non-zero entry of the matrix becomes a node, and the entries of each column and row form a separate hyperedge. Intuitively, the nodes here represent the multiplication operations with the given non-zero entry, and vertical (respectively, horizontal) hyperedges represent the values of the input (output) vector that need to be used for (aggregated from) the corresponding multiplications [24, 27]. We illustrate the hypergraph partitioning problem in Figure 1. 

Without replication. In balanced hypergraph partitioning, the goal is to partition the nodes of a hypergraph into subsets 𝑉 1, ..., 𝑉 𝑃 such that Ð𝑖 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] 𝑉 𝑖 = 𝑉 . In the base case without replication, we require the partitions to be disjoint, i.e. 𝑉 𝑖 ∩ 𝑉 𝑗 = ∅ for 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 .Given a real parameter 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1), we say that a partitioning is balanced if for all 𝑖 ∈ [ 𝑃 ], we have |𝑉 𝑖 | ≤ 1+𝜀 𝑃 · 𝑛 . With node weights, this condition can be replaced by 𝜔 (𝑉 𝑖 ) ≤ 1+𝜀 𝑃 · 𝜔 (𝑉 ). This balance constraint has a natural interpretation in most applications: it ensures that each processor is assigned approximately the same workload, in order to guarantee efficient parallelization. Given this balance constraint, the goal of hypergraph partition-ing is to ensure that as few edges are cut as possible. In particular, let 

𝜆 𝑒 denote the number of partitions that a hyperedge 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 intersects, i.e. 𝜆 𝑒 = |{ 𝑖 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] | 𝑒 ∩ 𝑉 𝑖 ≠ ∅}| . The cost incurred by hyperedge 

𝑒 is then defined simply as (𝜆 𝑒 − 1), or 𝜇 (𝑒 ) · ( 𝜆 𝑒 − 1) in case of hyperedge weights. The cost of the entire partitioning is obtained by summing up this cost over all hyperedges 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 .

𝑉 1 𝑉 2 𝑉 1 𝑉 2

Figure 1: Illustration of hypergraph bipartitioning into two sets 𝑉 1 and 𝑉 2, without replication (left) and with replication (right). Cut hyperedges are shown with a darker grey tone. 

This (𝜆 𝑒 − 1)-based cost function is a popular choice because it accurately captures the communication costs in many cases. Gen-erally speaking, if the hyperedge represents a piece of data that is initially associated with one of the 𝜆 𝑒 processors appearing in the hyperedge, then it takes at least (𝜆 𝑒 − 1) pairwise communications to share this data among all the processors. For instance, in the MoE hypergraphs above, if the KV cache for a request is on one of the 𝜆 𝑒 devices, then the corresponding token needs to be sent to (𝜆 𝑒 − 1) other devices in the given layer. In fine-grained SpMV hypergraphs, if an entry of the input vector (respectively, output vector) is originally stored on (aggregated on) one of the 𝜆 𝑒 pro-cessors appearing in the column (row), then this processor needs to send the value to (needs to receive values from) (𝜆 𝑒 − 1) others during the computation. Note that in some use cases, a cost of 𝜆 𝑒 for each hyperedge 𝑒 

might be more realistic. However, this leads to the same optimal solution(s), as it only adds a fixed term of |𝐸 | or Í𝑒 𝜇 (𝑒 ) in total. In the balanced hypergraph partitioning problem (for a fixed 𝑃 

and 𝜀 ), our input is a hypergraph, and our goal is to find a balanced partitioning of the hypergraph that minimizes the total cost. Regular graph partitioning, a well-studied problem itself, can be obtained as a special case where each hyperedge in the input has size 2.

With replication. While we are not aware if the extension of graph partitioning with replication has been explicitly studied before, it yields a natural mathematical problem. Assume that 𝑉 1, ..., 𝑉 𝑃 are now not required to be disjoint, but must still satisfy the balance constraint; this allows some nodes to be assigned to multiple parti-tions. For each (hyper-)edge, we want to find the minimal number of partitions that cover all its nodes, in order to again obtain an indicator of the communication costs. Specifically, let us now redefine 𝜆 𝑒 as the minimal integer such that there is a subset of processors Π ⊆ [ 𝑃 ] such that |Π| = 𝜆 𝑒 , and for all 𝑣 ∈ 𝑒 there is a 𝑝 ∈ Π with 𝑣 ∈𝑉 𝑝 . For example, if we have a hyperedge 𝑒 = (𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑤 ) such that 𝑢 is in both 𝑉 1 and 𝑉 2, 𝑣 is in both 

𝑉 2 and 𝑉 3, and 𝑤 is in both 𝑉 3 and 𝑉 4, then 𝜆 𝑒 = 2, because e.g. 𝑉 1

and 𝑉 3 together already cover the hyperedge. For the special case of simple graphs and edges (𝑢, 𝑣 ), we simply have 𝜆 𝑒 = 1 if 𝑢 and 𝑣 

share a processor, and 𝜆 𝑒 = 2 otherwise. We again sum up (𝜆 𝑒 − 1)

for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 to obtain the total cost of a partitioning. This new definition of 𝜆 𝑒 generalizes the previous cost function to partitioning with replication, again capturing the required number of pairwise communications in many of the use cases. In our MoE 

> 3Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

hypergraphs, each expert now may be available on multiple devices; the new (𝜆 𝑒 − 1) describes the minimal number of devices where we need to send the token so that it reaches all experts in hyperedge 

𝑒 . In a horizontal hyperedge of the SpMV example (or any other setting where hyperedges describe an aggregation of outputs), each operation may be executed on multiple processors, so the number of communications required to collect the outputs to a single processor is again the new (𝜆 𝑒 − 1).We note that a significant drawback of this cost function is that 

𝜆 𝑒 is rather challenging to compute, as it actually forms an instance of the set cover problem. However, when 𝑃 is a small constant, this is not a problem in terms of complexity or practical viability. 

## 3.3 DAG scheduling 

Consider a general static computation with precedence constraints between the operations, which can be naturally captured as a DAG. It is easy to see that a single balance constraint per processor does not ensure parallelization here: we might be forced to execute many or even all the operations of one processor before another processor can start working. Some ideas have been explored to extend partitioning to this setting, like layer-wise partitioning the DAG, but these have strong limitations [45]. The only model to capture parallelization accurately in this case is scheduling, where we assign the nodes not only to processors, but also to time steps. In contrast to partitioning, the DAG scheduling problem offers a general model that can be applied to any static computation; however, it is also often more challenging to solve or analyze due to the extra time dimension. DAG scheduling has been exhaustively studied in many models. Replication only becomes relevant in more realistic models that account for communication costs between processors, such as the communication delay model [ 43 ], the BSP model [ 56 ], or some custom models [ 41 ]. We analyze replication in the BSP model, since it is the most widely used among these for practical works. It also accounts for communicated data volume (unlike the communication delay model), and it offers a convenient schedule format for our algorithms. Even when not named explicitly, scheduling algorithms are often designed and analyzed in BSP-like models in several applications, such as sparse triangular system solving [5, 61]. 

Without replication. In the BSP model, a schedule is split into larger batches of computations called supersteps . Each superstep consists of two phases: first a computation phase where each processor executes operations, but no data movement happens, and then a communication phase where data is exchanged between processors, but no computation happens. Let 𝑆 denote the number of supersteps we choose to have in our schedule. Formally, a BSP schedule for a DAG consists of: 

• computation phases 𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 ⊆𝑉 for all 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ], 𝑠 ∈ [ 𝑆 ], containing the set of nodes executed by processor 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 ;

• communication phases Γ𝑝,𝑠 ⊆𝑉 × [ 𝑃 ] for all 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] and 𝑠 ∈ [ 𝑆 ],i.e. the set of values (outputs of specific nodes) to send from processor 𝑝 to some other processor 𝑝 ′ in superstep 𝑠 .Let us say that a node 𝑣 is already present on processor 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 if either ∃ 𝑠 ′ ≤ 𝑠 such that 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 ′ , or if ∃ 𝑠 ′ < 𝑠 and 

𝑉 2,1 𝑉 2,2 𝑉 2,3

𝑉 1,1 𝑉 1,2 𝑉 1,3

𝑣 

𝑣 

Figure 2: BSP schedule of a DAG on 2 processors and 3 super-steps. Node 𝑣 is originally computed in 𝑉 1,2. Replicating 𝑣 in 

𝑉 2,3 allows to remove the dashed communication. Note: both parents of 𝑣 are already present on processor 2 by 𝑉 2,3.

∃ 𝑝 ′ ∈ [ 𝑃 ] \ { 𝑝 } such that (𝑣, 𝑝 ) ∈ Γ𝑝 ′,𝑠 ′ . A valid BSP schedule must satisfy the following properties for all 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] and 𝑠 ∈ [ 𝑆 ]:

• All inputs of the operations are available: for all 𝑣 ∈𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 , all the parents 𝑢 of 𝑣 in 𝐺 are already present on 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 .

• Any data we send is available: for all (𝑣, 𝑝 ′) ∈ Γ𝑝,𝑠 , 𝑣 is already present on 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 .Furthermore, a valid schedule must ensure that all nodes are com-puted, i.e. for all 𝑣 ∈𝑉 , there exists a 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] and 𝑠 ∈ [ 𝑆 ] such that 

𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 . In scheduling without replication, we also require that each node is assigned only to one processor and superstep, i.e. the computation phases 𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 are all disjoint. The cost of a BSP schedule is defined as follows. For each su-perstep 𝑠 ∈ [ 𝑆 ], the cost of the compute phase is max 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] |𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 |, or 

max 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ]

Í𝑣 ∈𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 𝜔 (𝑣 ) with node weights, since the computations on the different processors run in parallel. The communication cost is more complex, defined via a so-called ℎ-relation and two global parameters 𝑔 , 𝐿 of the BSP model: 𝑔 is the cost of sending a single unit of data (the inverse bandwidth), and 𝐿 is a fixed synchronization cost incurred by each superstep. Let us denote the values received by processor 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 by Γ′ 

> 𝑝,𝑠

= {( 𝑣, 𝑝 ′) ∈ 𝑉 × [ 𝑃 ] | ( 𝑣, 𝑝 ) ∈ Γ𝑝 ′,𝑠 }.The cost of a communication phase depends on the maximal amount of data sent or received by any processor, defined as 

𝐿 + 𝑔 · max    

> 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ]

max ( | Γ𝑝,𝑠 | , |Γ′ 

> 𝑝,𝑠

|) .

In case of node weights for communication, the two terms in the max are replaced by Í(𝑣,𝑝 ′ ) ∈ Γ𝑝,𝑠 𝜇 (𝑣 ) and Í(𝑣,𝑝 ′ ) ∈ Γ′ 

> 𝑝,𝑠

𝜇 (𝑣 ), respec-tively. The cost of a superstep is the sum of the compute and com-munication costs, and the total cost of a schedule is the sum of the costs of all supersteps. Unlike partitioning, this approach combines workload balance and communication costs into a single objective function. We refer to [4, 46] for more details on the BSP model. Given an input computational DAG and parameters 𝑃 , 𝑔 and 𝐿 ,our goal is to find a valid BSP schedule of minimal cost. 

With replication. The BSP scheduling problem is straightforward to extend with replication: we simply remove the restriction that the 𝑉 𝑝,𝑠 pairs need to be disjoint. The rest of the problem definition and the cost function remains identical. Note that even with replication, it is never beneficial to assign a node twice to the same processor in different supersteps. However, 

> 4Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

replicating a node on two different processors can indeed help: it might increase the cost of the corresponding computation phases, but it can also notably decrease the incurred communication costs, thus altogether providing a schedule with lower cost. An example schedule with replication is illustrated in Figure 2. 

## 4 Theoretical results 

We first briefly analyze how introducing replication affects the par-titioning and scheduling problems. It is not surprising that allowing replication can significantly decrease the optimal cost. Specifically, in partitioning, it can easily happen that the optimal cost without replication is Ω(𝑛 2), but with replication it is 0: a simple example graph for 𝑃 =2 consists of two cliques of size 1+𝜀  

> 2

·𝑛 that intersect in 

𝜀 ·𝑛 nodes. In scheduling, replication can reduce the cost by a factor 

(𝑃 − 𝛿 ) for any 𝛿 > 0; this is essentially as high as possible, since the optimal cost is always between 𝑛 𝑃 and 𝑛 . The example here is a complete bipartite DAG with a set 𝑈 of source nodes and sets 𝑈 1, ..., 

𝑈 𝑃 of sink nodes, and carefully chosen parameters. Without repli-cation, for a large constant 𝑔 , the optimum only uses one processor at a cost of 𝑛 . However, if we can replicate 𝑈 , then the sets 𝑈 𝑖 can be parallelized, and the optimum is essentially 𝑛 𝑃 if |𝑈 | << |𝑈 𝑖 |. We discuss both of these examples in detail in Appendix A.1. Below we focus on a more challenging question: the impact of replication on the complexity of the problems. Since it is usually straightforward to show NP-hardness for both partitioning and scheduling (in many model variants, with/without replication), we instead focus on the approximability of the optimal solution. 

## 4.1 Graph Partitioning 

For partitioning, we show that the optimal solution is NP-hard to approximate to any finite factor. This already holds for graph partitioning, and hence naturally carries over to hypergraphs, too. This provides an interesting contrast to partitioning without replication. Without replication, for simple graphs, the optimum is known to be approximable in polynomial time to a 𝑂 (log 𝑛 )

factor [ 16 , 28 , 49 ]. For hypergraphs, the landscape is more com-plex. The best known inapproximability results depend on the complexity-theoretic conjectures we accept [45]: 𝑛 1/poly log log 𝑛 , as-suming the Exponential Time Hypothesis [ 37 ]; 𝑛 𝑜 (1) , assuming Gap-ETH [ 37 ]; 𝑛 𝛿 for some 𝛿 > 0, assuming specific one-way func-tions [ 3]; and 𝑛 1/12 −𝛿 assuming the Hypergraph Dense vs. Random Conjecture [ 11 ]. However, all of these are significantly weaker than the inapproximability bound in our claim, which only relies on 

𝑃 ≠ 𝑁 𝑃 . For the case of hypergraph partitioning with 𝜀 = 0, the optimum is also known to be approximable to a ˜𝑂 (√𝑛 )-factor [ 50 ]. As such, our result indicates that introducing replication signifi-cantly increases the complexity of the partitioning problem. 

Theorem 4.1. For any 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1), graph partitioning with replica-tion is NP-hard to approximate to any finite factor. 

Proof sketch. The proof relies on showing that it is already NP-hard to decide whether there exists a partitioning with replication of cost 0. Hence it is already NP-hard to distinguish between an optimum cost of 0 or 1; the theorem already follows from this. The main idea of the proof is quite natural: if a partitioning has cost 0, i.e. there are no edges between 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 at all, then 

𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 is a so-called vertex separator in the graph. As such, the problem of partitioning with cost 0 allows a simple reduction from the balanced vertex separator problem, where the allowed size of the separator is set to 𝜀 ·𝑛 , that is, the maximal allowed size of the intersection 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 in the partitioning problem. The concrete proof is somewhat more complex because previous works on balanced vertex separator typically consider the separator size as a problem input. Hence from these works, it only follows that balanced vertex separator is NP-hard for some separator sizes. To prove our theorem for any 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1), we instead require that it is NP-hard for a separator size of 𝜀 · 𝑛 for any 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1). As such, our proof needs some further technical steps to show that balanced vertex separator is NP-hard with separator size 𝜀 · 𝑛 for any 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1). □

The proof above relies on differentiating between an optimum of 0 and 1, but we can also extend this to optimum values of 0 and 

𝑛 2−𝛿 . This shows inapproximability to a large additive term. 

Theorem 4.2. For any 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1) and 𝛿 > 0, graph partitioning with replication is NP-hard to approximate to an 𝑛 2−𝛿 additive term. 

Proof sketch. As a reduction from the previous theorem, for any graph 𝐺 on 𝑁 nodes, we create a new graph 𝐺 ′ on 𝑛 = 𝑁 1/𝛿 

nodes by replacing each node in 𝐺 by a clique of size 𝑛 1−𝛿 . The construction remains polynomial for any fixed 𝛿 . Original edges are replaced by complete bipartite connections between the cliques. We show that this expanded graph 𝐺 ′ fulfills two properties: 

• The optimum in 𝐺 is 0 if and only if the optimum in 𝐺 ′ is 0.

• If the optimum in 𝐺 ′ is not 0, then it is at least 𝑛 2−𝛿 .This shows that it is NP-hard to differentiate between an optimum of 0 and 𝑛 2−𝛿 , hence the theorem follows. The technical part is to prove the second point above: we use several steps to transform any partitioning into an easier-to-handle solution, and then analyze several cases for the lower bound. We also need some additions to the construction to handle the inconvenient fact that we may have 

⌊ 1+𝜀  

> 2

·𝑁 ·𝑛 1−𝛿 ⌋ ≠ ⌊ 1+𝜀  

> 2

·𝑁 ⌋· 𝑛 1−𝛿 , so the clique-expansion of an original partition may not fit into the constraint bounds anymore. □

## 4.2 DAG scheduling 

Complexity questions are often more challenging to study for sched-uling problems where computation and communication costs are combined into the same objective. For the simplest case of free communication, it is not even known whether scheduling for a constant 𝑃 ≥ 3 is NP-hard. For more realistic models, NP-hardness has been long known, and there are also results on the classes of DAGs for which scheduling becomes NP-hard. For BSP in particular, it is known that scheduling is polynomially solvable in chain DAGs (where all in- and outdegrees are at most 1), but already NP-hard in in-trees (where out-degrees are at most 1) and 2-layer DAGs (where any directed path has length at most 1) [ 46 ]. One can observe that these properties remains unchanged even with replication. 

Lemma 4.3. For 𝑃 ∈ 𝑂 (1), BSP scheduling with replication is solvable in polynomial time on chain DAGs, but NP-hard on in-trees and 2-layer DAGs. 

The proof is deferred to Appendix A.4. On a high level, for chain DAGs and in-trees, the out-degree of at most 1 ensures that replica-tion is never beneficial, hence the original proofs carry over to our 

> 5Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

setting. For the case of 2-layer DAGs, some further observations are also required to adapt the original construction [46]. The approximability of the optimal schedule is a more challeng-ing question. For 𝑃 ∈𝑂 (1), the only hardness result we are aware of is a (1 + 𝛿 )-factor inapproximability in the BSP model, for a small 𝛿 > 0 [46 ]. Intuitively, proving inapproximability is difficult because any schedule has an inherent compute cost of at least 𝑛 𝑃 ,and the cost difference between solutions is often small compared to this. To overcome a similar issue in pebbling problems, recent work considered an alternative cost metric which directly subtracts this unavoidable cost from the total [ 6]. This idea generalizes well to scheduling with replication, since it naturally captures any extra cost incurred by either communication steps or replications. 

Definition 4.4. The surplus cost of a BSP schedule (with/without replication) is obtained by subtracting 𝑛 𝑃 from its original BSP cost. To our knowledge, surplus cost has not been studied before in BSP or other models. We show that the optimal surplus cost cannot be approximated to a reasonable factor, either with or without replication. This result is a bit of an outlier in the paper, as it does not highlight a difference between the replicating and non-replicating case. Nonetheless, it provides valuable insight into DAG scheduling problems, and we hope that it motivates the study of surplus-like metrics in the future. 

Theorem 4.5. Assuming the exponential time hypothesis, for 𝑃 =2

and some 𝛿 > 0, the surplus cost in BSP scheduling (with or without replication) is NP-hard to approximate to an 𝑛 1/( log log 𝑛 )𝛿 

factor. 

Proof sketch. The main idea is similar to a 2-layer DAG con-struction that is used to show NP-hardness in [ 46 ]. By changing some gadgets and the analysis, we obtain a reduction from the smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph problem, which is inapproximable to a 

𝑛 1/( log log 𝑛 )𝛿 

factor under the same assumption [37]. On a high level, the construction contains a block gadget for each edge of the original graph (the input of smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph). With extra gadgets and careful adjustments, we can ensure that any reasonable schedule assigns exactly 𝑘 such gadgets to processor 1,and the rest to processor 2. We then create a gadget for each node of the original graph, which incurs a communication or replication step if and only if one of the incident edge gadgets is assigned to processor 1. The rest of the construction allows for perfect work balance and requires no communication, so the surplus cost corre-sponds exactly to the communication or replication steps incurred by the node gadgets that are incident to one of the 𝑘 chosen edges. This allows a reduction to smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph. The cost of communication/replication is actually split between the two proces-sors, so it might be a factor 2 off from the original cost, but this has no affect on approximability to a superconstant factor. The proof details are in Appendix A.5. □

## 5 Replication in partitioning 

We now turn to concrete algorithmic approaches to study the impact of replication empirically. For hypergraph partitioning, we consider a standard representation of the problem as an ILP, and we analyze two different ways to extend this with replication. In the formulations, 𝑣 ∈𝑉 , 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] will always denote a node, hyperedge and processor, respectively. For simplicity, we write Í𝑣 , Í𝑒 and Í𝑝 instead of Í𝑣 ∈𝑉 , Í𝑒 ∈𝐸 and Í𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑃 ] .

## 5.1 ILP formulation of hypergraph partitioning 

Hypergraph partitioning is known to allow a rather straightforward ILP formulation [24]; we briefly outline it here for completeness. For each node 𝑣 and processor 𝑝 , one can use a binary variable 

𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 to indicate whether 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝑝 . For each hyperedge 𝑒 , a binary variable 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 indicates whether there exists any 𝑣 ∈ 𝑒 such that 

𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝑝 . We use Í𝑝 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 = 1 for all 𝑣 to ensure that each vertex is assigned. For all hyperedges 𝑒 , all 𝑣 ∈ 𝑒 and all processors 𝑝 , the constraint 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 ≥ 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 ensures that the variables 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 fulfill their role. The balance constraint can be expressed as Í𝑣 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 ≤ 1+𝜀 𝑃 · 𝑛 . As the objective function, we aim to minimize Í𝑒 (Í𝑝 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 − 1), which describes the (𝜆 − 1)-metric. 

## 5.2 Introducing replication 

We discuss two ways to extend this ILP formulation with replication. 

5.2.1 ILP/D – Duplication. We first consider a limited form of replication: we only allow any specific node to be replicated on at most 2 processors. This is a restriction from the modeling side, but it allows for a simpler ILP representation. We begin by introducing a binary variable 𝑧 𝑣 for each node 

𝑣 to indicate whether 𝑣 is replicated on two processors. We can replace the original constraint Í𝑝 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 = 1 by Í𝑝 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 = 𝑧 𝑣 + 1; this implicitly ensures that Í𝑝 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 ∈ { 1, 2}.The variables 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 now indicate whether the solution uses pro-cessor 𝑝 to cover some part of hyperedge 𝑒 . E.g. if 𝑒 = {𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 },with 𝑣 1 ∈ 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 and 𝑣 2 ∈ 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2, the desired values are 𝑦 𝑒, 1 = 1

but 𝑦 𝑒, 2 = 0, despite the fact that 𝑒 intersects 𝑉 2. We ensure this with the following constraints. If a vertex is not duplicated, i.e. 

𝑧 𝑣 = 0, then we need 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 ≥ 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 as before. We can ensure this with the constraint 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 ≥ 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 − 𝑧 𝑣 , which has no effect if 𝑧 𝑣 = 1. If a vertex is duplicated, i.e., 𝑧 𝑣 = 1, then for each hyperedge 𝑒 with 

𝑣 ∈ 𝑒 and each pair of processors 𝑝 1 and 𝑝 2, we need to ensure that 

𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 1 = 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 2 = 1 implies either 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 1 = 1 or 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 2 = 1. This can be formulated as 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 1 + 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 2 ≥ 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 1 + 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 2 − 1.This results in 𝑃 2 · 𝜅 constraints of this type (recall that 𝜅 is the number of pins), which is a notable increase from the original 

𝑃 ·𝜅 . However, the magnitude of the number of variables remains unchanged, so for a small 𝑃 , this may still be viable. 

5.2.2 ILP/R – Unlimited replication. An alternative approach is to introduce a binary variable 𝑧 (𝑣,𝑒 ),𝑝 for each pin (𝑣, 𝑒 ) in the hyper-graph, and each processor 𝑝 . This indicates whether the replica of node 𝑣 on processor 𝑝 is used to cover 𝑣 in hyperedge 𝑒 .The constraint Í𝑝 𝑧 (𝑣,𝑒 ),𝑝 = 1 for all pins (𝑣, 𝑒 ) ensures that each pin is covered in each hyperedge. For each pin (𝑣, 𝑒 ) and processor 

𝑝 , the constraint 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 ≥ 𝑧 (𝑣,𝑒 ),𝑝 ensures that a node is only used if it is indeed assigned to a processor. Finally, for each pin (𝑣, 𝑒 ) and processor 𝑝 , we add 𝑦 𝑒,𝑝 ≥ 𝑧 (𝑣,𝑒 ),𝑝 : if the pin is covered by 𝑝 , then 𝑝 

is one of the processors used for hyperedge 𝑒 . We can again remove the original constraint Í𝑝 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝 = 1.This provides a more general ILP, but the number of variables now also scales with the number of pins 𝜅 . As such, this ILP has 

> 6Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

more variables both in the primal and dual problem, possibly mak-ing it more challenging for an ILP solver. 

## 6 Replication in scheduling 

Intuitively, the scheduling problem has a higher degree of freedom than partitioning, and hence it is in many ways more challenging to tackle. Due to this, algorithm design for scheduling often focuses on sophisticated heuristics instead of exact solutions. 

## 6.1 Scheduling baselines 

As a baseline, we consider the recent work of Papp et al. [ 44 ], which develops a framework to optimize BSP schedules for DAGs. In particular, we use the following two-step algorithm from [44]: 

• first a good initial schedule is developed using a well-balanced heuristic (named BSPg), which adapts the classical list schedul-ing approach to the BSP model; 

• this is followed by a hill climbing local search, which further improves the schedule by executing small modifications that decrease the cost. The framework of [ 44 ] also considers more advanced methods to further improve small parts of the schedule, but these provide very limited gain at the cost of a very high running time. We point out that our goal is not to compete with this baseline scheduler, but to take the non-replicating BSP schedule it produces, introduce replication steps into this schedule, and analyze how much this can decrease the cost of the baseline schedule. 

## 6.2 Introducing replication 

We consider two ways to introduce replication into a BSP schedule. 

6.2.1 ILP-based method. One natural idea is to once again embed replication into an ILP formulation of the scheduling problem. The ILP formulation of BSP scheduling is rather complex, but it has already been analyzed [ 44 , 46 ]. Replication only needs a trivial change in this formulation: relaxing the constraint that all nodes must be computed exactly once. However, solving scheduling problems via ILPs is much more challenging than in case of partitioning: the scheduling ILP has a much higher number of variables due to the extra dimension of time steps. Even with modern ILP solvers, this approach is only viable for very small graphs in practice. 

6.2.2 The ‘basic’ heuristic. We also consider some heuristic method to also tackle the scheduling problem on much larger DAGs. These algorithms begin from a BSP schedule without replication, and in a local-search-like fashion, they identify improvement opportunities where replacing some communication step(s) in the schedule by replication decreases the total cost. The basic heuristic only considers the simplest improvement steps: replacing a single communication step with replication. That is, for any communication step of sending node 𝑣 from processor 

𝑝 1 to 𝑝 2, we check whether the total cost decreases if we remove this step, and instead replicate 𝑣 on processor 𝑝 2 in an appropriate superstep. The first possible superstep to replicate 𝑣 on 𝑝 2 is the first computation phase where all of 𝑣 ’s parents are already present on 

𝑝 2; the last possible superstep is where 𝑣 is first required for either a computation or communication on 𝑝 2. We select the superstep from this interval where adding the computation of 𝑣 on 𝑝 2 increases the compute cost by the smallest amount. If this cost increase is smaller than the gain from removing the communication step, then we execute this modification, decreasing the total BSP cost. Note that executing such a step might also enable further im-provement steps that were not beneficial before: the gain from removing other communications may become larger, or the cost increase from an extra computation may become smaller. The basic heuristic simply keeps searching for and executing these improve-ment steps as long as it is possible. 

6.2.3 The ‘advanced’ heuristic. We also implement a more ad-vanced heuristic that considers several ways to execute larger mod-ifications, replacing multiple communication steps by replication in a single step. This allows to further improve the schedule even when the basic heuristic is stuck in a local minimum. Our algorithm uses three different approaches to further utilize replication in the schedule (also shown in Figure 3). The first method is batch replication , which replicates single nodes like the basic heuristic, but executes multiple steps at the same time to escape local minima. In particular, the ℎ-relation cost in BSP means that if the maximal communication cost is attained in the send and/or receive cost of multiple processors, then all these send and receive costs need to be decreased simultaneously to ob-tain any decrease in the cost. In batch replication, we consider each superstep in order, and attempt to remove multiple communication steps at the same time; specifically, at least one outgoing/incoming communication from every processor where the send/receive cost is equal to the maximum. We replicate these nodes on the target pro-cessors instead, always choosing the superstep (from the interval of valid options) where this increases the compute costs minimally. Once a step is removed from all send/receive costs that saturate the maximum, the communication cost decreases; if the decrease is larger than the total increase in compute costs, we accept the modi-fication. We continue this process as long as it allows to decrease the total cost; otherwise, we proceed to the next superstep. The second method is superstep merging , which considers all consecutive superstep pairs (𝑠 , 𝑠 +1), and attempts to merge them into a single superstep. This requires changes for all communication steps in superstep 𝑠 . Assume that a node 𝑣 is sent from processor 𝑝 1

to 𝑝 2. If 𝑣 is not yet needed on 𝑝 2 in superstep (𝑠 +1), we can simply keep this communication step in the new (merged) superstep. If 

𝑣 was already present on 𝑝 1 before superstep 𝑠 , we can move the communication to the superstep before 𝑠 . Otherwise, 𝑣 needs to be replicated on 𝑝 2 in the merged superstep, and we need to make the parents of 𝑣 also available on 𝑝 2 by superstep 𝑠 if not present already. For parents that are already computed before superstep 𝑠 , we can simply send them in the superstep before 𝑠 ; however, if a parent of 𝑣 

is first computed on 𝑝 1 in superstep 𝑠 , we also need to replicate it on 

𝑝 2, and continue the process with the parent’s parents in a recursive fashion. Once all the necessary changes are identified, we check the cost of the modified schedule, and execute the merging step if it decreases the cost altogether. Superstep merging is especially useful when the synchronization cost 𝐿 is large; then it is indeed better to have fewer supersteps, but this is often hard to achieve via single-node improvement steps.           

> 7Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman
> 𝑉 2,1𝑉 2,2
> 𝑉 1,1𝑉 1,2
> 𝑣
> 𝑢
> 𝑣
> 𝑢
> 𝑉 2,1𝑉 2,2
> 𝑉 1,1𝑉 1,2
> 𝑢 𝑣
> 𝑢 𝑣
> 𝑉 2,1𝑉 2,2
> 𝑉 1,1𝑉 1,2
> 𝑢 𝑣
> 𝑢 𝑣

Figure 3: Examples for each ingredient of the advanced heuristic. In batch replication (left), we remove the 2 dashed communi-cations simultaneously, replicating 𝑢 and 𝑣 . In superstep merging (middle), we merge 𝑉 𝑖, 2 into 𝑉 𝑖, 1 for 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2}, and replicate 𝑢 and 

𝑣 to replace the dashed communication; the other communication can be kept in the merged superstep. In superstep replication (right), we replicate in 𝑉 2,1 all nodes of 𝑉 1,1 that are ever required on processor 2; this removes the dashed communication. 

The third method is superstep replication , where we take a specific superstep 𝑠 and pair of processors 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, and consider replicating all nodes of 𝑉 𝑝 1,𝑠 in 𝑉 𝑝 2,𝑠 . Intuitively, this may identify a less par-allelizable segment of the schedule that was assigned to a single processor, and allows to save communication afterwards by replicat-ing this segment on other processors. During this step, we replicate all nodes in 𝑣 ∈𝑉 𝑝 1,𝑠 on 𝑉 𝑝 2,𝑠 , except those that are already present on 𝑝 2 or not needed on 𝑝 2 at any later point. If 𝑣 has parents that are not yet present on 𝑝 2 by superstep 𝑠 , we add communication steps to send these to 𝑝 2 in superstep (𝑠 −1). As in superstep merging, we analyze the cost change for each such transformation, and only execute those that decrease the total cost of the schedule. Our advanced heuristic keeps iterating through these 3 methods until none of them allows to further improve the schedule. 

## 7 Experiments 7.1 Experimental setup 

In our experiments, we use a diverse dataset to evaluate the algo-rithms above. For hypergraph partitioning, we assemble a bench-mark from the two applications mentioned before. For MoE parti-tioning, we use open-source profiled data of expert usage from [ 59 ], obtained from running two modern LLMs (FP8 quantized Qwen3-235B and 4 bit quantized Deepseek R1) on the Massive Multitask Language Understanding benchmark with various questions on 57 subjects. This describes the 8-tuple of experts invoked by more than 

1.5 million tokens on each layer. We create hyperedges from the most frequently appearing 8-tuples on a layer, with the hyperedge weight 𝜇 (𝑒 ) being the frequency normalized to [1, 10 ]. We create a separate hyperedge from each of the first 5 layers of Qwen and DeepSeek, choosing the frequency threshold such that the number of pins in the given hypergraphs is at least 1 000 . Any experts that do not appear in these most frequent 8-tuples are discarded. This gives us 5 hypergraphs for both Qwen and DeepSeek, with 81 – 109 

and 220 – 241 nodes, respectively. This new dataset, named moe-8 ,is in itself a small standalone contribution of our paper, which might be a useful benchmark for future works on partitioning. We also create another version of this dataset where instead of the 8-tuples, we consider all the  82

 pairs of nodes appearing in each 

8-tuple. This may allow deeper insight into the distribution of the most frequently invoked experts; indeed, many approaches for MoE partitioning focus on pairs of experts [ 19 ]. We name this dataset 

moe-2 . As before, we add the most frequently appearing pairs as hyperedges until the number of pins is at least 1 000 . From the first 

5 layers, we obtain 5 instances on 80 – 97 (Qwen) and 167 – 239 

(DeepSeek) nodes here. Note that these are actually simple graphs, since we always form hyperedges of size exactly 2.For SpMV, we consider a selection of application matrices from the SuiteSparse sparse matrix collection [ 15 ]. This is similar to the benchmark used in [ 24 ], but with larger matrices. We create two datasets via two different hypergraph models for SpMV, each con-sisting of 10 hypergraphs between 92 – 494 nodes and 184 – 1910 

pins. In the fine-grained model [ 24 , 27 ], each node represents a non-zero, and each hyperedge is a row or column of the matrix, as discussed in Section 3.2. In the more coarse-grained row-net model [ 10 ], each node represents a column, and each hyperedge represents a row, connecting the columns with a non-zero in the given row. The datasets are named spmv-fg and spmv-rn , respec-tively. We note that there are also established benchmarks of much larger hypergraphs to evaluate large-scale partitioning heuristics [ 25 ,52]; however, these are not viable for ILPs due to their size. For scheduling, we consider 3 different datasets of computational DAGs that have previously been used in scheduling-related works: 

• hdb : the HyperDAG DataBase introduced in [ 44 ] represents a variety of computations from areas like linear algebra, graph algorithms or machine learning. We use the 3 largest DAG sets here, giving 52 DAGs with 1 000 –100 000 nodes. 

• psdd : Probabilistic Sentential Decision Diagrams (PSDDs) [ 26 ]are arithmetic circuits for tractable probabilistic inference, whose evaluation naturally forms an irregular DAG [ 35 , 53 ]. We use PSDD circuits from the StarAI Circuit Model Zoo. Ex-cluding tiny DAGs, this gives 29 DAGs on 2 500 –175 000 nodes. 

• sptrsv : the parallel solving of sparse triangular systems can be expressed as a scheduling problem on the DAG representation of a triangular matrix [ 61 ]. We collect 40 application matrices from the SuiteSparse matrix collection [ 15 ]; these correspond to 40 DAGs with 1 000 –150 000 nodes. Many of the computations in these benchmarks have a highly ir-regular structure and are in general hard to parallelize.    

> 8Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems spmv -fg spmv -r nmoe-8 moe-2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cost  reduction  ratio

Figure 4: Distribution of cost reduction ratios on each dataset, for 𝑃 =2, 𝜀 =2.5% (blue/left) and 𝑃 =4, 𝜀 =5% (orange/right). 

We also use the smallest DAG sets from [ 44 ] for the scheduling ILP experiments; this contains 16 DAGs on 40 –80 nodes. To measure the impact of replication, we consider the ratio be-tween the replicating and non-replicating cost (‘cost reduction ra-tio’) for each instance. For datasets, we take the geometric mean of these ratios, and subtract this from 1 to obtain a mean cost reduction value as a percentage. We run the algorithms with various parameters that are in line with previous works on partitioning and scheduling [ 24 , 44 ]. For the ILPs, we use a smaller number of processors to limit the total run-ning time of the experiments. Specifically, for hypergraph partition-ing, we focus on parameters 𝑃 ∈ { 2, 4} and 𝜀 ∈ { 0.0125 , 0.025 , 0.05 }.For the scheduling heuristic, running time is not critical, so we explore a larger set of parameters: our main experiments have 

𝑃 = 8, 𝑔 = 4 and 𝐿 = 20 , but we also investigate other cases with 

𝑃 ∈ { 2, 4, 8, 16 }, 𝑔 ∈ { 1, 4, 16 }, 𝐿 ∈ { 1, 20 , 400 }.In order to solve the ILP problems, we use COPT, a state-of-the-art commercial ILP solver [ 18 ]. We use 5 hours as the time limit for all the ILP problems. We run our experiments using an AMD EPYC 7763 processor (x86), with 1 TB memory and theoretical peak memory throughput of 204.8 GB/s. The C++ implementation of our algorithms are available open-source on GitHub, as well as the new hypergraph benchmarks and the data from our experiments [1]. The datasets and the experimental results are discussed in more technical detail in Appendices B and C, respectively. 

## 7.2 Results for partitioning 

For partitioning, we compare non-replication and replication via the ILPs in Section 5. We always run both ILP/D and ILP/R, and select the better solution found for the cost reduction ratio. We focus on 𝑃 =2 and 𝑃 =4 for our main experiments. However, obtaining ‘comparable’ results for 𝑃 = 2 and 𝑃 = 4 is a non-trivial question. Since each partition can have up to 𝑛 𝑃 + 𝜀 𝑃 ·𝑛 nodes, intu-itively, the slack in a partition is proportional to 𝑛 𝑃 instead of 𝑛 . For 

𝑃 =2, this allows twice as many extra nodes in each partition as in 

𝑃 =4. As such, it is a more reasonable approach instead to keep the value ˆ𝜀 := 𝜀 𝑃 fixed, i.e. to compare 𝜀 = 0.05 for 𝑃 = 4 with 𝜀 = 0.025 

for 𝑃 =2. We use these parameters in our experiments. The cost reduction ratios for the instances are visualized in Fig-ure 4. The figure shows that replication can drastically decrease 

Table 1: Mean cost reduction in partitioning for 𝑃 = 2 and different choices of 𝜀 on the ablation set. The brackets show the number of times where cost was reduced to 0; the mean cost reduction is taken on the remaining instances. 

spmv-fg spmv-rn moe-8 moe-2 

𝜀 = 1.25% 41.52% (0) 11.79% (0) 11.32% (0) 69.66% (0) 

𝜀 = 2.5% 63.49% (1) 25.87% (0) 21.89% (0) 80.31% (0) 

𝜀 = 5% 66.67% (2) 56.32% (0) 35.05% (0) 80.99% (1) the partitioning cost. In particular, the optimal cost with replica-tion actually goes down to 0 for 5 instances with 𝑃 = 2, and for 2

instances with 𝑃 = 4. For the remaining instances, the mean cost reduction is 59 .63% , 41 .31% , 23 .93% , 63 .14% on the datasets spmv-fg ,

spmv-rn , moe-8 and moe-2 , respectively, for 𝑃 =2. The same cost reduction numbers are 65 .22% , 21 .93% , 16 .99% and 42 .49% for 𝑃 =4.This confirms that replication can indeed have a remarkable impact on the optimal communication cost in these problems. For 𝑃 = 2, the ILP solver finds the optimum in all cases. For 

𝑃 =4, the ILPs are much harder: in many cases, the solver cannot find the optimal solution with proof within the 5-hour time limit. Specifically, for partitioning without replication, the solver could almost always prove optimality; with replication, this happened in significantly fewer cases. Nonetheless, if the non-replicating solution is optimal, then any better solution found with replication already establishes a lower bound on the gap between the two optimum values. Furthermore, our experience with the ILP solver suggests that the returned solutions are often (close to) optimal after a short time; the time-consuming part for the solver is to actually prove optimality. As such, we believe that our solutions are likely good indicators of the actual optimum cost in most cases. In Appendix C, we also compare the ILP/D and ILP/R formula-tions in detail based on how often they outperform each other and find optimal solutions. The results indicate that neither of them is clearly superior: ILP/R is stronger in general, but ILP/D is e.g. consistently better on moe-8 .We also note that in the special cases when the optimum cost with replication is actually 0, algorithms for finding balanced vertex separators could also be a viable alternative to our ILPs. Finally, we further discuss how the cost reduction depends on 𝑃 

and 𝜀 . For this, we use a smaller ablation set of 12 instances ( 3 from each dataset), all with 𝑛 ≥ 160 . This reduces the running time of the experiments, and also ensures that the number of nodes allowed in a partition is different for any pair of 𝜀 values we use, so we are indeed solving distinct problems. For 𝑃 =2, we compare the cost reduction for different 𝜀 values in Table 1. These instances are again always solved to optimality. The table shows that as 𝜀 grows, the reductions become significantly larger: while the non-replicating optimum also decreases for larger 

𝜀 , the impact of replication grows much more rapidly. We also run some experiments on the ablation set for larger 𝑃 ;we only summarize these here briefly, with the details deferred to Appendix C. For 𝑃 =4, we again study several 𝜀 values; our re-sults suggest that the mean reduction again grows with 𝜀 , although not so sharply. For 𝑃 = 8, we find that the problem is already too 

> 9Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

Table 2: Mean cost reduction with the basic / advanced heuris-tic for scheduling with replication, for 𝑔 = 4, 𝐿 = 20 , organized by 𝑃 and the dataset. 

dataset 𝑃 = 2 𝑃 = 4 𝑃 = 8 𝑃 = 16 

hdb 0.48% / 12.20% 2.23% / 16.49% 4.11% / 19.17% 6.24% / 22.57% 

psdd 0.10% / 15.45% 1.27% / 22.36% 3.74% / 23.13% 6.11% / 23.09% 

sptrsv 0.78% / 3.88% 3.25% / 7.74% 6.29% / 11.61% 9.24% / 15.21% challenging for the ILP solver: reasonable solutions are only ob-tained for spmv-fn within the time limit. The reductions on these instances are almost identical to those of 𝑃 =4.

## 7.3 Results for scheduling 

For DAG scheduling, we analyze the impact of replication via our scheduling heuristics. Our results on the DAG datasets are summa-rized in Table 2. The two numbers in each cell describe the mean cost reduction achieved by the basic and the advanced heuristic, respectively, compared to the non-replicating initial schedule. The table shows that the algorithms, especially the advanced heuristic, can achieve significant cost reductions with replication, even from an already strong baseline schedule. For 𝑃 = 8, the improvement on the hdb and psdd datasets is 19 .17% and 23 .13% , respectively, but the improvements on a single instance go up to 53 .23% and 33 .62% .It is also visible that the improvement values grow larger for a higher number of processors; intuitively, parallelizing among more processors inherently requires more communication, and hence allowing replication has a higher impact altogether. Table 3 shows the same numbers for 𝑃 =8 with different choices of 𝑔 and 𝐿 . These two BSP parameters directly describe the cost of communication, and hence it is not surprising that a higher 𝑔 or 

𝐿 comes with higher gains from replication. For 𝑔 = 16 , the cost reductions are 40 .97% and 56 .49% for hdb and psdd , respectively; for 𝐿 = 400 , the same numbers are 58 .17% and 34 .53% . Hence for larger communication costs, replication often allow us to reduce the total costs by more than a 2× factor on average. Interestingly, the improvements of the basic heuristic actually decrease for larger 𝐿 values. This is because synchronizations are a much larger portion of the total costs here, and the basic heuristic has no direct way to reduce the number of supersteps. Note that hdb in fact consist of 3 subgroups of different sizes: 

1 000 –2 000 , 5 000 –10 000 , and 50 000 –100 000 nodes. Appendix C shows the same results per subgroup, confirming that the improve-ments are rather consistent over different instance sizes. Table 4 also analyzes each component of the advanced heuristic separately. This shows that both batch replication (BR) and super-step merging (SM) obtain a considerable further cost reduction from the basic heuristic, and hence they both contribute significantly to the final improvement. Superstep merging is in particular very use-ful for higher communication costs. On the other hand, the impact of the superstep replication (SR) is marginal at best. The results confirm that replication can drastically improve on heuristic schedules; however, it is not clear how these costs relate 

Table 3: Mean cost reduction with the basic / advanced heuris-tic for scheduling with replication, for 𝑃 = 8, with different values of 𝑔 and 𝐿 .

dataset 𝑔 = 4

𝐿 = 20 

𝑔 = 1

𝐿 = 20 

𝑔 = 16 

𝐿 = 20 

𝑔 = 4

𝐿 = 1

𝑔 = 4

𝐿 = 400 

hdb 4.11% / 19.17% 2.37% / 9.22% 6.12% / 40.97% 4.47% / 15.31% 2.14% / 58.17% 

psdd 3.74% / 23.13% 2.66% / 4.11% 5.03% / 56.49% 3.88% / 22.03% 2.40% / 34.53% 

sptrsv 6.29% / 11.61% 2.58% / 5.56% 12.7% / 26.45% 7.10% / 10.97% 3.10% / 39.18% 

Table 4: Ablation study: cost decrease obtained by activating only single components of the advanced heuristic, i.e. batch replication (BR), superstep merging (SM) and superstep repli-cation (SR), compared to using only the basic heuristic (B). 

heuristic 𝑃 = 8, 𝑔 = 4, 𝐿 = 20 𝑃 = 8, 𝑔 = 16 , 𝐿 = 20 

hdb psdd sptrsv hdb psdd sptrsv 

B 4.11% 3.74% 6.29% 6.12% 5.03% 12.71% B + BR 11.90% 18.38% 9.56% 21.26% 28.99% 20.33% B + SM 14.63% 21.06% 10.02% 38.69% 55.61% 23.64% B + SR 4.72% 3.77% 6.39% 7.03% 5.03% 12.87% to optimality. Hence we also use ILPs to find the optimal schedules on some very small computational DAGs from [ 44 ]. We run these experiments for 𝑃 ∈ { 2, 4}, with 𝑔 = 4 and 𝐿 = 5; the mean cost reductions are 12 .99% and 21 .08% for 𝑃 = 2 and 𝑃 = 4, respectively. This is consistent with the results of the advanced heuristic on hdb 

and psdd in Table 2. More details are deferred to Appendix C. 

## 8 Conclusion 

Our results demonstrate that replication can indeed significantly reduce the optimal cost in partitioning and scheduling problems. For partitioning, it can reduce the communication cost by 17% –65% ,or even allow to avoid all communication entirely. In scheduling, the cost can be reduced by 11 .61% –23 .13% , or up to 58 .17% for some settings. This is especially impressive because allowing recompu-tation often comes at no other disadvantage or practical cost than requiring model flexibility: in partitioning, the maximal assignment to each partition remains unchanged, whereas in scheduling, the increased compute cost is already factored into these values. The results also show that, unsurprisingly, the gain increases considerably as communication becomes a more dominant part of the problem, either directly via cost parameters or indirectly via the number of processors. Besides the theoretical and experimental insights, our (advanced) heuristic for scheduling is a standalone contribution to utilize this approach for larger DAGs in applications. We believe that devel-oping similar heuristics for replication in both partitioning and scheduling problems is one of the most interesting and impactful opportunities for future work. 

> 10

Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems 

## References 

[1] 2026. Supplementary material. The partitioning and scheduling algorithms in the paper are implemented within the OneStopParellel scheduling toolbox on GitHub: https://github.com/Algebraic-Programming/OneStopParallel. The new MoE hypergraph benchmarks and the data from our experiments are avail-able at: https://github.com/Algebraic-Programming/Artifacts/tree/master/2026_ Replication_in_Graph_Partitioning_and_Scheduling_Problems. [2] Ishfaq Ahmad and Yu-Kwong Kwok. 1998. On exploiting task duplication in parallel program scheduling. IEEE Transactions on parallel and distributed systems 

9, 9 (1998), 872–892. [3] Benny Applebaum, Boaz Barak, and Avi Wigderson. 2010. Public-Key Cryptog-raphy from Different Assumptions. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . ACM, 171–180. [4] Rob H Bisseling. 2020. Parallel Scientific Computation: A Structured Approach Using BSP . Oxford University Press, USA. [5] Toni Böhnlein, Pál András Papp, Raphael S Steiner, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2025. Efficient Parallel Scheduling for Sparse Triangular Solvers. In 2025 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW) .1263–1265. [6] Toni Böhnlein, Pál András Papp, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2025. Red-Blue Pebbling with Multiple Processors: Time, Communication and Memory Trade-Offs. In International Colloquium on Structural Information and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO) . Springer, 109–126. [7] Doruk Bozdag, Fusun Ozguner, and Umit V Catalyurek. 2008. Compaction of schedules and a two-stage approach for duplication-based DAG scheduling. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 20, 6 (2008), 857–871. [8] Israel Casas, Javid Taheri, Rajiv Ranjan, Lizhe Wang, and Albert Y Zomaya. 2017. A balanced scheduler with data reuse and replication for scientific workflows in cloud computing systems. Future Generation Computer Systems 74 (2017), 168–178. [9] Ümit Çatalyürek, Karen Devine, Marcelo Faraj, Lars Gottesbüren, Tobias Heuer, Henning Meyerhenke, Peter Sanders, Sebastian Schlag, Christian Schulz, Daniel Seemaier, et al . 2023. More recent advances in (hyper) graph partitioning. Comput. Surveys 55, 12 (2023), 1–38. [10] Umit V Catalyurek and Cevdet Aykanat. 2002. Hypergraph-partitioning-based decomposition for parallel sparse-matrix vector multiplication. IEEE Transactions on parallel and distributed systems 10, 7 (2002), 673–693. [11] Eden Chlamtáč, Michael Dinitz, and Yury Makarychev. 2017. Minimizing the Union: Tight Approximations for Small Set Bipartite Vertex Expansion. In Pro-ceedings of the 28th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) .881–899. [12] Edward G Coffman and Ronald L Graham. 1972. Optimal scheduling for two-processor systems. Acta informatica 1, 3 (1972), 200–213. [13] David Culler, Richard Karp, David Patterson, Abhijit Sahay, Klaus Erik Schauser, Eunice Santos, Ramesh Subramonian, and Thorsten Von Eicken. 1993. LogP: Towards a realistic model of parallel computation. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM SIGPLAN symposium on Principles and practice of parallel programming (PPoPP) . 1–12. [14] Sami Davies, Janardhan Kulkarni, Thomas Rothvoss, Jakub Tarnawski, and Yihao Zhang. 2020. Scheduling with communication delays via LP hierarchies and clustering. In 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) .IEEE, 822–833. [15] Timothy A Davis and Yifan Hu. 2011. The University of Florida sparse matrix collection. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS) 38, 1 (2011), 1–25. [16] Uriel Feige, Robert Krauthgamer, and Kobbi Nissim. 2000. Approximating the minimum bisection size. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . ACM, 530–536. [17] Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. 2002. Computers and intractability . Vol. 29. Wh freeman New York. [18] Dongdong Ge, Qi Huangfu, Zizhuo Wang, Jian Wu, and Yinyu Ye. 2023. Cardinal Optimizer (COPT) user guide. https://guide.coap.online/copt/en-doc. [19] Seokjin Go and Divya Mahajan. 2025. Moetuner: Optimized mixture of expert serving with balanced expert placement and token routing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06643 (2025). [20] Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Theodore Johnson, Mohammad Reza Khani, and Barna Saha. 2014. Hierarchical graph partitioning. In 26th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA) . ACM, 51–60. [21] Claire Hanen and Alix Munier. 1995. An approximation algorithm for sched-uling dependent tasks on m processors with small communication delays. In 

Proceedings 1995 INRIA/IEEE Symposium on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA) , Vol. 1. IEEE, 167–189. [22] Jonathan MD Hill, Bill McColl, Dan C Stefanescu, Mark W Goudreau, Kevin Lang, Satish B Rao, Torsten Suel, Thanasis Tsantilas, and Rob H Bisseling. 1998. BSPlib: The BSP programming library. Parallel Comput. 24, 14 (1998), 1947–1980. [23] Diyi Hu and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. 2019. Throughput Optimized Scheduler for Dispersed Computing Systems.. In MobileCloud . 76–84. [24] Engelina L Jenneskens and Rob H Bisseling. 2022. Exact k-way sparse matrix par-titioning. In 2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW) . IEEE, 754–763. [25] George Karypis, Rajat Aggarwal, Vipin Kumar, and Shashi Shekhar. 1999. Multi-level hypergraph partitioning: Applications in VLSI domain. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 7 (1999), 69–79. [26] Doga Kisa, Guy Van den Broeck, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche. 2014. Prob-abilistic Sentential Decision Diagrams. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR) .[27] Timon E. Knigge and Rob H. Bisseling. 2020. An improved exact algorithm and an NP-completeness proof for sparse matrix bipartitioning. Parallel Comput. 96 (2020), 102640. [28] Robert Krauthgamer and Uriel Feige. 2006. A Polylogarithmic Approximation of the Minimum Bisection. SIAM Rev. 48 (2006), 99–130. [29] Robert Krauthgamer, Joseph Naor, and Roy Schwartz. 2009. Partitioning graphs into balanced components. In Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM-SIAM sympo-sium on Discrete algorithms (SODA) . SIAM, 942–949. [30] Janardhan Kulkarni, Shi Li, Jakub Tarnawski, and Minwei Ye. 2020. Hierarchy-based algorithms for minimizing makespan under precedence and communica-tion constraints. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) . SIAM, 2770–2789. [31] Tom Leighton and Satish Rao. 1999. Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use in designing approximation algorithms. J. ACM 46, 6 (1999), 787– 832. [32] Renaud Lepere and Christophe Rapine. 2002. An Asymptotic {𝑂 } ( 𝑙𝑛𝜌 /𝑙𝑛𝑙𝑛𝜌 )-Approximation Algorithm for the Scheduling Problem with Duplication on Large Communication Delay Graphs. In Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS) . Springer, 154–165. [33] Elaine Levey and Thomas Rothvoss. 2016. A (1+ epsilon)-approximation for makespan scheduling with precedence constraints using LP hierarchies. In Pro-ceedings of the 48th annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) .168–177. [34] Quanquan C Liu, Manish Purohit, Zoya Svitkina, Erik Vee, and Joshua R Wang. 2022. Scheduling with Communication Delay in Near-Linear Time. In 39th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS) .Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. [35] Jaron Maene, Vincent Derkinderen, and Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires. 2025. KLay: Accelerating Arithmetic Circuits for Neurosymbolic AI. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .[36] Biswaroop Maiti, Rajmohan Rajaraman, David Stalfa, Zoya Svitkina, and Aravin-dan Vijayaraghavan. 2020. Scheduling precedence-constrained jobs on related machines with communication delay. In 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) . IEEE, 834–845. [37] Pasin Manurangsi. 2017. Almost-Polynomial Ratio ETH-Hardness of Approxi-mating Densest k-Subgraph. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . ACM, 954–961. [38] WF McColl and A Tiskin. 1999. Memory-efficient matrix computations in the BSP model. Algorithmica 24, 3-4 (1999), 287–297. [39] Alix Munier and Claire Hanen. 1997. Using duplication for scheduling unitary tasks on m processors with unit communication delays. Theoretical Computer Science 178, 1-2 (1997), 119–127. [40] Rudolf Müller and Dorothea Wagner. 1991. 𝛼 -Vertex separator is NP-hard even for 3-regular graphs. Computing 46, 4 (1991), 343–353. [41] M. Yusuf Özkaya, Anne Benoit, Bora Uçar, Julien Herrmann, and Ümit V. Çatalyürek. 2019. A Scalable Clustering-Based Task Scheduler for Homoge-neous Processors Using DAG Partitioning. In IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) . IEEE, 155–165. [42] David A Papa and Igor L Markov. 2007. Hypergraph Partitioning and Clustering. 

Handbook of Approximation Algorithms and Metaheuristics (2007). [43] Christos Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. 1988. Towards an architecture-independent analysis of parallel algorithms. In Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (STOC) . 510–513. [44] Pál András Papp, Georg Anegg, Aikaterini Karanasiou, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2024. Efficient Multi-Processor Scheduling in Increasingly Realistic Models. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA) . 463–474. [45] Pál András Papp, Georg Anegg, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2023. Partitioning hypergraphs is hard: Models, inapproximability, and applications. In 35th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA) . 415–425. [46] Pál András Papp, Georg Anegg, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2025. DAG Scheduling in the BSP Model. In International Conference on Current Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Science (SOFSEM) . Springer, 238–253. [47] Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N Yzelman. 2025. Multiprocessor Scheduling with Memory Constraints: Fundamental Properties and Finding Optimal Solutions. In Proceedings of the 54th International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP) . 238–247. [48] Daniël M Pelt and Rob H Bisseling. 2015. An exact algorithm for sparse matrix bipartitioning. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 85 (2015), 79–90. 11 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman                                   

> [49] Harald Räcke. 2008. Optimal hierarchical decompositions for congestion min-imization in networks. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . 255–264. [50] Harald Räcke, Roy Schwartz, and Richard Stotz. 2018. Trees for Vertex Cuts, Hypergraph Cuts and Minimum Hypergraph Bisection. In 30th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA) . ACM, 23–32. [51] Harald Räcke and Richard Stotz. 2016. Improved Approximation Algorithms for Balanced Partitioning Problems. In 33rd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS) (LIPIcs, Vol. 47) . 58:1–58:14. [52] Sebastian Schlag, Vitali Henne, Tobias Heuer, Henning Meyerhenke, Peter Sanders, and Christian Schulz. 2016. k-way hypergraph partitioning via n-level recursive bisection. In Proceedings of the 18th Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX) . 53–67. [53] Nimish Shah, Wannes Meert, and Marian Verhelst. 2022. DPU-v2: Energy-efficient execution of irregular directed acyclic graphs. In 2022 55th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) . IEEE, 1288–1307. [54] Ola Svensson. 2010. Conditional hardness of precedence constrained scheduling on identical machines. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . 745–754. [55] Aleksandar Trifunović and William J Knottenbelt. 2008. Parallel multilevel algorithms for hypergraph partitioning. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 68, 5 (2008), 563–581. [56] Leslie G Valiant. 1990. A bridging model for parallel computation. Commun. ACM 33, 8 (1990), 103–111. [57] Leslie G Valiant. 2008. A bridging model for multi-core computing. In European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA) . Springer, 13–28. [58] Bart Veltman, BJ Lageweg, and Jan Karel Lenstra. 1990. Multiprocessor scheduling with communication delays. Parallel computing 16, 2-3 (1990), 173–182. [59] Zhongkai Yu, Yue Guan, Zihao Yu, Chenyang Zhou, Zhengding Hu, Shuyi Pei, Yangwook Kang, Yufei Ding, and Po-An Tsai. 2025. Orders in Chaos: Enhancing Large-Scale MoE LLM Serving with Data Movement Forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05497 (2025). [60] AN Yzelman, Rob H Bisseling, Dirk Roose, and Karl Meerbergen. 2014. Multi-coreBSP for C: a high-performance library for shared-memory parallel program-ming. International Journal of Parallel Programming 42, 4 (2014), 619–642. [61] Behrooz Zarebavani, Kazem Cheshmi, Bangtian Liu, Michelle Mills Strout, and Maryam Mehri Dehnavi. 2022. HDagg: hybrid aggregation of loop-carried dependence iterations in sparse matrix computations. In 2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) . 1217–1227.

## A Theoretical results 

We first discuss the technical details of the theoretical proofs. 

## A.1 Example constructions for cost reduction 

We begin with a more detailed discussion of the examples that show a large cost reduction with replication. For partitioning, consider two cliques of size 1+𝜀  

> 2

·𝑛 that intersect in 𝜀 · 𝑛 nodes (we can take the floor of these value in case they are not integers). Without replication, any partitioning has a cost of at least Ω(𝑛 2): indeed, the 𝜀 · 𝑛 nodes in the intersection are adjacent to all other nodes, so from their outgoing edges, at least 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑛 are cut in any solution. On the other hand, if we are allowed to replicate the 𝜀 · 𝑛 common nodes, the cost of the optimal partitioning is 0.For scheduling, let 𝑐 be a constant parameter, and let us choose 𝑃 

and 𝑔 as constants such that 𝑔 > 𝑃 ·( 𝑃 ·𝑐 +1). Let 𝑚 = 𝑛 𝑐 ·𝑃 +1 . Consider a DAG which consists of a set 𝑈 of 𝑚 nodes, and 𝑃 distinct sets 𝑈 1,..., 𝑈 𝑃 of 𝑚 ·𝑐 nodes each, such that for all 𝑖 ∈ [ 𝑃 ], every node in 𝑈 

has an edge to every node in 𝑈 𝑖 .Without replication, the optimal schedule is to use a single pro-cessor and superstep, resulting in a total (compute-only) cost of 

𝑛 = 𝑚 · ( 𝑃 ·𝑐 + 1). Indeed, if any two nodes from 𝑈 1, ..., 𝑈 𝑃 are computed on different processors, then all nodes from 𝑈 must be sent to at least one other processor, resulting in at least 𝑚 commu-nication steps, and hence a communication cost of at least 𝑚 ·𝑔 𝑃 . This is already larger than 𝑚 · ( 𝑃 ·𝑐 + 1) since we chose 𝑔 > 𝑃 · ( 𝑃 ·𝑐 + 1).However, when 𝑈 1, ..., 𝑈 𝑃 are assigned to the same processor 𝑝 , the nodes in 𝑈 are also cheaper to assign to 𝑝 : computing one of them on 𝑝 increases the compute cost by at most 1, but decreases the communication costs (of values received by 𝑝 ) by 𝑔 > 1.On the other hand, with replication, we can compute 𝑈 on all processors, and assign a separate 𝑈 𝑖 to each processor; this requires no communication, and its total (compute) cost in the single super-step is (𝑐 + 1)· 𝑚 . As such, the ratio between the optimum with and without replication is 𝑃 ·𝑐 +1 

> 𝑐 +1

; with 𝑐 chosen large enough, this gets arbitrarily close to 𝑃 .

## A.2 Proof of Theorem 4.1 

For the proof of Theorem 4.1, we use a reduction from the balanced vertex separator problem. In general, this problem requires us to partition 𝑉 into three disjoint sets 𝑉 𝑎 , 𝑉 𝑏 and 𝑉 ′ such that there are no edges (𝑢, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝐸 such that 𝑢 ∈ 𝑉 𝑎 and 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 𝑏 , the size of the separator |𝑉 ′ | is minimized, and the sizes |𝑉 𝑎 |, |𝑉 𝑏 | satisfy some kind of a balance constraint. There are several variations of this balance constraint in the literature; in particular, many works on complexity and algorithms focus on a version where we must have 

max (| 𝑉 𝑎 |, |𝑉 𝑏 |) ≤ 𝛼 · 𝑛 after the separation for some constant 𝛼 ≥ 12 ,often chosen as 𝛼 = 23 .However, in our proof, we use the variant of the problem consid-ered in e.g. [ 40 ], which requires that min (| 𝑉 𝑎 |, |𝑉 𝑏 |) ≥ 12 · ( 𝑛 − | 𝑉 ′ |) ,or in other words, that |𝑉 𝑎 | = |𝑉 𝑏 |. It is shown in [ 40 ] that this prob-lem is NP-hard, via a simple reduction from the balanced complete bipartite subgraph (BCBS) problem. In particular, the problem of finding a balanced complete bipartite subgraph of size 𝑘 + 𝑘 in a bipartite graph of size 𝑛 is equivalent to finding a separator |𝑉 ′ | of size 𝑛 − 2𝑘 in the complement graph. When the NP-hardness of BCBS is discussed, this often happens without any assumptions on 𝑘 [ 17 ]. As such, we must begin by showing that for any 0 < 𝛿 < 12 , the BCBS problem is NP-hard for the specific choice of 𝑘 = ⌈𝛿 · 𝑛 ⌉. Indeed, for any 0 < 𝛿 < 12 , assume we have a polynomial-time 𝛿 -BCBS algorithm for finding a BCBS of size ⌈𝛿 · 𝑛 ⌉; we show how to use this to solve original problem of finding a BCBS for some specific size 𝑘 ≥ 2, which is known to be NP-hard. If we happen to have ⌈𝛿 · 𝑛 ⌉ < 𝑘 , then we can repeatedly add a pair of new nodes 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 to the graph that are only connected to each other. These cannot be contained in a BCBS; furthermore, each such pair increases the value of 𝛿 · 𝑛 by less than 1. Hence at some point we get 𝑘 = ⌈𝛿 · 𝑛 ⌉, and then our 𝛿 -BCBS algorithm will find a BCBS of size exactly 𝑘 . On the other hand, if ⌈𝛿 · 𝑛 ⌉ > 𝑘 , we can repeatedly add a pair of new nodes 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 that are connected to each other, and also 𝑣 𝑖 is connected to all nodes in class 𝑖 for 

𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2}. These can be included in any BCBS, and adding a new pair increases the size of our BCBS by 1, while it increases 𝛿 · 𝑛 by strictly less than 1. As such, after adding sufficiently many pairs 

ℓ, we get that 𝑘 + ℓ = ⌈𝛿 ·𝑛 ⌉; a BCBS of size (𝑘 + ℓ) exists in the new graph exactly if a BCBS of size 𝑘 exists in the original one. Note that the number of pairs that need to be added in both cases is polynomial in 𝑛 for any given 𝛿 . Hence for any 0 < 𝛿 < 12 , the problem of finding a BCBS of size at least 𝛿 · 𝑛 is NP-hard. From here, the NP-hardness of partitioning with replication fol-lows exactly as in the reduction of [ 40 ]. Specifically, we can assume for simplicity that in any partitioning with replication that both classes 𝑉 1 and 𝑉 2 contain exactly ⌊ (1+𝜀 ) 

> 2

· 𝑛 ⌋ nodes, otherwise, we 

> 12 Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

can insert arbitrary further nodes into the class without increas-ing the cost. In this case, balanced vertex separator is essentially identical to partitioning with replication. In particular, 𝑉 1, 𝑉 2 is a partitioning with replication that has cost 0 if and only if 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2,

𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 and 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 form a balanced vertex separator as defined above: both 𝑉 1 \𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \𝑉 1 need to have at least ⌈ (1−𝜀 ) 

> 2

·𝑛 ⌉ nodes, and there can be no edges from 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 to 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 in order for the partitioning cost to be 0.As such, for some 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1), assume we can decide in polynomial-time if a graph partitioning with replication and with cost 0 exists. Let 𝛿 = (1−𝜀 ) 

> 2

, and consider an instance of the 𝛿 -BCBS problem. As in [ 40 ], we can take the complement of the input graph; this complement has a partitioning with replication of cost 0 exactly if the original graph has a 𝛿 -BCBS. This completes the reduction. Since it is already NP-hard to decide whether the optimum of the partitioning problem is 0 or 1, the inapproximability result follows. 

## A.3 Proof of Theorem 4.2 

We know from the previous proof that for any 𝜀 > 0, it is NP-hard to decide if there is a partitioning with replication of cost 0. For Theorem 4.2, we provide a reduction from this previous problem. Given a graph 𝐺 on 𝑁 nodes, we construct another graph 𝐺 ′ on 

𝑛 nodes such that if the optimum (for partitioning with replication) in 𝐺 is 0, then it is also 0 in 𝐺 ′, but if the optimum is at least 1 in 

𝐺 , then it is at least 𝑛 2−𝛿 in 𝐺 ′. Through our previous NP-hardness result, this implies that it is NP-hard to approximate the optimum to an 𝑛 2−𝛿 additive term. Consider a small constant 𝛿 > 0, and let us select 𝑛 = 𝑁 1/𝛿 ; this way, 𝑛 is still polynomial in 𝑁 for any 𝛿 > 0. Let us replace every node 𝑣 in 𝐺 by a clique of size 𝑛 1−𝛿 ; this way, the total number of nodes is 𝐺 ′ is indeed 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 = 𝑁 (1−𝛿 )/ 𝛿 +1 = 𝑁 1/𝛿 . For each edge 

(𝑢, 𝑣 ) in 𝐺 , let us draw an edge from every node of the clique of 𝑢 to every node in the clique of 𝑣 in 𝐺 ′. Note that in this construction, any two nodes in a clique always have the exact same set of neighbors except for each other. For ease of presentation, let us refer to the three sets 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2,

𝑉 1 \𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \𝑉 1 as divisions. Let us say that a clique (corresponding to an original node of 𝐺 ) is unsplit if all its nodes are in the same division, and it is split otherwise. Considering the original problem in 𝐺 , let us use 𝐵 = ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉

to denote the minimal number of nodes we need to place in both 

𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. Through most of the proof, we assume for simplicity that also in 𝐺 ′, the number of nodes we need to place in both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 is 𝐵 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ; in other words, both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2

and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 can fit exactly 𝐵 of our cliques in 𝐺 ′. Note that this is not necessarily the case due to the ceiling function, since we might have ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ⌉ ≠ ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉ · 𝑛 1−𝛿 , but we will address this technicality separately in the end. It is not hard to see that the optimum is 0 in 𝐺 exactly if it is 

0 in 𝐺 ′. If the optimum is 0 in 𝐺 , then we easily obtain a solution of cost 0 in 𝐺 ′ by placing the corresponding cliques into the same divisions. On the other hand, assume we have a solution of cost 0

in 𝐺 ′. Then due to the sizes of the divisions, we can select 𝐵 cliques for 𝑉 1 \𝑉 2 and 𝐵 cliques for 𝑉 2 \𝑉 1 such that the cliques have at least one node in the corresponding division. The two selections will also be disjoint: our partitioning in 𝐺 ′ has cost 0, so no clique can intersect both divisions. Furthermore, there are also no edges from a clique selected for 𝑉 1 \𝑉 2 to a clique selected for 𝑉 2 \𝑉 1. Thus in 𝐺 ,this gives us 𝐵 + 𝐵 nodes corresponding to the selected cliques with no edges from the nodes selected for 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 to the nodes selected for 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. Placing these nodes into 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 creates a solution of cost 0 in 𝐺 .It remains to show that the optimum in 𝐺 ′ is either 0 or at least 

𝑛 2−𝛿 . We transform an arbitrary solution in 𝐺 ′ to a new solution where a smaller number of cliques is split, without increasing the cost. Assume first that there are two cliques 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 which both have nodes in both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2. Assume without loss of generality that an (arbitrary) node in 𝐶 1 has at least as many edges towards 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 as a node in 𝐶 2. We can then simultaneously move nodes of 𝐶 1 from 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 to 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 and nodes of 𝐶 2 from 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 to 

𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 without increasing the cost. Specifically, if ℓ = min (| 𝐶 1 ∩(𝑉 1 \𝑉 2)| , |𝐶 2 ∩𝑉 1 ∩𝑉 2 |) , then we can move ℓ nodes of 𝐶 1 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 \𝑉 2)

to 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 and ℓ nodes of 𝐶 2 ∩ 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 to 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2. This decreases the number of cliques split between 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 by at least 1.We can continue this procedure until there is at most 1 clique that intersects both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2. We can do the same in a similar fashion to cliques split between 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 and 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2.Similarly, assume there are two cliques 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 which both have nodes in both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. Let 𝑎 1,1 and 𝑎 1,2 denote the number of edges from a node in 𝐶 1 to 𝑉 1 \ ( 𝑉 2 ∪ 𝐶 1 ∪ 𝐶 2) and 

𝑉 2 \ ( 𝑉 1 ∪𝐶 1 ∪𝐶 2), respectively, and 𝑎 2,1 and 𝑎 2,2 denote the number of edges from a node in 𝐶 2 to 𝑉 1 \ ( 𝑉 2 ∪𝐶 1 ∪𝐶 2) and 𝑉 2 \ ( 𝑉 1 ∪𝐶 1 ∪𝐶 2),respectively. If 𝑎 1,1 − 𝑎 1,2 − 𝑎 2,1 + 𝑎 2,2 ≤ 0, then we can again move nodes of 𝐶 1 from 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 to 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 and nodes of 𝐶 2 from 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 to 

𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2, whereas if 𝑎 1,1 − 𝑎 1,2 − 𝑎 2,1 + 𝑎 2,2 > 0, we can move nodes of 𝐶 1 from 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 to 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and nodes of 𝐶 2 from 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 to 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1,as long as one of 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 has no more nodes in either 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 or 

𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. As for the edges between 𝐶 1 and 𝐶 2 in this process, note that there are either no edges from 𝐶 1 to 𝐶 2, or all nodes of 𝐶 1 are adjacent to all nodes of 𝐶 2; in the latter case, the number of cut edges that go from 𝐶 1 to 𝐶 2 remains unchanged in each move. At this point, there is at most one clique that is split between any two specific divisions. There can be no clique 𝐶 that intersects all three divisions, because then every other clique should be unsplit, which is not possible if the sizes of all three divisions are integer multiples of the clique size. Only two possible cases remain. One possibility is that we have no unsplit cliques at all. In this case, if there is a clique in 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and a clique in 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 such that the corresponding nodes are adjacent in 𝐺 , then this already results in 𝑛 1−𝛿 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 cut edges due to the complete bipartite connection. If there are no such cliques, then we have no cut edges at all, and the solution has cost 0.As the other possibility, there still might be three split cliques 

𝐶 1, 𝐶 2, 𝐶 3 such that 𝐶 1 intersects 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1, 𝐶 2 intersects 

𝑉 2 \𝑉 1 and 𝑉 1 ∩𝑉 2, and 𝐶 3 intersects 𝑉 1 ∩𝑉 2 and 𝑉 1 \𝑉 2. In this case, for some 𝑐 1, 𝑐 2 with 𝑐 1 + 𝑐 2 = 𝑛 1−𝛿 , we have 𝑐 1 = |𝐶 1 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2)| =

|𝐶 2 ∩ ( 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1)| = |𝐶 3 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2)| and 𝑐 2 = |𝐶 1 ∩ ( 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1)| =

|𝐶 2 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2)| = |𝐶 3 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2)| , once again because the set sizes are integer multiples of 𝑛 1−𝛿 . Assume w.l.o.g. that 𝑐 1 ≤ 𝑐 2. If a node in 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 1 has at least as many edges towards 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 as a node of 

𝐶 3, then we can swap the nodes 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 1 and 𝐶 3 ∩ 𝑉 2: both sets have cardinality 𝑐 1, the number of cut edges is not increased, and we end 

> 13 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

up with 𝐶 3 ⊆ ( 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2), and only two split cliques between 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2

and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1, which can then be removed with the methods above, again resulting in no unsplit cliques at all. On the other hand, assume that a node in 𝐶 3 has more edges towards 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 than a node in 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 1. With 𝑐 1 ≤ 𝑐 2, both the size of 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 and the size of 𝐶 3 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2) is at least 12 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 . Hence nodes in 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 1 have at least 12 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 edges towards 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 (they are adjacent to 𝐶 1 ∩ 𝑉 2), so nodes in 𝐶 3 also have at least 12 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 

neighbors in 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. With 𝐶 3 ∩ ( 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2) ≥ 12 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 , this is at least  

> 14

· 𝑛 2−2·𝛿 = Ω(𝑛 2−2𝛿 ) cut edges. Note that above we showed a factor of 𝑛 2−2𝛿 or Ω(𝑛 2−2𝛿 ), whereas the theorem has 𝑛 2−𝛿 for any 𝛿 > 0. However, both the factor 2

in the exponent and the constant in the Ω can be removed with a choice of any smaller 𝛿 ′ < 12 · 𝛿 in the same proof, since we asymptotically have Ω(𝑛 2−2𝛿 ′

) > 𝑛 2−𝛿 .Finally, recall that we assumed ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ⌉ = ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉ · 𝑛 1−𝛿 

for convenience, whereas this is often not the case. To resolve this, we can select a different balance parameter 𝜀 ′ such that 0 < 𝜀 ′ < 𝜀 ,and we in fact consider a reduction from the original problem with 𝜀 ′; recall that Theorem 4.1 holds for any 𝜀 ′ ∈ ( 0, 1). If we consider 𝑛 large enough, we can always ensure ⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ⌉ <

⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

·𝑁 ⌉ · 𝑛 1−𝛿 . We now add several extra nodes to the construction that are adjacent to every other node in 𝐺 ′; we do this until we have 

⌈ 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑛 0⌉ = ⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉ · 𝑛 1−𝛿 for the new total number of nodes 𝑛 0.This is indeed always possible, since incrementing 𝑛 0 by 1 increases  

> 1−𝜀
> 2

·𝑛 0 by at most 12 . This ensures that exactly ⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

·𝑁 ⌉ cliques fit into both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1. Furthermore, we can assume that the extra nodes are always in 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2; otherwise, swapping an extra node with a non-extra node in 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2 never increases the number of cut edges. With all the extra nodes in 𝑉 1 ∩ 𝑉 2, the problem is reduced to the simplified setting above: both 𝑉 1 \ 𝑉 2 and 𝑉 2 \ 𝑉 1 has enough space for exactly ⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉ cliques, and 𝑉 1 ∩𝑉 2 has enough space exactly for the remaining cliques besides the extra nodes. It only remains to discuss the effect of these extra nodes on 𝑛 0.For a naive bound, we will ensure with the choice of 𝜀 ′ that we have 

(1−𝜀 ′) ≤ 2·( 1−𝜀 ); after restructuring, this is equivalent to 𝜀 ′ ≥ 2·𝜀 −1.In case if 𝜀 ≤ 12 , this holds automatically for any 𝜀 ′ > 0. Otherwise, if 𝜀 > 12 , we can specifically select 𝜀 ′ = 2·𝜀 −1. Furthermore, note that for 𝑁 large enough, we also have ⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

·𝑁 ⌉ ≤ 2· 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

·𝑁 . Altogether, this implies that ⌈ 1−𝜀 ′ 

> 2

· 𝑁 ⌉ · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ≤ 4 · 1−𝜀  

> 2

· 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 ; as such, the new total number of nodes is at most 𝑛 0 ≤ 4 · 𝑁 · 𝑛 1−𝛿 = 4 · 𝑛 after adding the extra nodes. This means that in our proof, the number of cut edges becomes 𝑛 2−𝛿 ≥ 116 · 𝑛 02−𝛿 = Ω(𝑛 02−𝛿 ). To remove the constant factor and obtain 𝑛 02−𝛿 , we can again apply the same proof with a choice of any 𝛿 ′ < 𝛿 .

## A.4 Proof of Lemma 4.3 

Lemma 4.3 claims that the properties for BSP scheduling on specific subclasses of DAGs in [ 46 ] also carry over to BSP scheduling with replication. In DAGs with out-degree at most 1, there is nothing to gain from replicating a node 𝑣 . If 𝑣 has no out-neighbor, we can simply remove one of the replicas of 𝑣 without any effect. If 𝑣 has an out-neighbor 𝑢 , we can assume that 𝑢 is not replicated (via an induction in a reverse topological order), but computed on a single processor 

𝑝 . If 𝑣 is computed on 𝑝 , then its other replica can be discarded. If 𝑣 is computed on two distinct devices different from 𝑝 , then 𝑣 

can be discarded from the processor which sends the value of 𝑣 

to 𝑝 in a later superstep (or does not send it at all); if both send it in the same superstep, we can discard an arbitrary one. As such, the problems in this case are essentially equivalent to scheduling without replication. For the hardness results on 2-layer DAGs, we do need to make some modifications to the original proof construction in [ 46 ]. Note that once again, the sink nodes are not replicated in any reasonable solution, but the source nodes might be. For instance, for the 2-block gadgets that are a main ingredient of the construction, our new setting now only ensures that if the second-level blocks are split, then each node in the first level must be either sent or replicated ;as such, we need to increase the size of the first-level blocks appro-priately to ensure that replicating each node from the block also comes with a prohibitively large cost. We have the same case for the first-level nodes 𝑣 𝑒 ′ and ˆ𝑣 𝑖 that might be needed on both processors: these can now either be sent or replicated. We pick any 𝑔 > 1 to ensure that replication is the cheaper method, and we also modify the cost limit from 𝐶 0 = 𝑛  

> 2

+ (| 𝐸 ′ | −  𝑘 

> 2

) · 𝑔 to 𝐶 0 = 𝑛  

> 2

+ (| 𝐸 ′ | −  𝑘 

> 2

),so that besides the minimal work cost, it allows at most (| 𝐸 ′ | −  𝑘 

> 2

)

replication steps on both processors. The arguments of the original proof then all carry over to the new setting, with communication steps replaced by replications. For more details, we refer the reader to the original proof in [46]. 

## A.5 Proof of Theorem 4.5 

The proof construction for Theorem 4.5 is also similar to the 2-layer DAG construction of [ 46 ], but requires more significant changes. Here we focus on the modifications to the construction; for a de-tailed discussion of the original construction that motivates the idea, we again refer the reader to [46]. We present the proof for BSP scheduling with replication; we discuss in the end how to also adapt it to BSP scheduling without replication. The main building blocks of the construction are 2-level block gadgets (𝑈 (1) , 𝑈 (2) ), which consist of a set 𝑈 (1) of source nodes, a set 𝑈 (2) of sink nodes, and edges (𝑢 1, 𝑢 2) for all 𝑢 1 ∈𝑈 (1) , 𝑢 2 ∈𝑈 (2) .For all blocks, we have |𝑈 (1) | ≥ 𝑀 1, |𝑈 (2) | ≥ 𝑀 2 for some large values 𝑀 1, 𝑀 2. Note that there is no reason to replicate any of the nodes in 𝑈 (2) , since they are sink nodes. Furthermore, in any reasonable solution, all nodes of 𝑈 (2) are assigned to the same pro-cessor; otherwise, each node in 𝑈 (1) must be either communicated or replicated, which results in a cost of at least 𝑀 1 

> 2

· min (1, 𝑔 ), and the construction ensures that we can always trivially find a solution of lower cost. As such, we may assume that each 𝑈 (2) is assigned entirely to a single processor. In contrast to the proof in [ 46 ] which reduces from the clique problem, our modified construction provides a reduction from the smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph problem: given an undirected graph 

𝐺 0 (𝑉 0, 𝐸 0) on 𝑁 = |𝑉 0 | nodes, our goal is to find a minimal set of nodes such that their induced subgraph contains at least 𝑘 

edges. The problem is known to be NP-hard to approximate to an 𝑁 1/( log log 𝑛 )𝛿 ′

factor for some constant 𝛿 ′ > 0, assuming the exponential time hypothesis [37]. 

> 14 Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

For every edge 𝑒 0 ∈ 𝐸 0 of the input graph 𝐺 0, we create a block 

(𝑈 (1) 

> 𝑒 0

, 𝑈 (2) 

> 𝑒 0

) with |𝑈 (1) 

> 𝑒 0

| = 𝑀 1, |𝑈 (2) 

> 𝑒 0

| = 𝑀 2. For every node 𝑣 0 ∈𝑉 0,we create a source node 𝑣 in our construction, and draw an edge from 𝑣 to an arbitrarily selected node of |𝑈 (2) 

> 𝑒 0

| for each edges 𝑒 0

that is incident to 𝑣 0 in 𝐺 0. We also add two blocks (𝑈 (1) 

> 1

, 𝑈 (2) 

> 1

)

and (𝑈 (1) 

> 2

, 𝑈 (2) 

> 2

) to the construction, with |𝑈 (1) 

> 1

| = |𝑈 (1) 

> 2

| = 𝑀 1,but |𝑈 (2) 

> 1

| = (𝑘 + 1) · 𝑀 2 and |𝑈 (2) 

> 2

| = (| 𝐸 0 | − 𝑘 + 1) · 𝑀 2. For each representative 𝑣 of a node 𝑣 0 ∈ 𝑉 0, we also draw an edge from 𝑣 to an arbitrary node in 𝑈 (2) 

> 1

. Finally, we add |𝐸 0 | · 𝑀 1 + | 𝑉 0 | isolated nodes to finish the construction. The intended BSP schedule for the DAG is as follows. We can assign (𝑈 (1) 

> 𝑖

, 𝑈 (2) 

> 𝑖

) to processor 𝑖 for 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2}. We can assign |𝐸 0 |− 𝑘 

of the blocks (𝑈 (1) 

> 𝑒 0

, 𝑈 (2) 

> 𝑒 0

) to processor 1 and the remaining 𝑘 to processor 2; this already ensures that the second blocks 𝑈 (2) of the block gadget altogether contribute the same amount of nodes to both processors. We then assign all sources 𝑣 that correspond to a node 𝑣 0 ∈𝑉 0 to processor 1, and if 𝑣 0 has an incident edge gadget assigned to processor 2, then we also replicate 𝑣 on processor 2.Assume there are 𝑑 nodes replicated on processor 2 this way. Finally, we split the isolated nodes between the processors to ensure that the node assignment is as balanced as possible: we assign 𝑘 · 𝑀 1 + ⌈ 𝑑  

> 2

⌉

isolated nodes to processor 1, and (| 𝐸 0 | − 𝑘 ) · 𝑀 1 + | 𝑉 0 | − ⌈ 𝑑  

> 2

⌉

isolated nodes to processor 2. This schedule consists of only a single superstep, requires no communication at all, and its surplus cost is ⌈𝑑  

> 2

⌉.The appropriate choice of parameters ensures that any reason-able schedule is of the form above. Indeed, 𝑀 1 > |𝑉 0 | + 1 > 𝑑 and 

𝑔 > 1 ensures that splitting a sink group 𝑈 (2) , as discussed above, results in a higher surplus cost than the above schedule with any choice of 𝑘 edges. Let 𝑀 ′ 

> 2

= 2 · (| 𝐸 0 | + 2) · 𝑀 1 + 2 · | 𝑉 0 | denote the number of nodes in the construction besides the sink groups 

𝑈 (2) . We then select 𝑀 2 > 𝑀 ′ 

> 2

+ 2· | 𝑉 0 | + 2. This ensures that the sink groups 𝑈 (2) altogether must add up to exactly (| 𝐸 0 | + 1) · 𝑀 2

nodes on both processors; otherwise, the compute cost is at least 

2 · (| 𝑉 0 | + 1) higher on one of the processors, so we again have a surplus cost of at least |𝑉 0 | + 1 > 𝑑 . Similarly, we cannot assign 

𝑈 (2) 

> 1

and 𝑈 (2) 

> 2

to the same processor due to their large size: even if all other nodes are assigned to the other processor, this would have a surplus cost of |𝑀 2 | 

> 2

> 𝑑 at least. As such, the only way to balance the sink groups 𝑈 (2) without splitting a group is to assign 

𝑈 (2) 

> 1

and (| 𝐸 0 | − 𝑘 ) edge gadgets to one processor (assume w.l.o.g. that this is processor 1), and assign 𝑈 (2) 

> 2

and the remaining 𝑘 edge gadgets to processor 2.This already implies that the value of all source vertices 𝑣 (that correspond to a 𝑣 0 ∈ 𝑉 0) must eventually be present on processor 

1, and if 𝑑 of them have incident edges 𝑒 0 with the corresponding gadget assigned to processor 2, then these 𝑑 values must also be eventually present on processor 2. Whether this happens with replication or communication, this results in a surplus cost of at least ⌈𝑑  

> 2

⌉. On the other hand, a surplus cost of only ⌈𝑑  

> 2

⌉ is always obtainable in a single superstep as discussed above, by keeping 𝑈 (1)

and 𝑈 (2) on the same processor for all blocks, assigning all nodes 

𝑣 to processor 1 and replicating the 𝑑 required ones on processor 

2, and then assigning the appropriate number of isolated nodes to each processor to maintain work balance. This means that we can assume that all our schedules are in this form; if an approximation algorithm to BSP scheduling (with or without replication) returns a schedule that does not satisfy these properties, we can simply replace it by a schedule fulfilling these properties, and this will have even lower (surplus) cost. This implies that if the optimum cost of the input smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph problem is OPT 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆 , then the corresponding BSP sched-uling problem will have optimal surplus cost OPT 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 = ⌈ OPT 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆  

> 2

⌉,and hence in particular, we have OPT 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆 ≥ OPT 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 . Similarly, if an approximation algorithm for BSP scheduling returns a schedule with surplus cost SOL 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 , then by selecting the edge gadgets as-signed to processor 2, we can convert this into a smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph solution on at most SOL 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆 ≤ 2 · SOL 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 nodes. Also note that with our choice of parameters, we have 𝑀 1 = 𝑂 (𝑁 ) and 

𝑀 2 = 𝑂 (𝑁 3); the number of nodes in the construction is altogether 

𝑛 = 𝑂 (𝑁 5), so there is a small constant 𝑐 such that 𝑛 ≤ 𝑐 ·𝑁 5.Recall that 𝛿 ′ denotes the constant from the inapproximabil-ity result for smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph [ 37 ], and let us select a constant 𝛿 such that 𝛿 > 𝛿 ′. Assume we have a polynomial-time approximation algorithm for the surplus cost in BSP scheduling to a  

> SOL 𝑠𝑢𝑟 𝑝
> OPT 𝑠𝑢𝑟 𝑝

≤ 𝑛 1/( log log 𝑛 )𝛿 

factor. Then for the corresponding solution to smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph, we have that SOL 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆 

OPT 𝑆𝑘𝐸𝑆 

≤ 2 · SOL 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 

OPT 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝 

≤ 2 · 𝑛 1/( log log 𝑛 )𝛿 

.

With 𝑛 ≤ 𝑐 · 𝑁 5 and 𝑁 ≤ 𝑛 , the right-hand side can be further upper bounded by 2 ·𝑐 · 𝑁 5/( log log 𝑁 )𝛿 

. Since 𝛿 > 𝛿 ′, there exists an 𝑁 large enough such that 2 ·𝑐 · 𝑁 5/( log log 𝑁 )𝛿 

< 𝑁 1/( log log 𝑁 )𝛿 ′

.As such, we have obtained an 𝑁 1/( log log 𝑁 )𝛿 ′

-factor approximation algorithm for the smallest 𝑘 -edge subgraph problem. This completes the reduction. If we instead consider the BSP scheduling problem without repli-cation, then we only need to replace replication steps by communi-cation steps in the proof to hold in an identical way. Specifically, let us now select 𝑔 = 1 and 𝐿 = 0. The source nodes that needed to be replicated before now need to be communicated to the other processor. A reasonable solution distributes these in a balanced way among the two processors, so the single communication phase in-curs a cost of 𝑔 ·⌈ 𝑑  

> 2

⌉ = ⌈𝑑  

> 2

⌉, which is the same surplus cost as before. With this, the arguments above all carry over to the non-replicating case, too. 

## B Benchmarks for the experiments 

We now discuss the experiment benchmarks in more detail. 

## B.1 For partitioning 

MoE hypergraphs. The hypergraph benchmark for MoE optimiza-tion is novel in this paper. We use open-source dataset of [ 59 ], which profiles the expert usage of modern MoE frameworks on several benchmarks. The dataset offers two Mixture-of-Experts models: Qwen (FP8 quantized Qwen3-235B) on 128 experts per layer, and DeepSeek (4 bit quantized Deepseek R1 using AWQ) on 256 ex-perts per layer. From the datasets, we use the Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark, which measures 

> 15 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

the capabilities of the LLMs in 57 different subjects, ranging from natural sciences to social sciences and humanities. For both models, data is available for both the prefill and the decode phase; we focus on the data from the decode phase, since the optimization of this is often more relevant. The benchmark altogether provides the expert access pattern of more than 1.5 million tokens for DeepSeek and almost 1.8 million tokens for Qwen, thus allowing to build rather accurate hypergraph models of expert usage. We form hypergraphs in the moe-8 dataset as follows. We con-sider the 8-tuples of experts that each of the 1.5+ millions of tokens invokes on a specific layer, and we select the 8-tuples that appear most frequently. We select a pin limit parameter 𝜅 0, and we find the smallest integer 𝑓 such that there are at least 𝜅 0 

> 8

distinct 8-tuples appearing at least 𝑓 times. We create a hyperedge for each 8-tuple that appears at least 𝑓 times; this ensures that the number of pins in the hypergraph is 𝜅 0 or only slightly above. For the weight of each hyperedge, we consider the frequency of the given 8-tuple and normalize it into the range [1, 10 ], with values below 1 rounded up to 1. On the other hand, the weights of the nodes are uniformly 1

here. For the moe-2 dataset, we follow the same procedure, but instead of the 8-tuples, we consider all the subsets of size 2 in each 8-tuple for the given layer. The interpretation of the pin limit 𝜅 0 is adjusted accordingly: we now find the smallest integer 𝑓 such that there are at least 𝜅 0 

> 2

distinct pairs appearing at least 𝑓 times. Focusing on subsets of size 2 actually creates a simple graph, which is a special case of a hypergraph; as such, this also provides some insight into the relative hardness of graph partitioning to hypergraph partition-ing for our ILP solver. Note that the moe-2 dataset is also motivated by many practical approaches in this area, which also often choose to focus only on pairs of frequently co-occurring experts instead of larger subsets [19]. With the methodology above, our hypergraphs will often contain isolated nodes when a specific experts does not appear in any of the 

𝑓 most frequent hyperedges. Since these isolated nodes might make the partitioning problem substantially easier, we remove them to obtain connected hypergraphs for our experiments. However, we point out that of course in a practical application of the method, these experts also need to be placed on some device. The accurate modeling of this setting would ideally require a more sophisticated hypergraph model where the connection of these nodes to the rest of the experts is also represented, but without resulting a signifi-cant increase of the number of hyperedges or pins. We leave the exploration of these more advanced hypergraph models to domain-specific future work. Our goal is hence to select a relatively small 𝜅 0 so that the number of pins is similar to the other dataset, but we still want this to cover a high portion of the original experts. Our analysis of the data shows that the first layers of the LLMs are much more suitable for this: the same choice of 𝜅 0 covers much more experts here. As such, for both Qwen and DeepSeek, we select the first 5 layers of the model to form a hypergraph in our test set. In Qwen, this simply means the layers indexed 0-4. In DeepSeek, layers 0-2 do not actually contain experts yet, so here the first 5 expert layers actually corresponds to layers 3–7; to avoid confusion, we also re-index these to the range 

0-4.

Table 5: Properties of MoE hypergraphs: name, model ( 8-tuples or pairs), and number of nodes, hyperedges, pins. 

name model nr. nodes nr. hyper-edges nr. pins Qwen_l0 moe-8 109 125 1000 Qwen_l1 moe-8 94 125 1000 Qwen_l2 moe-8 88 125 1000 Qwen_l3 moe-8 81 126 1008 Qwen_l4 moe-8 86 126 1008 Qwen_l0 moe-2 97 500 1000 Qwen_l1 moe-2 92 500 1000 Qwen_l2 moe-2 84 500 1000 Qwen_l3 moe-2 80 501 1002 Qwen_l4 moe-2 80 500 1000 DeepSeek_l0 moe-8 187 125 1000 DeepSeek_l1 moe-8 187 126 1008 DeepSeek_l2 moe-8 201 125 1000 DeepSeek_l3 moe-8 215 126 1008 DeepSeek_l4 moe-8 212 125 1000 DeepSeek_l0 moe-2 149 500 1000 DeepSeek_l1 moe-2 141 500 1000 DeepSeek_l2 moe-2 165 500 1000 DeepSeek_l3 moe-2 161 502 1004 DeepSeek_l4 moe-2 199 500 1000 For our hypergraphs, we choose 𝜅 0 = 1000 . For the case of Qwen, this already ensures that in each of the first 5 layers, even with the restriction to pairs in moe-8 , we cover at least 80 of the 128 experts. Note compared to the smaller SpMV hypergraphs, this generally produces instances with a smaller number of nodes but a higher number of pins. For DeepSeek, we use the same choice of 𝜅 0 = 1000 ,which produces hypergraphs with a similar number of pins, but more nodes and somewhat smaller average degree. We point out that we also experimented with 𝜅 0 = 2000 with DeepSeek in order to obtain some even larger hypergraphs; however, the ILP solver struggled to find reasonable solutions for these within our 5-hour time limit. The properties of the instances are also summarized in Table 5. Note that the primary aspect for the sorting of the table rows is not the dataset that that the instance is contained in ( moe-8 or moe-2 ), but the LLM model where it originates from. 

SpMV hypergraphs. For SpMV, we use the SuiteSparse matrix col-lection [ 15 ], a popular benchmark for sparse matrix computations, available at https://sparse.tamu.edu/. For both the fine-grained and the row-net case, we select 10 matrices of varying size ranging from 

90 to 500 nodes. Our goal was to select matrices that originate from 

> 16 Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

Table 6: Properties of SpMV hypergraphs: name, model (Fine-Grained or Row-Net), and number of nodes, hyperedges, pins. 

name model nr. nodes nr. hyper-edges nr. pins can_24 spmv-fg 92 48 184 bcspwr02 spmv-fg 108 98 216 refine spmv-fg 153 91 306 mesh1e1 spmv-fg 177 96 354 d_dyn spmv-fg 238 174 476 bcspwr03 spmv-fg 297 236 594 west0156 spmv-fg 371 312 742 impcol_c spmv-fg 411 274 822 west0132 spmv-fg 414 264 828 bfwa62 spmv-fg 450 124 900 bcspwr03 spmv-rn 118 118 297 impcol_c spmv-rn 137 137 411 west0156 spmv-rn 156 156 371 rajat14 spmv-rn 180 180 1503 impcol_e spmv-rn 225 225 1308 lshp_265 spmv-rn 265 265 1009 bcspwr04 spmv-rn 274 274 973 lp_lotfi spmv-rn 366 153 1136 west0479 spmv-rn 479 479 1910 494_bus spmv-rn 494 494 1080 a diverse set of application areas, while also filtering out matrices with heavily structured nonzero patterns where the best partition-ing would be trivial to find. We also made sure to include some of the larger matrices from the experiments of [24]. In the fine-grained model, each node represents a non-zero, and as such their compute weight is uniformly 1. In the row-net model, the weight of each vertex (corresponding to a column) is defined as the number of non-zero entries in the given column [ 10 ]. The weight of each hyperedge is uniformly 1 in both of the models. The properties of the instances are summarized in Table 6. 

## B.2 For scheduling 

The hdb dataset. The hdb dataset uses the computational DAG database introduced by Papp et al. for studying scheduling algo-rithms in the BSP model [ 44 ]. The dataset consists of 5 smaller datasets, named tiny (40-80 nodes), small (250-600 nodes), medium (1000-2000 nodes), large (5000-10000 nodes) and huge (50000-100000 nodes). For the hdb dataset, we combine the medium, large and huge datasets, thus altogether obtaining 52 computational DAGs with the number of nodes between 1000 –100000 . The dataset is avail-able at https://github.com/Algebraic-Programming/Artifacts/tree/ master/SPAA_2024_Efficient_Multi-Processor_Scheduling/database/ used_for_experiments/test_set. Most of the computational DAGs in this dataset are derived from a fine-grained representation of four fundamental computations (SpMV, conjugate gradient, 𝑘 -nearest neighbors, iterated matrix multiplication) in algebraic form, using a matrix with a random-ized non-zero pattern. There are also a few DAGs that correspond to a coarse-grained representation of computations from similar areas. The DAGs in the dataset also contain node weights for the 4

fine-grained groups; for the few coarse-grained graphs, these are uniformly 1. We summarize the number of nodes and directed edges in each of these DAGs in Table 7. To briefly analyze the relation of the heuristic costs to optimality, our scheduling ILP experiments for also consider the so-called tiny dataset from [ 44 ], which contains 16 computational DAGs of 40 –80 

nodes, with very similar structure and origin to hdb .

The psdd dataset. The psdd dataset originates from the Circuit Model Zoo of the UCLA Star AI Lab; Shah et al. use this dataset for experiments in their recent work on DAG-specific compilation [ 53 ]. The dataset is available at https://github.com/UCLA-StarAI/Circuit-Model-Zoo/tree/master/psdds. Originally, the dataset also contains some very small example DAGs; we remove these, restricting our-selves to DAGs above 1000 nodes. This results in a dataset of 29 

instances; 26 of these are between 2686 and 40034 nodes, and there are three larger instances with 63488 , 89389 and 174135 nodes, respectively. The properties of these computational DAGs are sum-marized in Table 8. 

The sptrsv dataset. The task of efficiently parallelizing sparse tri-angular system solving (SpTRSV) can be naturally captured as a DAG scheduling problem, where each node represents a row of the triangular matrix, and each directed edge corresponds to a depen-dency that is established by a non-zero entry [ 61 ]. We again turn to the SuiteSparse matrix collection [ 15 ] at https://sparse.tamu.edu/ to build the sptrsv dataset from such computations. We select 40 

symmetric square matrices with 1000 -200000 rows, mostly corre-sponding to application areas. We consider the lower triangular part of each of these matrices, and construct a computational DAG that represents the SpTRSV problem on the corresponding matrix. This gives us 40 computational DAGs; 38 of these are between 1074 

and 102158 nodes, whereas the two largest ones have 141347 and 

146689 nodes, respectively. The fundamental properties of these computational DAGs are summarized in Table 9. 

## C Experimental results 

This section discusses further details of the experimental results. 

## C.1 Partitioning results 

The improvements achieved via replication on our partitioning benchmarks are already discussed in the main part of the paper. Here we discuss some further technical details. 

C.1.1 Main experiments. We emphasize again that for the ILP solver, the 𝑃 = 4 case is drastically more challenging than 𝑃 =

2; while for 𝑃 = 2 all ILPs (even replicating ones) are solved to optimality, often in a matter of minutes, for 𝑃 = 4, the replicating ILPs can often not find the optimum within the 5-hour time limit. 

> 17 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman

Table 7: Properties of computational DAGs in the hdb dataset: name, as well as number of nodes and edges. The original names in the dataset are replaced by short identifiers for the sake of brevity. 

DAG nr. nodes nr. edges exp_N35_K4 1020 2028 CG_N12_K6 1067 2179 kNN_N40_K5 1073 2007 exp_N30_K6 1085 2268 CG_N9_K9 1099 2242 spmv_N60 1170 1575 kNN_N30_K8 1219 2601 exp_N30_K8 1395 3024 CG_N15_K7 1512 3116 CG_N12_K10 1527 3089 kNN_N50_K4 1541 2763 kNN_N30_K10 1585 3519 spmv_N65 1604 2211 exp_N40_K5 1632 3480 CG_N21_K5 1888 3996 kNN_N50_K5 1896 3801 spmv_N70 1920 2670 exp_N44_K5 1932 4170 exp_N30_K10 1950 4443 kNN_N30_K12 1951 4437 CG_N17_K8 1976 4134 kNN_N70_K7 5228 11991 spmv_N120 5326 7629 kNN_N45_K15 5392 13275 CG_N35_K8 5396 12153 exp_N50_K12 5434 13248 DAG nr. nodes nr. edges exp_N70_K5 5550 12825 CG_N25_K17 5658 12072 kNN_N55_K14 6941 17244 exp_N80_K6 7056 16704 exp_N55_K14 7230 17934 CG_N40_K10 7335 16632 CG_N24_K22 7383 16145 spmv_N130 7482 10833 kNN_N75_K9 7550 18231 kNN_N60_K15 8998 22722 spmv_N150 9088 13182 kNN_N90_K8 9108 21717 exp_N60_K17 9125 22821 exp_N90_K7 9632 23394 CG_N45_K13 9786 22088 CG_N30_K24 9941 21754 cg_gyro_m 47023 70893 bicgstab_gyro 50195 80373 exp_N75_K60 54229 146520 spmv_N300 54300 80550 CG_N60_K55 54324 127658 kNN_N100_K50 56521 151731 hpcg 72685 193610 exp_N100_K40 83394 232080 kNN_N250_K15 94667 253986 CG_N120_K35 96685 241842 We also note that in some of the hardest instances for 𝑃 = 4,the replicating ILPs actually do not find a better solution than that of the non-replicating optimum. In these cases, we considered the improvement ratio to be 1, since this is clearly an upper bound on the actual ratio. A natural option here for future is work is to actually initialize the replicating ILPs with an (optimal) non-replicating partition; this would limit the ratio to 1 inherently, and possibly also help guide the ILP solver to a better replicating solution. Similarly, even for the non-replicating ILP, initializing with 

Table 8: Properties of computational DAGs in the psdd dataset: name, number of nodes and edges in the DAG. 

DAG nr. nodes nr. edges kdd-6k 2686 6527 tretail 2822 6382 elevators 3331 6892 msnbc-yitao-d 4240 6908 nltcs 4676 10592 mnist 4904 5916 mnist-antonio 4904 5916 msnbc-yitao-c 4989 7164 msnbc-yitao-e 5216 8074 msnbc-yitao-b 6590 8870 msnbc-yitao-a 6682 8926 insurance 14342 30060 bnetflix 15340 40736 msweb 15777 38289 DAG nr. nodes nr. edges msnbc 16373 39056 jester 18957 48220 book 22118 53647 ad 22277 47345 cr52 22295 46968 cwebkb 22821 50251 c20ng 25696 56622 bbc 26023 54018 kdd 32021 79972 baudio 34567 94229 accidents 37486 102111 pumsb_ star 40034 110115 plants 63488 167486 tmovie 89389 274214 dna-500 174135 552352 a partitioning heuristic could be a useful way to further reduce the running time of the solver. Recall that we have 20 MoE related hypergraphs in our dataset, 

5 + 5 from Qwen and DeepSeek in both the moe-2 and the moe-8 

datasets. It is also a natural idea to sort these into 2 datasets of size 10 not according to the hyperedge sizes, but the origin MoE model. Alternatively, this can also be understood as splitting the dataset into two parts according to the number of nodes. In this case, for 𝑃 = 4 we get that the mean reduction is 31 .32% on the Qwen hypergraphs and 35 .05% on the DeepSeek hypergraphs. As such, the hyperedge size indeed seems to have a stronger influence on the reduction numbers we obtain. 

C.1.2 ILP/D and ILP/R. Table 10 shows the number of cases where our two replicating ILP formulations outperform each other. The table suggests that neither of them is clearly superior: ILP/R is better in general, but it is still consistently weaker than ILP/D on moe-8 .Hence the ideal choice of ILP might also depend on the instance properties. We also summarize in Table 11 the number of times each ILP problem is solved to optimality (out of the 10 instances in each dataset). This confirms, firstly, that the partitioning problems with replication are indeed significantly more challenging for the ILP solver, as expected. It also shows that the second version of the repli-cation ILP (presented in Section 5.2.2) is generally superior to the first version (Section 5.2.1), especially since it also does not impose further restrictions on the number of times a node is replicated. 

> 18 Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

Table 9: Properties of computational DAGs in the sptrsv 

dataset: matrix name, number of nodes and edges in the DAG. 

matrix nr. nodes nr. edges bcsstk08 1074 5943 1138_bus 1138 1458 msc01440 1440 22415 ex3 1821 25432 nasa1824 1824 18692 bcsstk26 1922 14207 bcsstk13 2003 40940 nasa2910 2910 85693 bcsstk23 3134 21022 bcsstk15 3948 56934 sts4098 4098 34129 bcsstk28 4410 107307 nasa4704 4704 50026 s3rmt3m3 5357 101169 bcsstk38 8032 173714 nd3k 9000 1635345 msc10848 10848 609465 Pres_ Poisson 14822 350491 Dubcova1 16129 118440 gyro_m 17361 161535 bodyy4 17546 52196 matrix nr. nodes nr. edges raefsky4 19779 654416 bcsstk36 23052 560044 msc23052 23052 565881 smt 25710 1863737 thread 29736 2220156 ship_001 34920 2304655 pdb1HYS 36417 2154174 cvxbqp1 50000 149984 ct20stif 52329 1323067 Andrews 60000 350077 Dubcova2 65025 482600 cfd1 75656 878854 shallow_ water1 81920 122880 thermal1 82654 245902 m_t1 97578 4827996 2cubes_ sphere 101492 772886 thermo-mech_TC 102158 304700 bmw7st_1 141347 3599160 Dubcova3 146689 1744980 

Table 10: Comparison of two ILP formulations for partition-ing with replication, for 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 . For each dataset, we show the number of instances where the lower cost solu-tion is found by ILP/D, or ILP/R, or where the costs are equal. 

spmv-fg spmv-rn moe-8 moe-2 

same cost 7 6 4 2ILP/D better 0 1 6 2ILP/R better 3 3 0 6Our two ILP formulations with replication can also be compared in more detail based on Figure 5, which shows the cost reduction factor with both ILPs (with the 5 hour runtime limit) for each instance. The figure again confirms that ILP/R is generally superior, but not always: it consistently outperformed by ILP/D on the moe-8 

dataset. 

Table 11: Table showing how many times the partitioning ILPs find the optimal solution within the time limit, out of the 10 instances of each dataset, with the base (non-replicating) ILP and the two replicating ILP formulations, for 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 .

spmv-fg spmv-rn moe-8 moe-2 

Base ILP 8 9 8 10 ILP/D 3 0 0 0ILP/R 6 6 0 0

C.1.3 The impact of 𝑃 and 𝜀 . For studying the impact of the pa-rameters 𝑃 and 𝜀 , we build a smaller ablation set of 12 hypergraphs in order to reduce the total running time of the experiments with the ILP solver. We select 3 instances from each dataset; specifi-cally, mesh1e1, d_dyn and west0132 from spmv-fg , rajat14, imp-col_e and bcspwr04 from spmv-rn , and DeepSeek_l2, DeepSeek_l3 and DeepSeek_l4 from moe-8 and moe-2 . The goal with this se-lection was to ensure that we get meaningful results on the same instances with a wide range of parameter combinations. Specifically, in spmv-fg and spmv-rn , we avoided the instances that already had cost 0 with replication for 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 , since these are also separable for larger 𝜀 . Furthermore, we restricted ourselves to in-stances of at least 160 nodes; with uniform node weights, this is the smallest 𝑛 which ensures that we have ⌊ 1+0.025 2 ⌋ · 𝑛 > ⌊ 1+0.0125 2 · 𝑛 ⌋,and hence the set of solutions is indeed different with 𝑃 = 2 for 

𝜀 = 0.025 and 𝜀 = 0.0125 . In moe-2 , it is only layers 2, 3 and 4 of DeepSeek that have at least 160 nodes (see the dataset details in Appendix B); as such, for both moe-8 and moe-2 , we pick the last three layers of DeepSeek. The results for 𝑃 = 2 and 𝜀 ∈ { 0.0125 , 0.025 , 0.05 } are already discussed in the main part of the paper. These instances are all solved to optimality, and show clear patterns. Our goal is to conduct similar experiments for 𝑃 = 4. Our ablation set instances with 

𝑛 ≥ 160 again ensure that each problem is distinct if we consider 

𝑃 = 4 with the same values of ˆ𝜀 = 𝜀 𝑃 ; that is, if we now select 

𝜀 ∈ { 0.025 , 0.05 , 0.1}. As such, we use these three values for 𝑃 = 4.Similarly, in order to keep our preliminary experiments for 𝑃 = 8

comparable to our main experiments with 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 , we keep ˆ𝜀 = 𝜀 𝑃 fixed, and run our 𝑃 = 8 experiments with 𝜀 = 0.1.Note that evaluating the results of these experiments for 𝑃 = 4

(or larger) is a very difficult task for various reasons. Firstly, recall that we are not able to run our replicating ILPs to optimality on most instances; as such, when comparing the ILPs on two different parameters, the relation of the ratios is heavily dependent on how close the best ILP solutions happen to be to the optimum for this specific instance and choice of parameters. This is made even worse by the fact that we have chosen some of the largest instances for the ablation set (in order to ensure that the solution space is different for distinct 𝜀 values), and these are exactly the instances that are most challenging for the ILP solver, and hence the ones were the solutions are least indicative of the true optimum values. In the most extreme case, for 𝑃 = 8, this actually means that the replicating ILP does not find a better solution than the non-replicating ILP for any of the ablation set instances from spmv-rn ,       

> 19 Pál András Papp, Toni Böhnlein, and Albert-Jan N. Yzelman spmv -fg/D spmv -fg/R spmv -r n/D spmv -r n/R moe-8/D moe-8/R moe-2/D moe-2/R
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cost  reduction  ratio

Figure 5: Illustration cost reduction ratio with replication on the different datasets for 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 . The ‘/D’ and ‘/R’ suffix corresponds to ILP/D and ILP/R, outlined in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2, respectively. 

moe-8 or moe-2 . For the three ablation instances from spmv-fg , we find that the improvement ratios are very similar to the 𝑃 = 4 case: the reduction numbers on the same 3 instances are 69 .23% , 38 .17% 

and 69 .23% for 𝑃 = 8 and 𝜀 = 0.1, whereas they are 71 .43% , 44 .44% 

and 57 .14% for 𝑃 = 4 and 𝜀 = 0.05 , respectively. For 𝑃 = 4, we can also compare the improvement ratios for the three cases of 𝜀 = 0.025 , 𝜀 = 0.05 , 𝜀 = 0.1. This is simplest to do for the spmv-rn and moe-2 datasets: here the non-replicating optimum is always found, the optimal costs are always above 0,and the replicating ILPs find a better solution in all cases except 1.For spmv-rn , the mean cost reduction is 17 .58% , 25 .38% and 52 .26% ,whereas for moe-2 , the mean cost reduction is 61 .14% , 66 .32% and 

84 .26% , for 𝜀 = 0.025 , 𝜀 = 0.05 and 𝜀 = 0.1, respectively. The values clearly show an increasing tendency for larger 𝜀 , although we note that for moe-2 , this is partially because there a large factor decrease for one of the instances. For the spmv-fg dataset, the mean cost reduction is 38 .11% and 59 .18% for 𝜀 = 0.025 and 𝜀 = 0.05 ; for 

𝜀 = 0.1, we cannot form the geomean, because, two of the instances have cost 0 with replication (the third one has a cost reduction of 

35 .29% ). Finally, for moe-8 , there is essentially no cost decrease in these hardest instances: the mean reduction is 2.08% for 𝜀 = 0.025 ,and there is no decrease for the larger 𝜀 values. We also summarize these values for the 𝑃 = 4 ablation study in Table 12. If we prefer an aggregate value over the different datasets in order to compare the different 𝜀 cases, we can restrict ourselves to spmv-rn , moe-2 , and the instance from spmv-fn that always has cost above 0. These 7 instances give a mean cost reduction of 42 .07% ,

49 .13% and 71 .58% for the three choices of 𝜀 , respectively. 

## C.2 Scheduling results 

The improvements achieved by our heuristics on the three main datasets are discussed in the main part of the paper. Here we discuss some further aspects and observations from the experiments. 

C.2.1 Heuristics. In this section, we further discuss the experimen-tal results obtained with the scheduling heuristics. We note that between the iterations of the advanced heuristic, there are also some further technical steps to clean the schedule by e.g. removing communication steps that became unnecessary due 

Table 12: Cost reduction with replicating ILPs for hypergraph partitioning, for 𝑃 = 4 and different choices of 𝜀 for 3 selected (large) instances from each dataset. The asterisk indicates that 2 of the 3 instances actually reduced the cost to 0; the number shows the cost reduction for the third instance. 

spmv-fg spmv-rn moe-8 moe-2 

𝜀 = 0.025 38.11% 17.58% 2.08% 61.14% 

𝜀 = 0.05 59.18% 25.38% 0% 66.32% 

𝜀 = 0.1 35.26%* 52.26% 0% 84.26% 

Table 13: Mean cost reduction achieved by the basic and ad-vanced heuristic on the hdb dataset, for 𝑔 = 4, 𝐿 = 20 , orga-nized by 𝑃 and instance size. 

dataset 𝑃 = 2 𝑃 = 4 𝑃 = 8 𝑃 = 16 

medium 0.74% / 12.08% 2.22% / 16.70% 4.48% / 20.11% 6.58% / 23.76% large 0.36% / 8.42% 2.17% / 12.99% 4.00% / 16.21% 6.09% / 18.67% huge 0.19% / 19.89% 2.34% / 22.95% 3.58% / 23.19% 5.87% / 27.86% to the modifications; these were omitted from the description due space constraints. The hdb dataset actually consists of three smaller parts [ 44 ], labeled ‘medium’ (with 1 000 – 2 000 nodes), ‘large’ ( 5 000 – 10 000 

nodes) and huge ( 50 000 – 100 000 nodes). This also offers a natural opportunity to investigate whether the size of the graphs has a sig-nificant impact on the improvements achieved by our algorithms. The improvement numbers for each subdataset for 𝑃 ∈ { 2, 4, 8, 16 }

are summarized in Table 13. The table shows rather consistent improvement numbers over the different subdatasets, which sug-gests that our algorithmic approach also scales acceptably to larger instances. 

> 20 Replication in Graph Partitioning and Scheduling Problems

Furthermore, recall that the ablation study in Table 4 shows the effect of enabling each algorithmic component of the advanced heuristic separately. For completeness, we also provide a different kind of ablation study of the same phenomenon, where we start with the basic heuristic and incrementally add the components of the advanced heuristic to this. The result of this alternative study is summarized in Table 14. The table again confirms that superstep merging can achieve a significant cost reduction, even after batch replication. It also shows that after we have batch replication and superstep merging, adding superstep replication sometimes even leads to slightly weaker results. This is partially an artifact of the ordering of our algorithmic components: superstep replication is applied immediately after supersteps have been merged, and thus there are several new improvement opportunities with replication; however, other methods like batch replication could remove the same communication steps with a smaller increase in computation costs. Altogether, this again confirms that batch replication and superstep merging are the two truly valuable components of the advanced heuristic. 

Table 14: Ablation study: cost decrease when activating the components of the heuristic separately, starting with the basic heuristic (B), then adding batch replication (BR), su-perstep merging (SM) and superstep replication (SR) in this order. 

heuristic 𝑃 = 8, 𝑔 = 4, 𝐿 = 20 𝑃 = 8, 𝑔 = 16 , 𝐿 = 20 

hdb psdd sptrsv hdb psdd sptrsv 

B 4.11% 3.74% 6.29% 6.12% 5.03% 12.71% B+BR 11.90% 18.38% 9.56% 21.26% 28.99% 20.33% B+BR +SM 19.14% 23.12% 11.57% 41.81% 56.51% 26.36% B+BR +SM+SR 19.17% 23.13% 11.61% 40.97% 56.49% 26.45% 

C.2.2 ILPs. The ILP formulation for BSP scheduling has already been introduced in [ 46 ] and experimentally studied in [ 44 ]. The formulation relies on binary variables 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝,𝑠 for all nodes 𝑣 , proces-sors 𝑝 and supersteps 𝑠 , indicating whether 𝑣 is computed on 𝑝 

in superstep 𝑠 . Other key variables express whether 𝑣 is already present on 𝑝 in superstep 𝑠 , and whether 𝑣 is sent from 𝑝 1 to 𝑝 2

in superstep 𝑠 . The number of variables is thus much larger than in the non-replicating hypergraph partitioning ILP: there is also a time dimension 𝑠 in the indices, and the communication variables scale with 𝑃 2. This already indicates why scheduling is much more challenging as an ILP than partitioning. The generalization of this ILP to replication is surprisingly simple. The original formulation has the constraint Í𝑝 

Í𝑡 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝,𝑡 = 1 for every node 𝑣 ; we replace this by Í𝑝 

Í𝑡 𝑥 𝑣,𝑝,𝑡 ≥ 1.We use this ILP formulations to also derive optimal schedules on very small computation DAGs with COPT. Due to the small DAG sizes ( 40 –80 nodes), we only consider 𝑃 = 2 and 𝑃 = 4 here. We pick 

𝑔 = 4 as in our main experiments, but scale down 𝐿 to 5, because our preliminary experiments showed that the original 𝐿 = 20 is too large to parallelize these tiny graphs; the optimum is very often a sequential schedule on a single processor. We use a shorter time limit of 2 hours for the ILPs in these experiments. This allows to solve 8 of the instances to optimality for 𝑃 = 2, and 4 of them for 𝑃 = 4; this already gives a good indication of the general performance of computational DAGs of this size. The mean cost reductions for 𝑃 = 2 and 𝑃 = 4 on these instances is 12 .33% and 21 .96% . In order to expand this dataset, we can also include the instances where the solver could prove that the gap between the best found solution and the best proven lower bound is at most 25% . In our experience, the best solution cost is rather unlikely to change after this point in the solving process, and hence we can also consider these costs ‘essentially optimal’. For 

𝑃 = 2 and 𝑃 = 4, respectively, this relaxation increases the number of instances to 12 and 6, and modifies the mean cost reduction numbers to 12 .99% and 21 .08% . These are almost identical to the same reduction values in the optimal set. The improvement numbers above are very similar to those ob-tained with our advanced scheduling heuristic on the hdb and 

psdd datasets with comparable parameters. This suggests that the heuristic scheduling costs in our experiments might also be a good indicator of the cost ratio of the actual optimum costs with and without replication. The data also shows that in this small dataset, the optimal non-replicating solution in this small dataset always consists of more than 1 superstep, so these are indeed non-trivial, parallel schedules, thus confirming that this is a reasonable choice of parameters.