Title: RePAIR: Predictive Self-Supervised Representation Learning in Chess

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11860v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:49:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# REPAIR: Predictive Self-Supervised Representation Learning in Chess 

1st Christoph Koller 

JKU 

Linz, Austria ckoller@faw.jku.at 

2nd Johannes F¨ urnkranz 

JKU 

Linz, Austria juffi@faw.jku.at 

3rd Timo Betram 

JKU 

Linz, Austria bertram@ml.jku.at 

Abstract —In this paper, we introduce Representation Prediction via Autoencoding using Iterative Refinement (R EPAIR) — a novel self-supervised representation learning architecture that synthe-sizes Masked Autoencoders (MAE), Joint Embedding Predictive Architectures (JEPA), and Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT). We demonstrate how it can be used to encode objects in sequential data like consecutive chess positions into compact yet meaningful representations. The basic principle of the architecture is to mask large portions of a sequence of latent states, similar to BERT and MAE. Then, we apply a lightweight Predictor to the latent representations that repairs gaps in the sequence in a lower-dimensional embedding space akin to JEPA. Our experiments in the domain of chess show that the Encoder refines the board representations such that meaningful chess concepts emerge clustered in the latent space. Furthermore, reconstructions of the masked board states show that the model is able to reason about the piece movements without relying on costly reinforcement learning methods. Lastly, we find that the resulting representation space allows for quick and intuitive dissections of chess games by observing the game path trajectories in this semantically rich space. 

Index Terms —Representation Learning, chess, XAI, Autoencoder, Transformer 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent developments in representation learning, especially in the image domain, have shown that meaningful representations can be learned in self-supervised fashion [1]–[4]. However, in the field of chess, most methods rely on either reinforcement learning [5], [6], or domain expertise and handcrafted heuris-tics [7]. As an alternative, this paper proposes a method for learning representations of states from sequential data in a self-supervised fashion. The architecture is tested by mapping consecutive chess states into a rich low-dimensional space. In particular, we take inspiration from the Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) [1], [8], Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [2] as well as the workflow of Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [9]. The key idea is to take a sequence of objects or states, e.g., a game of chess, and mask parts of the sequence. Then, an 

Encoder maps the incomplete sequence into a low-dimensional latent space, followed by a lightweight Predictor that is trained to repair the latent sequence iteratively. Lastly, the latent rep-resentations are mapped back to the original space, where the full sequence is recovered. By training the model to reconstruct missing states in the sequence, the Encoder is forced to learn the structure and semantics of the data. This enables the repair of large gaps in the latent sequence, resulting in a semantically rich representation space. We term the resulting workflow 

Representation Prediction via Autoencoding using Iterative Refinement (R EPAIR). To demonstrate the quality of the reconstructions, we show the top-1 reconstruction accuracy of the architecture and provide multiple examples that illustrate how the model can infer probability distributions for reconstructed states across various gap sizes. Furthermore, we show the versatility and generality of the resulting representations using several different chess datasets. First, in a Lichess dataset of full games, we identify separate regions in the embedding space that capture different phases of the games, such as opening, castling, middle game, and endgame. For the set of ECO opening positions, we observe a spatial clustering according to common opening choices. In the Lichess chess puzzle dataset, we find that positions with common positional or combinatorial motifs are clustered To summarize, our paper demonstrates the following:  

> •

Our Encoder can map chess positions into a semantically meaningful space, where chess concepts form clusters.  

> •

Our Predictor can infer chess moves in this latent space.  

> •

The model can reason about the basics of chess without resorting to handcrafted heuristics or expensive reinforce-ment learning methods.  

> •

Large gaps in a sequence of chess states can be partially or fully restored using R EPAIR.  

> •

Chess games can be intuitively dissected by analyzing their path in the learned latent space. In the following, we start with a discussion of related work in representation learning with a particular focus on chess (Sec-tion II). Then, we give a general description of the proposed REPAIR framework (Section III) and its realization in a chess context (Section IV). Lastly, the results of the experiments, including a detailed analysis of the learned representations on several chess datasets can be found in Section V, before we conclude. All our code and the learned embeddings can be accessed at https://github.com/Artificial-Chrisi/RePAIR. 979-8-3315-9476-3/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE 

> arXiv:2606.11860v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jun 2026

II. R ELATED WORK 

The following section is split into two parts, differentiating be-tween general representation learning architectures and chess-specific methods. 

A. Representation Learning Architectures 

This paper takes inspiration from the self-supervised learning methods BERT [9], MAE [2], and Image-JEPA [1]. BERT partially masks sequences of tokens, i.e., sentences, and pre-dicts a distribution over the dictionary for masked positions. By applying the model autoregressively and sampling from its output distribution, the model can generate new sentences given any starting sequence. MAEs mask regions of images and map the visible regions into a low-dimensional space. Afterwards, a decoder collects all latent patches of a given image with their locations and aims to reconstruct the entire image. Lastly, Image-JEPA processes images similar to MAE. An image is cropped and partially masked, with its masked regions mapped into a learned space. Instead of using a decoder, the unmasked image is projected into the same space, where the two representations are aligned by predicting the unmasked representation from the masked representation. As our task is reconstruction rather than latent alignment, the architecture is more similar to BERT and MAE than to JEPA. As with BERT, our architecture predicts from a masked sequence, but we directly predict latent states given by the Encoder instead of token distributions. This is similar to MAEs with the key difference that only the Predictor receives temporal information. In MAEs, the latent representations are all collected and processed by the Decoder , whereas in REPAIR, each latent state is decoded independently. 

B. Learning Chess Representations 

Our primary goal is learning a semantically rich representation space for chess positions. Previous work has aimed to achieve a similar goal with supervised contrastive learning [10], but requires labeled positive and negative samples. Chess2Vec [11] learns the relation between positions and commonly played moves. Chess representations can also be extracted from trained chess agents such as AlphaZero [5], Leela Chess Zero [6] or Stockfish [7]. Training such agents requires costly reinforcement learning and large-scale self-play setups. Agents trained with supervised learning, such as Maia [12], can be used in a similar fashion. In contrast to the above, REPAIR strictly relies on self-supervised latent prediction without incorporating explicit move information, player Elo, engine-generated labels, or reinforcement learning. III. M ETHOD 

The following section describes R EPAIR, which receives a sequence of states and learns a representation space in self-supervised manner. For simplicity, we henceforth assume a sequence of states, but in general, the architecture can be applied to any sequence of objects that undergo a successive transformation. z1 ẑ2 ẑ3 z4                          

> s1s2s3s4
> z1masked masked z4
> z1z2z3z4
> Sequence of states
> Predictor
> Masking
> Encoder
> Decoder
> s1ŝ2ŝ3s4
> Fig. 1: High-level overview of R EPAIR. States s1–s4∈ S are first mapped independently into latent states z1–z4∈ Z by the Encoder
> (blue). z2and z3are masked (orange). The Predictor (green) repairs the sequence via iterative refinement, using an attention mechanism. Then, the states are decoded independently (pink).

Figure 1 depicts the architecture, which consists of an Encoder ,a Predictor , and a Decoder , with an intermediate masking step. The states s1–s4 are mapped to latent states z1–z4 by the 

Encoder (Section III-A). Next, randomly selected parts of the sequence ( z2 and z3) are masked (Section III-B). The Predictor 

iteratively refines the latent representations by processing the entire sequence and restoring the masked states (Section III-C). Lastly, the restored states are independently mapped to the input space using the Decoder (Section III-D). 

A. Encoder 

The Encoder transforms initial states into latent representa-tions that can be repaired by the Predictor (Section III-C). For-mally, each state si in a sequence of states S = {s1, . . . , s n}

is mapped to a compact vector zi = Encoder (si), resulting in a sequence of vectors Z.Our chess-specific architecture starts with a single convolution that transforms the input to have the desire number of latent channels. A series of Squeeze-and-Excitation blocks [13] is applied, which use a lightweight gating mechanism to learn a weight for each channel. This allows the network to emphasize important features. Lastly, the latent channels are reduced by a final convolution and the result is flattened to a compact vector. The Encoder is applied to each state independently with no information flow in the sequence. 

B. Masking 

After transforming a state sequence S into a feature vector sequence Z, random parts of this sequence are masked. For this, with probability p, every latent vector zi ∈ Z except for the first and last element of Z is set to a learnable masking token ¯zi = Masking (zi, p ), resulting in a partially masked sequence ¯Z. The choice of p depends on the task: natural language domains require small gaps with larger amounts of context, while chess games allow for larger gaps. 

C. Predictor 

The Predictor is the only part of the architecture that allows for information exchange between states in the sequence. The predictor is applied iteratively over the entire sequence and updates masked states using an attention mechanism. More precisely, the Predictor processes all latent states ¯zi ∈ ¯Z

to generate an updated representation ˆzi = Predictor (¯zi, ¯Z)resulting in the sequence ˆZ(1) . The Predictor is applied repeatedly, resulting in iteratively refined states ˆz(j) 

> i

= Pre-dictor (ˆz(j−1)  

> i

, ˆZ(j−1) ), where j represents the j-th iteration of this prediction step. After n prediction steps, the goal is to reach zi ≈ ˆz(n) 

> i

= Predictor (ˆ z(n−1)  

> i

, ˆZ(n−1) ), i.e., the latent representation of each masked state should converge to the unmasked ground truth. Consequently, we need sufficient layers such that the model is capable of restoring long sequence. However, it is desired to keep the Predictor small, so that the Encoder performs the majority of the work. For the given task, all layers perform the same task: processing a sequence of states and predicting an improved version of the sequence. Therefore, we use a single-layer Transformer and apply it repeatedly on the state sequence [14], [15]. The Transformer follows an encoder-only architecture with four heads. 

D. Decoder 

After the Predictor has repaired the masked sequence, we decode the latent representations back to the input space. The Decoder is simply an inverted Encoder , i.e., we reshape the vector from 1D to 3D and use convolutional layers and Squeeze-and-Excitation blocks. The goal is to achieve si ≈

ˆsi = Decoder (ˆ zi), i.e., to reconstruct the original elements of the sequence. As a consequence, we obtain a learned mapping from the semantically rich representation space into the input space, where latent states can be interpreted as chess positions again. 

E. Losses 

As previously outlined, the task is to repair a sequence of states by encoding and decoding in a state-by-state manner, including a lightweight Predictor that performs the restoration in latent space. This process yields multiple objectives we can optimize. Figure 2 depicts the architecture of Figure 1 with possible objectives included. The initial state s1 as well as s4 are omitted as the loss is only computed on masked states. In the following, we discuss the three losses in detail. An evaluation of these choices can be found in Section V-A. 

a) JEPA loss: The first objective we could optimize is the loss between the Predictor output and the unmasked latent representation, e.g., by computing the MSE between the feature vectors: 

LJEPA = ( zi − ˆzi)2ẑ3ẑ2 z4

s1 s4s2 s3

z1

masked masked 

z2 z3

> Sequence of states

ŝ2 ŝ3

s' 3s' 2     

> Decoder loss long
> Decoder loss short
> JEPA loss
> Fig. 2: The loss functions of R EPAIR. The full architecture is described in Figure 1. The loss between latent representations (red) and the loss of the state reconstructions can be optimized. The
> Decoder can be applied both on the input as well as the output of the
> Predictor , yielding a short (teal) and a long (violet) Decoder path.

where zi and ˆzi are the latent board representations at sequence location i before and after the Predictor step. This corresponds to the latent alignment objective in JEPA architectures and will therefore be referred to as the JEPA loss. 

b) Decoder Loss — long: JEPA architectures can suffer from representation collapse where all inputs collapse into a single encoding. This can be circumvented by adding explicit regu-larization, which enforces high variance along all encodings of a batch [16], or with a bootstrap-style Encoder [1], [3]. In our setting, the Decoder enforces diverse representations, as it would otherwise yield collapsed decodings. Integrating the Decoder into the optimized objective, e.g., with a cross entropy loss between the states in the input sequences and the reconstructions thus prevents representation collapse. Consequently, the decoder loss along the long path of the network is denoted as 

LDL (si, ˆsi)

where si is the state at sequence position i and ˆsi is the decoded Predictor output at position i. Concrete instantiations of this loss depend on the domain — our choices in the domain of chess will be discussed in Section IV-0c. 

c) Decoder Loss — short: Alternatively, we can encode and immediately decode each state, which we call the short De-coder path: 

LDS (si, s ′

> i

)

where si is the state at sequence position i and s′ 

> i

is the 

Decoder output at position i without applying the masking procedure and the Predictor , i.e., s′ 

> i

= Decoder (zi). This loss does not optimize the Predictor . Therefore, we need to combine it with the JEPA loss to ensure optimization of the entire model. Figure 2 shows the distinction between the short (teal) and the long (violet) Decoder path. Our choices for chess sequence reconstructions are discussed in Section IV-0c. IV. C HESS SETUP 

The following section outlines how we apply R EPAIR to chess. 

a) Chessboard representation: Each chess state is represented as a 19 ×8×8 bitmap. The first 12 channels are the locations of the 6 unique chess pieces for the respective color, followed by channel 13, which encodes empty squares. Channel 14 to 17 specify the respective castling rights, and the last two channels indicate possible en passant squares and the current player. Previous models frequently use a 18 × 8 × 8 board representa-tion, as they omit the ”empty square” channel [12]. We use this additional channel such that we can view reconstructed boards as probability distributions over all possible options for each square. Complete chess games are represented as a sequence of chess states, where each sequence is truncated or padded to 100 elements. This leads to an overall representation of chess games as 100 × 19 × 8 × 8 bitmap tensors. 

b) Positional Encoding of Board Sequences: When encoding the positions of states in the sequence, the relative distance between boards is more important than the absolute position in the game. We thus apply RoPE [17], as it allows the model to be agnostic towards the global position of a state and to only consider relative distances between encodings. This also allows us to extend games beyond 100 moves at inference, as the model can generalize beyond positions that were encountered during training. 

c) Loss function: We use the categorical cross entropy loss along the first 13 channels of the bitmaps as the optimized objective for the Decoder losses LDS (si, s ′

> i

) and LDL (si, ˆsi).For the remaining channels, we use the binary cross entropy loss between each square. Optimizing both loss functions jointly yields the reconstruction of the entire 19 ×8×8 bitmap. We provide an ablation over the combination of objectives in Section V-A. 

d) Data: The model was trained on 80 000 games of the Lichess database (June 2025). 1 There was no restriction on game length or Elo rating, as the model should learn chess semantics across all players. Additionally, 10 000 games are each used as validation and test sets. 

e) Training: The model was trained until convergence with a masking ratio of 50%, followed by a second training phase using 90% masking, resulting in expected average gap sizes of approximately 2 and 10 states, respectively. BERT uses a masking ratio of 15%, but in language, a large context is needed to fill in small gaps, whereas in chess, small amounts of context allow for large information inference. A small masking ratio would trivialize the task, whereas a too-large masking ratio can be too difficult to learn. 

> 1https://database.lichess.org/

V. R ESULTS 

We begin by comparing the combination of objectives to optimize in training (Section V-A), followed by a discussion of the reconstruction performance (Section V-B), and an analysis of the network’s attention behavior (Section V-C). Finally, we analyze the semantics of the learned representation space using multiple datasets that capture various aspects of the game (Section V-D). 

A. Loss performance 

We compare the performance of different R EPAIR models trained with the losses discussed in Section III-E. For this, we only use the five meaningful combinations; using only LDS or only LJEPA would not train the Predictor or the Decoder and is thus discarded. Each of the five models was trained using a static masking ratio of 80% for three separate runs. We do not split the training into two phases for ease of computation (see Section III). For each model, we compute the average top-1 accuracy for each possible element, i.e., all pieces and an empty square, over all squares. Table I shows the results for the different loss functions.                               

> Loss Top-1 Accuracy Lower bound (predict empty) 50.00%
> LDS +LJEPA 73.41% ±0.42%
> LDS +LDL 93.71% ±0.05%
> LDL 93.90% ±0.02%
> LDL +LJEPA 93.18% ±0.02%
> LDS +LDL +LJEPA 93.19% ±0.02%
> TABLE I: Top-1 accuracy for various combinations of loss functions. The lower bound corresponds to always predicting empty squares (50%). Not including the long decoder loss LDL results in signifi-cantly lower accuracy, while all other versions perform similarly.

All models that include LDL in their loss function perform similarly, correctly reconstructing 93% of all squares despite masking 80% of all states in the sequence. Only the combina-tion of LDS and LJEPA performs poorly because the Predictor 

collapses. However, since every chess game has at most 32 pieces on the 64 square board, simply predicting every square to be empty already yields a top-1 accuracy lower bound of 50%. To get a more fine-grained comparison of the performance of the models, we assess the accuracy in relation to different masking ratios. We vary the ratio of masked states in the input sequence and compare the resulting top-1 accuracies (Figure 3). Again, the four models that include LDL perform similarly and behave nearly identical across all masking ratios. A significant drop can only be observed once the masking ratio approaches 100%, at which point the model only sees the start and the end of the sequence. Since all LDL loss combinations perform similarly, we choose L = LDS + LDL for the remaining exper-iments, omitting LJEPA . This allows us to decode states before and after the Predictor step and imposes fewer restrictions to the Predictor itself. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%      

> Masking ratio
> 70.0%
> 75.0%
> 80.0%
> 85.0%
> 90.0%
> 95.0%
> Top-1 accuracy
> DS DL
> DL
> DS DL JEPA
> DL JEPA
> DS JEPA Fig. 3: Top-1 accuracy of different loss configurations across varying masking ratios in testing. All models are trained with 80% masking. All combinations except LDS +LJEPA perform similarly.

B. State reconstruction 

As the Decoder output can be interpreted as a probability dis-tribution for each square, the resulting output can be visualized as a chess board with superimposed pieces, where the boldness of each piece is proportional to the given probability.  

> Fig. 4: Reconstructions of masked game states in three sequences of chess positions. In each row, the left and right boards are given, while the center shows a missing board that is repaired and decoded. The three rows illustrate a simple interpolation (top), the reconstruction of legal move patterns in long gaps (center), and the exclusion of non-sensible moves (bottom).

Figure 4 shows the predictions of the model in three selected sample games. Each row depicts a state sequence, where the left board state and the right board state are unmasked and separated by several moves. The center board is one masked board in the sequence, which is repaired and reconstructed. Note that the model obviously predicts as many intermediate board states as there are gaps in the sequence, but for better visualization, we only show one of these states. The first row depicts a simple example of two possible under-lying sequences. To transition from the left board state to the right board state, the sequence must follow Nf3, nc6, Nbd2, or Nd2, nc6, Ngf3. Consequently, the model produces a pseudo-state that shows each of the two knights on their target square with equal probability. The subsequent black knight move is not ambiguous and is therefore correctly detected. The second row depicts a complex reconstruction with a 25-move gap between the left and right positions. Here, the model considers all possible scenarios. It correctly recognizes the fixed pawns, and the piece probabilities on the other squares all correspond to possible move patterns. Therefore, the model demonstrates an intuitive understanding of the rules of chess. The third row depicts an example in which the model demon-strates the ability to reason. In the given sequence, we see three actions. White moves Qb3, attacks bg4 with ph3, and pins nc6 with Bb5. After one simulated move, it can be seen that the model takes all three actions into consideration. Moreover, it also considers the possible bishop moves Be3 and Bd3, while it ignores the moves Bc4 and Ba6. The latter two moves would lead to an immediate capture of the bishop by a black pawn, and since the bishop delivers the game-ending fork many moves later, the model does not consider these squares. These examples show that the model not only reconstructs sequences but also takes the ambiguity and the rules of the game into consideration to draw logical conclusions about piece movements. 

C. Visualizing the Attention 

As mentioned in Section III-C, the only part of the architecture that communicates between states in the sequence is the 

Predictor , as the Encoder and the Decoder process each state independently. We thus analyze the attention weights of the 

Predictor to gain insights into the communication process between states. In the following experiment, the one-layer Predictor is applied 20 consecutive times. Figure 5a depicts the attention weights of the four network heads across all iterations, where the query state is marked in red. The unmasked states in the sequence are shown with white lines. The color intensity indicates the log-scaled attention of each position to the query vector, where yellow and purple correspond to high and low attention, respectively. Note that we only show elements 20-48 in the sequence, while the model attends to all states. In the first iteration, all attention is placed on neighboring states. Afterwards, the attention spreads from the masked neighboring states to the unmasked states. The heads focus on different aspects of the sequence: Head 1 focuses on the communication between neighboring states, while Head 2 and Head 3 focus on propagating information to the left and right states. 20 25 30 35 40 45                

> Sequence position
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Iteration
> Head 0 20 25 30 35 40 45
> Sequence position
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Iteration
> Head 1 20 25 30 35 40 45
> Sequence position
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Iteration
> Head 2 20 25 30 35 40 45
> Sequence position
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Iteration
> Head 3

(a) The attention weights of the Predictor’s network heads across different iteration steps. The red position indicates the location of the query state. The white lines mark the unmasked anchor locations. Yellow and purple indicate high and low attention weights respectively. The colors are displayed on a logarithmic scale. 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18          

> Iteration
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> MSE (latent) 0246810 12 14 16 18
> Iteration
> 0.000
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> MSE (decoded)

(b) The mean squared difference between con-secutive latent states and consecutive decoded states after every repair iteration. 

Fig. 5: The results of the Predictor , visualizing the attention (Figure 5a) and the MSE between successive repair iterations over time (Figure 5b) 

Figure 5b shows the average squared difference between states while repairing. The change in the states stagnates after roughly five iterations. Comparing this to Figure 5a, we see that the fifth iteration corresponds to the moment where communication between neighbors diminishes. It should also be noted that the attention heatmap shows an alternating horizontal pattern, which could be due to the fact that chess is a two player turn based game, so the heads may attend to one player in particular. Interestingly, we see that attention is put on states beyond the nearest unmasked board despite containing redundant information. To prevent this, we trained another model with no attention outside of the relevant window but no notable improvements were achieved. 

D. Representation Space 

We visualize the representation space of the Encoder by projecting it to 2 dimensions using PCA [18] and t-SNE [19]. We show our results on three different datasets: 1) A Lichess dataset of full games (December 2025) 2

2) The ECO chess openings positions 3

3) The Kaggle chess puzzle dataset 4

This allows us to inspect game trajectories, opening encodings, and puzzle-specific clusters and thus shows the architecture’s utility on a wide range of tasks. 

1) Lichess dataset: We start by analyzing entire game trajec-tories in the representation space, as the path of each sequence yields insights into the semantic structure of our learned space. For visualizing entire games, we use the Projection Space 

> 2

https://database.lichess.org/ 

> 3

https://huggingface.co/datasets/Lichess/chess-openings 

> 4

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/tianmin/lichess-chess-puzzle-dataset 

Explorer [20], which allows for dynamic navigation through predefined embedding spaces. 

(a) A single trajectory from opening (right) to endgame (left). The loca-tions of the states give an immediate impression of the game. 

(b) Embedding space colored with seven clusters given by k-means. These clusters correspond to different game phases. 

Fig. 6: Games from the Lichess dataset projected into the represen-tation space and reduced to 2 dimensions using PCA. 

Figure 6 shows the learned embeddings projected to 2 dimen-sions using PCA. In total, 10 000 games were projected and a subset of 200 games was selected and visualized using the Projection Space Explorer 5. We encourage the reader to use the provided dataset of embeddings in conjunction with the Projection Space Explorer for further exploration using other features. Figure 6a shows a single trajectory in the learned representa-tion space. The trajectory starts at the right and successively moves through the middle-game in the center and ends in an endgame on the left. It shows an oscillating behavior that is caused by the turn-taking nature of chess. Closer inspection of several trajectories reveals that different areas in the embedding space correspond to different game phases. 

> 5

https://jku-vds-lab.at/pse/ To investigate this more closely, we use k-means to find 7 clusters in the full embedding space, which are colored accordingly (Figure 6b). The clear separation of the clusters confirms that the projection into 2 dimensions via PCA main-tains the clustering. Additionally, an analysis of the clusters shows a clear separation into different game phases: openings (teal), middlegames before castling (orange), white castling (pink), black castling (brown), middlegames after castling (purple), transitions between middle- and endgames (green) and endgames with just a few pieces (ochre). This gives a clear semantic interpretation of the game tra-jectory in Figure 6a: after the opening and the first few middlegame moves, white castles, which can be inferred from the jump into the pink cluster. Afterwards, the second major jump indicates castling from black and later a transition to the endgame. The trajectory ends in the ochre region as the board only consists of pawns, the kings and a white knight, at which point black resigned. 

Fig. 7: 2D projection of learned representations of chess openings, where every second state is mirrored to filter out turn oscillations. States are colored by their Eco code. We find similar openings are clustered in the embedding space. 

To further illustrate the semantics of the embedded game trajectories, we now focus on the opening moves. Figure 7 shows the opening moves in a color-neutral representation to filter out turn oscillations. In other words, every position is represented from the point of view of the player to move (as opposed to from the point-of-view of white). It can be observed that the openings are separated by color and that similar openings are clustered together. All queen-pawn openings are at the top half (yellow and green), whereas all king-pawn openings are at the bottom (violet and orange). 

2) ECO chess openings dataset: To further explore the clus-tering of openings in the embedding space, we use the set of positions commonly used for the ECO chess opening classification. The dataset consists of 3627 distinct opening board positions that can be used to classify chess games into 500 different codes from A00 to E99, where the letters A–E represent large semantic groups, such as king-pawn openings (B and C) or queen-pawn openings (D and E). Bitmaps Embeddings Opening Class 

> Eco A
> Eco B
> Eco C
> Eco D
> Eco E

Fig. 8: t-SNE projected ECO chess opening positions colored by their main ECO codes A, B, C, D, and E. We see the original bitmaps (left) and the learned embeddings (right). The learned embeddings show a clearer separation by Eco code, highlighting the semantic structure of the space. 

Figure 8 shows the difference between t-SNE projections of the original bitmaps and the learned embeddings, colored by their ECO code. We use t-SNE, as PCA is not suitable for visualizing one-hot encoded representations. The left side shows the unprocessed bitmap representation, whereas the right side contains the encoded representation. The right side shows some separation of the different openings in accordance to their Eco character, while the bitmaps are less separated. We can also see that B and C (king-pawn openings) form a clear cluster in the center (with some transpositions into other opening groups). 

3) Kaggle chess puzzle dataset: The Kaggle chess puzzle dataset consists of a set of chess positions annotated with several semantic keywords. They also contain the solutions, i.e., the correct line of moves, which are ignored in our experiments. Bitmaps Embeddings 

> advancedPawn
> backRankMate
> queenEndgame

Fig. 9: t-SNE projections of the Lichess puzzle dataset as unprocessed bitmaps (left) and in our embedding space (right). Positions are colored according to their motifs: advanced pawn, back-rank mate, and queen endgame. 

In Figure 9, we compare the original 19 × 8 × 8 bitmap representation (left) with the embeddings learned by our model (right), both projected to 2D using t-SNE. The red, blue and green dots represent puzzles whose solutions involve advanced pawns, back-rank mates, and queen endgames, respectively. Positions not containing any of these motifs are colored gray. We again find a much clearer separation in the learned em-beddings than in the unprocessed bitmaps. This again confirms the semantic richness of our representation space. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

We proposed the novel self-supervised architecture R EPAIR, which learns to reconstruct states in sequential problems. By masking and restoring parts of a latent sequence, the model learns to extract semantic information from sequences, provid-ing meaningful embeddings and reconstructions for missing elements. We validated our architecture in chess and showed that chess positions can be mapped into a semantically rich space that enables latent state reconstruction. By decoding masked states, REPAIR can learn to reconstruct gaps and to provide uncer-tainty estimations for pieces by reasoning about their move-ment. This indicated an intuition of the rules and strategies of chess. Contrary to previous approaches such as AlphaZero, where embedding spaces emerge merely as a by-product of atrained expert chess playing policy, our work focused on self-supervised training of meaningful embeddings for chess positions. The versatility and semantic richness of the found embeddings could be demonstrated by projecting a variety of chess datasets into the representation space, where we could observe meaningful clusters for different game phases, chess openings, and puzzle motifs. Furthermore, we showed that projecting entire chess games into the representation space allows for an interactive and intuitive dissection of any game by its trajectory. VII. F UTURE WORK 

Our R EPAIR architecture is general and can thus be applied to any domain where data undergoes successive transformations. It would therefore be interesting to extend it to a wide range of domains that go beyond the realm of game states. While similar ideas have been explored in vision tasks, many other domains remain largely unexplored, where the projection of sequential transformation could lead to explainable processes. For example, R EPAIR could be used to study protein evolu-tion. By masking and reconstructing sequences of proteins, they could potentially be mapped into a semantically rich prediction space, where different evolutions steps manifest themselves as clusters. From an architectural perspective, it could be further investi-gated how incorporating task-specific prediction heads would change the resulting embeddings. For example, applying a simple feed-forward network on the latent representation that is tasked with predicting board evaluations could push the representations into different regions. Lastly, the use of the Projection Space Explorer showed the semantic richness of the representation space. However, it is limited to two dimensions. Interacting with the paths in three-dimensional prediction space would be insightful and may reveal additional semantic clusters that are currently undiscovered. REFERENCES [1] M. Assran, Q. Duval, I. Misra, P. Bojanowski, P. Vincent, M. G. Rabbat, Y. LeCun, and N. Ballas, “Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive architecture,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, 2023, pp. 15 619–15 629. [2] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Doll´ ar, and R. B. Girshick, “Masked au-toencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . New Orleans, LA, USA: IEEE, 2022, pp. 15 979–15 988. [3] J.-B. Grill, F. Strub, F. Altch´ e, C. Tallec, P. H. Richemond, E. Buchatskaya, C. Doersch, B. A. Pires, Z. D. Guo, M. G. Azar, B. Piot, K. Kavukcuoglu, R. Munos, and M. Valko, “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2020. [4] M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. J´ egou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin, “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021, pp. 9630–9640. [5] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, T. Lillicrap, K. Simonyan, and D. Hassabis, “A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play,” Science , vol. 362, no. 6419, pp. 1140–1144, 2018. [6] Leela Chess Zero team, “Leela chess zero,” 2026. [Online]. Available: http://lczero.org/ [7] T. Romstad, M. Costalba, J. Kiiski, and G. Linscott, “Stockfish chess engine,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://stockfishchess.org/ [8] Y. LeCun, “A path towards autonomous machine intelligence,” Open Review , vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–62, 2022, version 0.9.2. [9] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), Volume 1 , J. Burstein, C. Doran, and T. Solorio, Eds. Minneapolis, MN, USA): ACL, 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [10] A. Hamara, G. Hamerly, P. Rivas, and A. C. Freeman, “Learning to plan via supervised contrastive learning and strategic interpolation: A chess case study,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04892 [11] B. Kapicioglu, R. Iqbal, T. Koc, L. Andre, and K. Volz, “Chess2vec: Learning vector representations for chess,” arXiv , vol. abs/2011.01014, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.01014 [12] Z. Tang, D. Jiao, R. McIlroy-Young, J. Kleinberg, S. Sen, and A. An-derson, “Maia-2: a unified model for human-ai alignment in chess,” in 

Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2024. [13] J. Hu, L. Shen, S. Albanie, G. Sun, and E. Wu, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence , vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2011–2023, 2020. [14] S. Takase and S. Kiyono, “Lessons on parameter sharing across layers in transformers,” arXiv , vol. abs/2104.06022, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.06022 [15] R. Dabre and A. Fujita, “Recurrent stacking of layers for compact neural machine translation models,” in Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press, 2019. [16] J. Zhu, R. Shwartz-Ziv, Y. Chen, and Y. Lecun, “Variance-covariance regularization improves representation learning,” arXiv , vol. abs/2306.13292, 06 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2306.13292 [17] J. Su, M. H. M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, “RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding,” Neurocomput-ing , vol. 568, p. 127063, 2024. [18] K. Pearson, “LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space,” The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science , vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 559–572, 1901. [19] L. van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, 2008. [20] A. Hinterreiter, C. A. Steinparz, M. Heckmann, H. Stitz, and M. Streit, “Projection path explorer: Exploring visual patterns in projected decision-making paths,” ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , vol. 11, no. 3–4, p. Article 22, 2021.