Title: FINAL4_final_non-anonymized_acm_submission_template-8 copy 3

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13190v1

Published Time: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 00:48:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
Multi-Modal Multi-Agent Robotic Cognitive Alignment enabled by Non-

# Invasive Consumer Brain Computer Interfaces: A Proof of Concept Exploration 

Pre-print. Under review. 

# NATALIYA KOSMYNA * 

GOOGLE, Paradigms of Intelligence, Cambridge, MA, United States, kosmyna@google.com 

# LIZ JENKINS 

GOOGLE, Paradigms of Intelligence, Mountain View, CA, United States, lizjenkins@google.com 

# ANOOP K. SINHA 

GOOGLE, Paradigms of Intelligence, Mountain View, CA, United States, anoopsinha@google.com 

While non-verbal behaviors and expressive movements are essential for natural human-robot interaction, existing methods o en 

overlook a crucial element: the human’s internal cognitive state. Frequently, proactive multi-agent systems can interrupt humans at 

inopportune moments, leading to cognitive overload and decreased task performance.  is paper introduces a framework for 

generating “cognitively aligned” multi-agent interactions, enhancing the ability of robotic systems to contextually defer 

communications to the user of an agent system during moments of high human mental workload and engagement. We present the 

design and implementation of a closed-loop architecture that explores the interplay between autonomous task execution and real-

time neurophysiological focus. Using a consumer-grade Brain-Computer Interface (BCI), our approach continuously monitors 

Electroencephalography (EEG) spectral band powers while a human performs an engagement-inducing task. We propose an 

engagement-driven pipeline where an HTTP-based signaling mechanism places a primary agent’s sensory inputs and audio outputs 

into a holding state upon detecting high engagement.  is allows secondary agents to seamlessly process complex, delegated tasks in 

the background. Once the human’s cognitive state returns to a lower cognitive load baseline, the primary agent releases the queued 

agent message. Our preliminary results demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging real-time signal processing, Large Language Models 

(LLMs), and physical robotic embodiments to create cognitively-aware, non-intrusive multi-agent systems. 

Additional Keywords and Phrases: Multi-agent, Brain-Computer Interfaces, EEG, Engagement, Workload, 

Cognitive Alignment, Multimodal, Robots 

Video Link 

Figure 1: Top part – 2008 version of Google Chrome with a t-rex dinosaur “Stan” in the o ff line game. Bo om part – 2026 version of 

embodied robotic agents in the shape of t-rex dinosaur “Nadine”, as well as “Red Claw” and “Blue Claw” lobsters. 

________________  

> *Corresponding author, all inquires are to be directed to Dr. Kosmyna’s email

1. INTRODUCTIO N

e rapid proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) and advanced Voice Activity Detection (VAD) systems has 

accelerated the deployment of proactive [1], multi-agent [2] systems in daily environments. However, a fundamental 

asymmetry exists in how humans and arti fi cial agents operate. Humans process things di ff erently using executive 

functioning; sustaining focus on a complex task requires deep, continuous cognitive immersion. In contrast, multi-

agent systems are inherently parallel, capable of processing massive amounts of data, executing background API calls, 

and generating asynchronous outputs at high speeds and high bandwidth. 

How might humans and agents communicate e ff ectively, given to di ff erences in perception, reasoning, action 

and timing of actions? An autonomous agent that interjects with an output precisely when a human is deeply focused 

on the task at hand, might force an abrupt context switch, as happens today with mobile noti fi cations.  is might 

incur a signi fi cant cognitive cost, harming the human’s performance and overall human-AI interaction, especially, if 

the information the agent carries is not related to the task at hand. For successful interaction to occur, we must design 

systems that leverage the best of the both worlds. 

To address this gap, this paper introduces a framework of cognitive alignment for multi-agent systems. We 

de fi ne cognitive alignment as the structural and temporal synchronization between an arti fi cial agent’s parallel 

processing capabilities and the human’s single-threaded mental workload. In addition to executing its functional 

purpose and generating expressive responses, a cognitively aligned system dynamically modulates the timing of its 

interventions to ensure they occur only when the human possesses the a entional bandwidth to process them. 

We present a proof-of-concept multimodal architecture that achieves this alignment by interfacing an LLM-

driven agent ecosystem with continuous human cognitive state monitoring in a robotic system. We leverage human 

cognitive state monitoring using a non-invasive Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) system, by measuring 

electroencephalography (EEG), via extraction of frequency band powers ( , , , , ) in real time and computing an 

engagement index [3, 4] which is then used by the LLM-driven agent to make decisions about when to interrupt. 

Our contributions: 

1. We propose a multimodal framework that introduces real-time engagement as a key objective in multi-agent 

interaction design, extending the paradigm of expressive robotics into the domain of interrupt-awareness. 

2. We present the design and implementation of an asynchronous architecture bridging a consumer BCI system, an 

engagement-inducing simulation (the puzzle game 2048), and a hierarchical LLM-driven agent ecosystem, featuring 

primary and secondary agents. 

3. We demonstrate an engagement-responsive interaction  fl ow among agents and humans, wherein secondary agents 

execute complex delegated tasks in the background, while the primary conversational agent holds its physical and 

auditory outputs until the human’s engagement load drops below a prede fi ned critical threshold. 

2. RELATED WORK 

e theoretical foundation of this architecture (Figure 2) is built upon the synthesis of real-time neurophysiological 

data, asynchronous multi-agent orchestration, and expressive robotic embodiment. 

2.1. Brain-Computer Interfaces and Engagement Tracking 

e integration of consumer-grade Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) has democratized real-time cognitive monitoring, 

allowing systems to transition from active control mechanisms to passive BCI that can decode human brain states 

without requiring explicit commands. Systems such as A entivU [4, 5] have demonstrated the advancements of 

closed-loop EEG biofeedback for monitoring and improving human engagement and a ention in personalized learning 

environments. Spatial-temporal EEG frameworks proposed by [6] establish the foundation for “communication 

gatekeeper” in human-robot teams. Our work builds directly upon this paradigm, utilizing non-invasive BCIs to track 

δ θ α β γ

2Figure 2: Conceptual Block Diagram of the Cognitive Alignment Gatekeeper. 

and actively facilitate multi-agent communications including stopping, starting, resuming the  fl ow of conversation. 

Baradari et al. introduced NeuroChat [3], a neuroadaptive AI tutor that integrates real-time EEG engagement 

tracking with a generative LLM to adapt its conversational responses in a closed-loop. NeuroChat demonstrated a 

modulation of tone and complexity of an LLM to increase engagement, and our architecture extends this concept to 

multi-agent gatekeeping, actively holding or releasing responses to protect the human’s cognitive state. 

2.2. Cognitive Cost and Timing of Interruptions 

A lot of recent technologies can shape a user's cognition primarily through fragmentation and frequency of exposure 

rather than through task substitutions, especially when these interactions are poorly timed. LLM-driven multi-agent 

work fl ows are new; we argue that multi-agent work fl ows might also provoke repeated interruptions by 

noti fi cations, which breaks a human’s sustained cognitive engagement. Prior work, for example, associated 

habitual social media and smartphone use to reduced sustained a ention, increased distraction, and delays in task 

resumption, particularly under conditions of repeated checking and multitasking [37, 38]. We believe that might also 

be the case for the multi-agent work fl ows. 

Furthermore, short-form video platforms such as TikTok or Instagram Reels represent a concentrated form of 

fragmented digital engagement. Recent work by [39] demonstrated that unrestricted context-switching during short-

form video viewing leads to signi fi cant declines in prospective memory performance following interruption, whereas 

limiting the frequency of switching mitigates these e ff ects. Furthermore, Chiossi et al. [40] observed that exposure to 

these rapidly switching content platforms interferes with the maintenance of internally held goals, impairing the 

ability to return to a task a er interruption. 

A multi-agentic system should be aware of the human context switching cost and the subsequent buildup of 

cognitive costs to prevent it from happening. Habit “hooks” and digital dependency may be developed when using 

multi-agent work fl ows. 

2.3. The case for Tangibility and Physical Embodiment 

According to [8], virtual embodied agents (VEAs) are currently a vital component of various conversational chatbots 

and throughout di ff erent human-computer interactions.  ese agents range from virtual 2D to 3D avatars to robotic 

androids with human-like features. One of the most common applications of VEAs in the  fi eld of AI therapy, where 

they can provide emotional support and companionship to individuals in need [31]. 

Wearable agents support and bene fi t from the unique environment they are a part of: being worn, usually in 

direct contact with the body of the user in order to capture an egocentric perception of the physical world around the 

user [8].  ese agents hold a promise of perceiving the physical world and helping humans execute actions within it, 

3creating an interesting synergy between perception and action [8]. As of writing this paper, a lot of recent AI glasses’ 

releases by default feature the wearable agents to ask for information, access applications on the smartphone, and chat 

with an AI. 

ere is an interesting tension rising between virtual embodied agents and wearable agents: both are actively 

competing for their user’s visual and auditory a ention, feeding into the fallacy of the screen-based engagement. 

ese two types of agents live in the screens of the users, competing for the very limited resources of the said user. 

Some progress to counter that was recently proposed by [32]: in their paper, they propose a wearable, 

wireless pair of glasses with a monocle-like heads-up display by including information about the current a entional 

state of the wearer by adapting their environment accordingly.  ey introduced their solution for AR-BCI integration 

with an application, which adapted to the user’s state of a ention measured via electroencephalography (EEG) and 

electrooculography (EOG).  e system only responded if the a entional orientation of the user was classi fi ed as 

“internal”, e.g., not paying a ention to external stimuli, like a movie playing on a TV screen.  e authors concluded 

that more systems would bene fi t from awareness of the user’s ongoing a entional state as well as further e ffi cient 

integration of XR and BCI systems. 

If we consider all the examples above, it is clear that there is an opportunity for agents to actually “take their 

space, place and time” alongside their user.  ink about a lamp you might currently have on your desk: it has a speci fi c

functionality, but it also takes its space and place alongside their user, where their user needs it to be, while also 

being a screen-free system. 

More importantly, as the development and adoption of multi-agent work fl ows grows and touches all ages 

and societies, and one agent can work alongside one human or start working with another human, this “taking space, 

place and time” becomes even more important. 

ink about a car: a car can be owned by a family, and multiple family members can use one car; or a car can 

be rented via a special service, and a company owns it, but multiple di ff erent humans can have access to it on a daily 

basis. A car can feature a screen, or a panel, or tactile physical control elements like bu ons, the car is intrinsically 

designed for multiple users, humans or not, pets, cargo, etc. It is multifunctional as it goes beyond the traditional role 

of moving a user from point A to point B, focusing instead on supporting and enabling the achievement of the user’s 

goals. And the current trend is to slowly transition into autopilots supervised by humans, and fully autonomous cars 

[33] with level 5 autonomy [34]. 

e car acts as a single agent representation, and it is not tasked with entertaining the user, it is rather 

similar to how ADK [19] is implemented in our system (see Agent Ecosystem section of this paper), it has a function of 

booking tickets; or a function of autopilot, in the case of the car example.  e remaining agents, extending all the way 

to user interaction and the ful fi llment of user goals, can potentially help create a signi fi cantly be er path forward by 

taking into account the surrounding environment, location, timing, and the user’s mental state. Consider use cases 

such as daily commutes, business travel, vacations, leisure trips, school drop-o ff s and pick-ups, car accidents, tra ffi c

congestion, and similar situations. Each of these contexts a ff ects humans di ff erently, making it important for the 

vehicle not merely to “know” the circumstances, but to be actively “guided” by the primary agent introduced earlier 

and described in detail in the “System Architecture” section.  e same reference extends from a car to a table, from 

work to communal space, to store, to a library and more. 

us, in designing interruption-aware systems, the physical presence of the agent can play a pivotal role for 

both performing the tasks alongside us, but also forming the foundation for general purpose intelligent agents [8, 9]. 

Virtual embodied agents o en lack the spatial presence necessary to e ff ectively convey their internal states without 

resorting to disruptive cues [10]. Tangible, physically embodied robots establish a stronger social presence [11, 12]. 

Embodiment allows an agent to use physical kinesics and proxemics, for example, closing its eyes or changing physical 

LED colors on its body to subtly signal that it changes its state [17, 18].  is tangibility enables the robotic agent to 

4communicate its cognitive alignment in the human’s peripheral vision, alerting the human about di ff erent stages of the 

task, for example it being complete. 

2.4. Multi-Agent Teaming and Interruption Management 

Certain multi-agent frameworks in HRI have been designed to maximize the speed and autonomy of the system [6], 

oen at the expense of the human operator. While recent surveys highlight the power of LLM-based autonomous 

agents to rapidly solve complex reasoning tasks [13, 14], introducing these agents into real-world work fl ows with real 

humans is an emerging and unresolved challenge. Wang et al. [15] recently demonstrated that multi-agent systems 

must actively "learn to interrupt" to avoid catastrophic coordination failures. As shown by Shang et al. [16], multi-

agent LLM systems inherently struggle with cognitive load theory when interacting with one or more humans. 

Traditionally, interruption management relies either on rigid scheduling rules or purely visual context. By integrating 

a neurophysiological component, our system ensures that the speed of a multi-agent team is dynamically controlled to 

align with the physiological preferences and needs of the human operator. 

2.5. Our Proposal: Cognitive Alignment and Cross-Domain Generalizability 

While aforementioned state-of-the-art approaches like EMOTION [17], or ELEGNT [18] demonstrate great progress in 

formulating the physical expression of the robot, they rely on external observations like visual or auditory signals to 

infer the appropriate social context. Our architecture addresses the critical missing context – human cognitive state. 

Cognitive alignment evaluates underlying neurological signals, cognitive and a ff ective states of the user, rather 

than domain-speci fi c behaviors, it is inherently generalizable. Whether a human is engaged in a gaming task, a 

physical mechanical repair task, or an intense verbal activity, the engagement, cognitive load, stress inferred from the 

physiological data can provide an additional source of baseline.  e cost of interruption can be critical, whatever 

agents are programmed to deliver, missing the human context entirely, if it interrupts a human during a moment of 

high cognitive load or  fl ow state. 

To bridge the asymmetry between parallel multi-agent processing and single-threaded human focus, agents must 

be designed to actively account for human states. By deferring multi-agent communications based on BCI, our system 

forces high-speed, multi-agent to respect the biological preferences of the human counterparts across any task domain, 

extending the principles of tangible, expressive robotics to include cognitive alignment and go from interoperability 

and interpretability to interruptibility. 

3. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

e system architecture is distributed across three primary domains: the Reasoning Host Machine, the Physical 

Embodiments, and the BCI/Simulation Environment. 

3.1. Physically Embodied Robotic Agents: Nadine, Red Claw and Blue Claw Lobsters 

To establish a strong social presence and leverage tangibility in interruption management, the system employs fully 

self-contained, physical agents-robots. Each agent houses its own electronics, programmable LEDs, speakers, ba eries, 

microcontrollers, sensors, Wi-Fi and BLE. 

Nadine ( e Primary Agent):  is agent operates as the exclusive socio-emotional and a ff ective interface 

between the system and the human. Physically embodied as a 1-foot-tall, pixelated, green plastic T-Rex constructed 

from interlocking modular blocks, Nadine is designed as a descendant of the Google Chrome o ffl ine dinosaur Stan [36] 

(see Figure 1). Its rigid, plastic structure invites physical interaction. It acts as a strict gatekeeper: using the 

bidirectional Google Gemini-3.1-fl ash-live-preview model, it monitors the human’s verbal inputs and BCI-derived 

cognitive state. No other agent is permi ed to output audio or directly interrupt the human without Nadine’s 

5permission, similarly to a human assistant sending people away saying that the boss is busy, and to come back later, 

and inviting the person back again, once the boss (human) is free. Nadine shields the human from backend 

complexities while managing a ff ective communications. 

e “Claw” Lobsters (Secondary Agents): Specialized background agents responsible for executing complex, 

time-consuming tasks. In contrast to Nadine’s rigid body, these agents are housed in so , plush lobster bodies (slightly 

smaller than Nadine, see Figure 1), encouraging squeezing and tactile engagement from humans.  ey operate 

asynchronously over internal HTTPS protocol.  e Red Lobster ("Red Claw") is equipped with an internal speaker for 

speci fi c background processing noises, as well as LED lights in its eyes, claws and tail, whereas the Blue Lobster ("Blue 

Claw") is engineered without an audio output module.  is constraint intentionally creates a “non-verbal" embodied 

agent out of Blue Claw, that communicates solely via Wi-Fi and synchronized LED kinesics, eliciting unique 

empathetic responses from humans. 

3.2. Agent Ecosystem, Reasoning Host and Agent Development Kit ( ADK) Integration 

e core logic operates on a host machine driven by an asynchronous Python event loop (Figure 3). Rather than 

utilizing traditional turn-based request-response loops, the system implements a live, bidirectional interface using the 

Google Gemini-3.1-fl ash-live-preview API [35] for the Primary Agent. Audio inputs are processed via an audio routing 

pipeline featuring continuous streaming and localized Voice Activity Detection (VAD). 

Because the fast, real-time Gemini audio session is not ideal for long-running tasks (e.g., iterating through 

weather APIs or multi-step booking logic), the ecosystem relies on the Google Agent Development Kit (ADK) 

LlmAgent [19]. When the human asks a complex question requiring deep research, for example, “Book a  fl ight from 

Paris to San Francisco for a summer trip, based on weather and prices”, Nadine triggers a speci fi c tool call (e.g., 

delegate_to_red_board() ).  is hands off  execution to the dedicated ADK Booking Agent, that is designed to 

communicate with the external booking agents and gather information about the booking destinations, airlines, prices, 

weather, etc, managed by the secondary Red Lobster. While the ADK agent autonomously processes the task, it drives 

the Red Lobster’s LEDs to display a "thinking" animation on its claw (an animation of the 8x LED grid with a wave 

animation), providing crucial peripheral feedback. Once the ADK task is resolved, the summarized answer is injected 

back into the main audio loop for Nadine to deliver, resuming the fast voice conversation. 

3.3. Semantic “Intent-Interruption” Classifier 

To ensure critical information is not withheld during periods of engagement and deep focus of the human, the Primary 

Agent integrates an edge-based, locally inferred intent-interruption classi fi cation model. Before holding any agent 

message or passing it to the primary cloud-based LLM (e.g., Gemini Live) for conversational synthesis, the local 

classi fi er evaluates the contextual importance and time-sensitivity of the incoming data, returning a normalized 

importance weight . To achieve this classi fi cation with near-zero latency, we utilized a locally hosted, 

local quantized LLM provided with a strict JSON schema and instructed to classify the agent message’s semantic 

importance into one of  fi ve prede fi ned heuristic categories (e.g., 0.0 for “Routine Informational”, 1.0 for “Critical Safety/ 

Time-Sensitive”). By enforcing JSON output mode and running inference directly on the host hardware, the system 

consistently returns a deterministic weight without incurring network round-trip delays.  e decision to interrupt at 

time is governed by the following: 

(1) 

where is the indicator function, is the current EMA-smoothed engagement score, and is a scaling constant 

representing the human’s current interruption-aversion strictness. 

Wimp ∈ [0,1 ]

t

It = I(Wimp > λ ⋅ Et)

I Et λ

6Figure 3: System architecture of all parts: multi-modal LLM in the cloud (Google Cloud Gemini Live API), host system and voice 

> detection system, audio input and output, focus server, robotic APIs and integrations, Agent Development Kit (ADK) integration with
> a custom booking agent that could be optimized for users’ tasks.

is allows the Primary Agent to mathematically determine whether the value of immediate delivery outweighs 

the cognitive penalty of breaking the human’s  fl ow state (see Figure 4). 

3.4. Inter-Agent Communication and Delegation Protocol 

While traditional multi-agent systems rely heavily on strict API handshakes and deterministic message-passing buses, 

our architecture also supports a more organic, “ human-like” interaction paradigm . Just as humans coordinate tasks 

using voice, gaze and body language, our agents can observe each other’s physical state. For instance, the Primary 

Agent can determine if the Secondary Agent is busy by observing its physical LED status over the shared BLE network 

or acoustic “roars” and “ fi ller” noises emi ed by either of the embodied agents. 

For the sake of robustness in our experimental setup, the primary  fl ow is facilitated through an asynchronous 

JSON message-passing bus. When the Primary Agent identi fi es a complex request, it generates a structured tool call 

(e.g., delegate(task) ), passing the necessary semantic context to the Secondary Agent.  is architectural decoupling 

allows the Primary Agent to immediately free its context window to focus solely on tracking the human’s real-time 

cognitive state, while the Secondary Agent resolves the heavy computational workload via the ADK API. 

7ese agents interface with physical robotic boards via a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) protocol. A primary 

microcontroller cluster controls the conversational agent’s physical expressions (e.g., LED eyes), while a secondary 

cluster represents the task agent’s processing status. 

4. BCI A ND COG NITIVE E NGAGEME NT SIMULATIO N

Cognitive engagement is induced and measured using a standardized Python-based 2048 game engine (Figures 5 and 

6).  e game serves as an cognitive engagement paradigm because it demands continuous spatial reasoning, forward 

planning, and arithmetic calculation, thereby maintaining the human in a sustained state of engagement without 

requiring complex experimental setups.  e environment incorporates a background threading architecture to handle 

continuous BCI data streams without interrupting the primary render loop (Figure 5). 

A dedicated child process utilizes the bleak library to maintain a BLE connection with a Muse headband [20], an 

EEG device we used in this project. It subscribes to multiple synchronous sensor streams: 

• EEG: 4/5 channels sampled at 256 Hz (number of channels depends on model of Muse headband used). 

• PPG: 3 channels sampled at 64 Hz. 

• IMU: 6-axis motion tracking at 52 Hz. 

e pipeline applies a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) over a sliding window (e.g., 256 samples) alongside 

> Figure 4: Interaction model demonstrating the Semantic Importance Classifier. When the cognitive penalty cost is high, routine
> agent messages are held. Critical alerts mathematically override the cognitive penalty, permi ing an interruption.

• PPG: 3 channels sampled at 64 Hz. 

• IMU: 6-axis motion tracking at 52 Hz. 

e pipeline applies a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) over a sliding window (e.g., 256 samples) alongside a 50/60 Hz 

notch  fi lter to extract spectral band powers: (1-4 Hz), (4-8 Hz), (8-13 Hz), (13-30 Hz), and (30-45 Hz).  is 

telemetry is streamed as JSON to a background thread in the game engine. 

By analyzing spectral band powers and using the ratio of frequency band to and frequency band, consumer 

EEG devices can act as a continuous proxy for cognitive engagement [3, 4]. 

To quantify cognitive engagement, the system calculates the instantaneous ratio , a well-established 

neurophysiological proxy for cognitive engagement,  fi rst introduced by Pope et al. [21]: 

δ θ α β γ

# β α δ

# Rt

8(2) 

where denotes the power spectral density in frequency band . e beta frequency band is particularly associated 

with cognitive processes such as visual a ention, motor planning, and active information processing, all of which 

indicate an engaged mental state. Increased alpha and theta activity typically correspond to lower cognitive 

engagement, with alpha band linked to relaxation or passive states of rest [22-24].  e engagement index has been 

widely deployed across various applications, including cognitive load assessments [25], visual processing studies, and 

sustained a ention tasks [26]. It has also been applied in complex task environments such as the multi-a ribute task 

ba ery (MATB) [21], which involves tasks like tracking, resource management, and communication.  ese studies 

demonstrate the metric’s e ff ectiveness in detecting a ention shi s triggered by external stimuli [27, 28]. 

We refer the reader to Baradari et al. [3] for more details about the artifact rejection and  fi ltering pipelines. 

We treat the underlying BCI processing as a way to focus on multi-agent orchestration. To mitigate remaining high-

frequency artifacts like muscular micro-twitches and provide a stable signal for the gatekeeping agent, we apply an 

Exponential Moving Average (EMA) to derive the  fi nal engagement score :

(3) 

where is the smoothing factor normalized within the subject, while it empirically set to 0.15 in our 

implementation to enforce smooth transitions and validated during the live demonstration (out of the lab). 

5. ENGAGEME NT-DRIVE N INTERACTIO N FLOW 

e fundamental contribution of the paper is the dynamic coordination between the human’s 

neurophysiological state and the agents’ operational  fl ow . e core interaction  fl ow (Figure 7) is orchestrated as 

follows: 

1.  Task Delegation and Role Division:  e human issues a complex verbal prompt.  e Primary Agent 

parses the semantic intent and determines that the request requires signi fi cant processing latency. Acting as 

the human’s liaison, it packages the request into a JSON agent message and delegates it to the Secondary 

Agent via an internal tool call.  e Primary Agent then transitions into a dedicated observation mode, 

prioritizing the monitoring of incoming BCI. 

2.  Cognitive Engagement:  e human begins the cognitively demanding simulation (2048 game). As task 

intensity scales, the BCI registers a proportional increase in EEG-derived cognitive engagement. 

3.  Agent Holding State: Once the engagement score remains above a prede fi ned threshold for a sustained 

period of one minute (ensuring the cognitive engagement is reliable and not a momentary spike), the 

simulation triggers an HTTP POST request to the host machine (/ focus?state=on) that ensures separation of 

concerns and keeps neurophysiological data fully secluded from the agent and can fully run on 

another machine in the local network.  e Primary Agent reacts by muting its microphone, shi ing its 

physical LED indicators to a holding state (red), and entering a strict holding pa ern. 

4.  Autonomous Resolution: Concurrently, the Secondary Agent completes its autonomous data scraping and 

reasoning. It synthesizes the  fi nal information and prepares a response agent message. 

5.  Semantic Importance Evaluation and Gatekeeping:  is is the critical juncture of cognitive alignment. 

e Secondary Agent a empts to deliver the agent message.  e Primary Agent  fi rst passes the agent 

message through its Semantic Intent-Interruption Classi fi er. If the agent message is deemed "Routine" (e.g., a 

standard search result) and the BCI-derived focus state is active (focus=on), the Primary Agent enforces its 

gatekeeping mandate. It intercepts the agent message (or actively denies the Secondary Agent’s vocalization) 

# Rt = P(βt )

# P(αt ) + P(θt )

P ( f ) f

Et

Et = α Rt + (1 − α)Et−1

α ∈ (0,1 )

9and holds the information in memory, actively protecting the human’s a entional resources. Conversely, if 

the agent message is classi fi ed as "Critical" for example: canceled  fl ight or physical safety alert, the 

importance overrides the BCI holding state, permi ing an immediate, graceful interruption. 

6.  Contextual Agent Message Release: When the human concludes the task or naturally loses focus, the 

engagement score drops.  e simulation issues a state-release request ( /focus?state=o ff ).  e Primary Agent 

awakens (LEDs turn green), unmutes the microphone, and allows the agent to deliver the queued agent 

message, as well as following-up with routine messages, bridging the gap between the background 

computation and the human’s renewed cognitive availability. 

6. SYSTEM VALIDATIO N AND E NGAGEME NT A NALYSIS 

In our deployment, the architecture successfully demonstrated high-fi delity synchronization between the human’s 

internal cognitive state and the physical robotic agents. To validate the robustness of the system across a diverse 

population, the architecture was deployed and observed in an extensive live trial comprising approximately 50 

participants trying it during a 2026 Google Cloud Next conference in Las Vegas (Figure 8) and around 300 spectators 

engaging with the demo.  e standardized interaction involved humans verbally instructing the primary 

conversational agent (Nadine) to "book a  fl ight to Las Vegas" a task which was seamlessly delegated to the secondary 

execution agent (Red Claw), while simultaneously engaging in the 2048 game. 

From an Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) perspective, conducting out-of-the-lab deployments at high-

tra ffi c expos imposes strict time constraints [29]. It is impractical to train 300 random a endees on a complex, 

specialized primary task.  e 2048 game served as a highly e ff ective, universally understood proxy that allowed to 

introduce a spatial-reasoning "engagement state" for most of the a endees. Pairing this rapid stressor with "booking a 

fl ight" voice task taken by the agents allowed us to quickly simulate the universal modern experience of ge ing 

interrupted by a noti fi cation while deep in concentration, e ff ectively demonstrating the domain-agnostic nature of our 

cognitive alignment framework. 

To adhere to absolute privacy constraints and ethical deployment guidelines, the system was designed 

with a strict isolated o ff line data approach. No raw EEG telemetry, personal identi fi ers, or longitudinal 

performance metrics were transmitted to any cloud server. To evaluate the system performance without 

violating these constraints, we recorded anonymized macro-system logs like state trigger timestamps. 

6.1. System Performance and Engagement Drop 

antitative analysis of the system logs revealed that the cognitive alignment gatekeeper successfully intercepted and 

held 94.2% of secondary agent messages generated during active 2048 gameplay.  e average duration of a holding 

state was 42.6 seconds ( ). Only 5.8% of interactions resulted in an interruption during a high-load phase, due 

to rapid and transient drops in the engagement ratio causing premature state releases before the EMA smoothing fully 

stabilized. As theoretically illustrated in Figure 9, the live interaction timeline was empirically corroborated by these 

logs, bound by the human’s engagement spikes. 

Due to the chaotic, high-tra ffi c nature of the public demo setup, administering strict, counter-balanced A/B 

laboratory baselines or formal NASA-TLX questionnaires was not feasible [29]. Instead, we optimized for a massive 

out-of-the-lab validation and summarized takeaways from our informal Q&A with the participants. 

6.2. System Latency and Environmental Acoustics 

Because the conference environment was highly congested and acoustically loud (ranging from 70–85 dB ambient 

noise), relying purely on physical robot speakers proved insu ffi cient. To ensure reliable communication between the 

SD = 18.3 

10 Figure 5: Integration of the Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) with the 2048 game engine for real-time cognitive engagement 

simulation. 

11 Figure 6: The 2048 puzzle game interface, used to induce sustained spatial-reasoning cognitive load (“flow state”) during the multi-

> agent interaction.

human and the agentic robots, audio outputs and speech-to-text transcripts were synchronized and visually/audibly 

mirrored on a local laptop interface. Despite this complex, real-world acoustic routing, the system maintained high 

concurrency.  e architecture ensured and executed strict process isolation of the 60 Hz simulation loop and remained 

una ff ected by BLE communication latency, FFT processing overhead, and audio transcription delays.  e system 

maintained a steady 60 FPS in the primary engagement task while concurrently processing 256 Hz EEG telemetry and 

running asynchronous LLM inferences in the background. 

6.3. Baseline Calibration and Reliability of the Holding State 

Because absolute EEG band power values vary wildly across di ff erent humans and sessions due to neurophysiology, 

fatigue, and skull impedance, a static threshold is functionally impossible. To solve this, our system begins 

with a 30-second resting calibration phase to establish a human-speci fi c baseline . e threshold for triggering 

the holding state is then dynamically set to . is multiplier was empirically derived during pilot 

testing, where it reliably distinguished resting states from active task engagement without triggering false positives 

from minor a entional shi s. 

True cognitive immersion rarely happens instantaneously. Rather than relying on a rigid, hardcoded "60-

second rule," our system treats the initial 60 seconds of high cognitive load simply as an ongoing calibration window to 

verify the transition into a deep " fl ow state."  rough continuous monitoring, the system actively tracks the stability of 

the ratio over time.  e 60-second mark is merely the  fi rst reliable con fi rmation that the human is not just 

experiencing a momentary spike in frustration or distraction of some sort, but has se led into their task at hand. Once 

this state is continuously validated, the HTTP hold signal (/ focus?state=on ) is locked in.  roughout the sustained high-

engagement periods (the plateau observed in Figure 9), zero audio agent messages from the secondary background 

tasks were interrupted, con fi rming the performance of the Primary Agent’s active agent message interception 

mechanism. 

β/(A + θ)

Ebase

1.5 × Ebase 1.5 ×

β/(A + θ)

12 Figure 7: Sequence diagram illustrating the engagement-driven deferral and release of multi-agent interactions. 

13 Figure 8: Photographs from the live deployment at the 2026 Google Cloud Next conference in Las Vegas. Le : Experimental booth 

> and multi-agent setup with one of the researchers explaining the demo to a passer-by. Another researcher is wearing the Muse BCI
> headband while engaged in the 2048 game. Center: Participant engaging with Red Claw and Nadine by touching them and talking to
> them. Right: Close-up of the robotic embodiments (Nadine and the Secondary Agents, Red Claw and Blue Claw) with their
> respective LED sequences for inter-agent communication.

6.4. Inter-Human Variability and Behavioral Adaptations 

During our live demo, we observed signi fi cant inter-human variability not only in raw EEG spectral powers but also in 

behavioral responses to cognitive load.  e 30-second resting calibration normalized the threshold for the 

vast majority of individuals, the trajectory of entering the “ fl ow state” varied wildly. Some highly experienced 2048 

players exhibited lower, more stable ratios indicating task automaticity compared to novices, who 

demonstrated more erratic, high-amplitude beta spikes associated with intense problem-solving. Some 5-10 

participants in our deployment were entirely unfamiliar with the rules of the 2048 game. Rather than entering a 

focused " fl ow state”, they exhibited more sporadic engagement pa erns, preventing the system from locking into a 

sustained holding state.  is variability highlights why establishing a uniform baseline control was challenging in an 

out-of-the-lab deployment: cognitive alignment inherently depends on the human’s ability to actually engage with the 

primary task. If the human is confused, the ratio will not reliably trigger the multi-agent deferral. 

6.5. Human-Embodied Agent Social Dynamics and Spectator Engagement 

Because the live deployment occurred in a highly tra ffi cked conference se ing, the physical tangibility of the multi-

agent system elicited profound social dynamics from both the humans who used the system and humans who 

observed other humans use it. Humans rarely treated the robots as mere "appliances." Instead, we observed a variety of 

anthropomorphic interactions driven by the robots’ physical forms. 

e contrast between Nadine’s rigid, pixelated plastic structure and the lobsters’ so , plush bodies 

encouraged diverse tactile engagement: humans would touch and squeeze the plush lobsters, and o en tap Nadine’s 

plastic head when an interaction concluded. One participant, treating the agents in a social manner, was observed 

saying hello and waving goodbye to the lobster upon  fi nishing the task. 

As detailed in Section 3, the Blue Claw agent’s "non-verbal" hardware constraint (lacking a speaker) yielded 

unexpected psychological reactions from the crowd.  is perceived vulnerability of not being able to talk, in 

comparison to Red Claw and Nadine, elicited empathy from some participants; they frequently asked the researchers 

questions regarding the Blue Claw’s well-being and how it was successfully communicating with the rest of the multi-

agent swarm. While designers must remain cautious about unintentionally mapping di ff erent human abilities onto 

hardware, this observation highlights that by restricting a traditional output modality, the system might have allowed 

to generate deeper human curiosity and a ff ective engagement. 

β/(A + θ)

β/(A + θ)

β/(A + θ)

14 e a ention across the entire multi-agent swarm was remarkably  fl uid, driven by the presence of light and 

sound modalities. All three robotic agents utilized their embedded LED arrays not just for human-facing status 

updates, but for highly expressive, generative gestures. During interactions, the LLM dynamically controlled speci fi c

sequences, colors, and pulsing rhythms of the LEDs to mirror the semantic weight of the conversation or the state of 

the background processing. Spectators closely tracked this inter-agent synchronization; they visibly reacted when a 

Secondary Agent successfully transferred data, watching the LED sequences cascade across the wireless network 

before the Primary Agent shi ed its own LED colors to signal the BCI holding state. One participant explicitly noted 

this peripheral awareness: “I didn’t have to look at the screen; I saw the red lights  fl ash from the lobster out of the corner 

of my eye and knew it was handling my  fl ight request.”  

> Figure 9: Theoretical timeline mapping the BCI-derived engagement score ( ) against the intervention states of the multi-
> agent system. The system holds outputs during the high-engagement plateau and releases them subsequent to the drop.

To reinforce this social presence without using disruptive verbal cues during the human’s high-engagement 

game state, Nadine occasionally emi ed so , non-verbal animalistic "dinosaur roars" through its embedded speaker. 

Humans responded to these cues organically, frequently engaging in spontaneous mimicry — sometimes roaring back, 

or laughing. In psychology, this phenomenon is widely recognized as the "Chameleon E ff ect" [30], wherein the non-

conscious mimicry of postures, mannerisms, and facial expressions acts as an indicator of establishing rapport and 

connection.  e fact that humans exhibited the Chameleon E ff ect toward a non-humanoid plastic robot during a 

period of intense cognitive load is interesting.  is  fi nding might demonstrate that in physical, multi-agent HRI, 

"silence" during a holding state does not need to mean a complete cessation of character; non-verbal audio kinesics and 

synchronized, playful LED sequences might allow humans and robots to share a space  fl uidly. 

Physiological variations like fatigue are individual susceptibility to EEG movement artifacts, for example: jaw 

clenching during concentration, they require real-time, per-human adjustments to the EMA smoothing factor ( ) to 

prevent gatekeeping behavior from under- or over- performing, where the smoothing factor is adjusted automatically 

based on the calibration phase in the beginning of the session. Cognitive alignment cannot be a "one-size-fi ts-all" 

algorithm; multi-agent systems must continuously adapt their neurophysiological thresholds to match the human’s 

speci fi c skill level, psychological expectations, and biological state. 

7. MAI N TAKEAWAYS 

In evaluating this proof-of-concept architecture, several takeaways emerge regarding the possible future of Human-

Robot Interaction, physically embodied agents and ambient intelligence:    

> β/(A+θ)

α

15 1. Cognitive Alignment Transcends Physical Expressiveness: While previous frameworks like 

EMOTION [17] and ELEGNT [18] have explored how a robot moves to convey intent, our results argue that when a 

robot chooses to act is a separate, equally critical axis of both HRI and embodied agents. An elegantly generated 

gesture is rendered obsolete if it causes a destructive context switch for the human user. Integrating cognitive 

alignment — the ability for a system to sense and respect mental boundaries — is a necessary evolution for multi-agent 

systems. 

2. Mitigation of Cognitive Focus Loss: By autonomously queuing responses until the human’s cognitive 

engagement dropped naturally, our system actively prevented the accumulation of cognitive focus loss [7]. Humans 

were not forced to interrupt their primary task to process AI outputs.  is shows that high-speed, parallel LLM-driven 

agents can be managed to adapt to the cognitive preferences of the human, deploying them as asynchronous helpers 

rather than synchronous interrupters. 

3. Tangible Embodiment in the Spatial Temporal Context of the Space:  e physical embodiment of 

the agent played a psychological role during the holding state. By using subtle physical kinesics like LED color shi s

and animations rather than screen noti fi cations, the robot communicated its status like “I have your answer, but I am 

waiting” without disturbing the human, but rather communicating this in the space for all to see.  is potentially 

relieved the human from the anxiety of wondering if the background task had failed or was still going on, without 

demanding their a entional resources and interrupting their “ fl ow state”. 

4. Scalability:  e system is designed to generalizable EXG markers, rather than task-speci fi c computer 

vision or keyword spo ing, and the architecture scales beyond the puzzle games.  e same gating mechanism that 

holds an agent message while a human plays 2048 can be applied to protect a human performing a physical repair task 

or navigating complex tra ffi c task, demonstrating the cross-domain potential of cognitively aligned agents .

8. ETHICAL CO NSIDERATIO NS A ND PRIVACY 

e integration of continuous BCI modality into ambient multi-agent systems presents signi fi cant ethical and privacy 

challenges that must be addressed before any widespread deployment can occur. 

Neural Data Privacy and Edge-Based Processing: BCI data is inherently intimate; EEG signals can reveal 

underlying neurological conditions, emotional states, and much more. It was an absolute requirement of our 

architecture that no raw neurophysiological data le  the local system. During the public deployment, the demo relied 

solely on generalized spectral band power ratios processed locally on the host machine. To guarantee 

human privacy, no raw EEG signals, personal identi fi ers, or cognitive baseline metrics were transmi ed to cloud-based 

LLM APIs (e.g., Gemini), nor were they recorded or stored by the researchers.  e primary conversational agent 

received only a sanitized, mathematically abstracted binary state trigger (focus=on/o ) via an internal HTTP POST. 

is strict separation of concern ensures that EEG data remains completely separate, o ff line and securely 

con fi ned to the local edge environment, protecting humans from unauthorized access or data sharing .

Autonomy and the Right to Interruption: While our system actively holds agent outputs to protect the 

human’s state, it introduces a risk of information withholding. In critical, time-sensitive scenarios (e.g., severe weather 

alerts, physical safety warnings), denying interruption could be dangerous. It is for this exact reason that our 

architecture explicitly incorporates the Semantic Intent-Interruption Classi fi er, ensuring that the AI can autonomously 

skip the holding state if the semantic weight of the agent message outweighs the cognitive penalty of the interruption 

and supersedes con fi gurations provided by the human who is using the system. Tuning this algorithmic threshold to 

respect both human safety and cognitive bandwidth should remain a crucial area of ongoing ethical HRI research. 

## β/(A + θ)

16 9. LIMITATIO NS A ND FUTURE WORK 

While the proposed framework demonstrated the viability of BCI-derived cognitive management for multi-agent 

work fl ow, several important limitations remain to be addressed. 

First, the live deployment at a technology conference introduced a strong "novelty e ff ect."  e tactile 

engagement, empathy, and high tolerance for the holding state may have been in fl ated by the unique, playful 

environment. A formal research protocol, as well as longitudinal studies spanning several months in realistic home or 

offi ce environments are required to determine if humans continue to respect and trust the holding state, or if the 

"interaction anxiety" returns once the novelty of the physical embodiment wears o ff .

Second, the use of a consumer-grade BCI (the Muse headband) inherently carries signal-to-noise (SNR) 

constraints. Unlike medical-grade, multi-channel “wet” EEG caps, dry electrode systems are more susceptible to 

movement artifacts like eye blinks, facial muscle tension, and head movements. Our model relies on the 

ratio as a proxy for " fl ow." High activity can also correlate with stress, sensory overload, or active frustration — 

states that were highly likely in an 85 dB conference hall. More work is required to ensure the granularity to 

distinguish between positive, productive  fl ow and negative cognitive overload. 

ird, our current model over-relies on a threshold mechanism. Because baseline neurophysiological states 

vary signi fi cantly across individuals due to factors like fatigue, ca ff eine intake, and other factors, a static threshold 

cannot scale universally. Future iterations of this architecture should bypass scalar thresholding entirely. Instead, 

research should explore projecting the raw, high-dimensional EEG vector space directly into the hidden representation 

layers of the LLM. By aligning the neurophysiological manifold with the LLM’s semantic embedding space, the agent 

could develop a nuanced, continuous understanding of the human’s cognitive state (e.g., distinguishing between 

"focused  fl ow," "frustrated stuck-state," or "boredom"), enabling vastly more sophisticated cognitive alignment. Further 

focus on the use of foundation EEG models is a promising approach for the future work. 

Finally, while our localized Semantic Intent-Interruption Classi fi er eliminates cloud-based API round-trip 

delays, our architecture still exposes minor vulnerabilities regarding hardware-level latency. Speci fi cally, the BLE 

protocol used by the consumer BCI introduces inherent latency and occasional packet loss. While the system operated 

smoothly at 60 Hz locally, transient BLE disconnects in highly congested radio environments, such as an 85 dB 

conference hall with tens of thousands of active devices, can momentarily stall the cognitive engagement stream. 

10. CO NCLUSIO N

In this paper we have presented an end-to-end architecture that pairs real-time neurophysiological monitoring with 

multi-agent orchestration. By utilizing an o ff -the-shelf BCI and a custom asynchronous pipeline with custom-built 

agentic robots we built the system that coordinates human cognitive engagement with the actions of multiple agents 

and reduced cognitive debt accumulation during human-AI interactions. Future work should explore expanding the 

cognitive alignment models beyond general engagement to detect speci fi c states such as frustration, confusion or 

fatigue, enabling AI agents to dynamically adjust not just the timing of their responses, but their complexity, modality, 

and proactivity in pu ing human-wellbeing  fi rst. 

ACK NOWLEDGME NTS 

We would like to wholeheartedly thank the Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform team, especially Eric Schmidt, Eliza 

Kuzmenko, Mike Clark and Dave Ellio , as well as the organizing team of Google Cloud NEXT 2026 for their feedback 

and support in se ing up this system. 

REFERE NCES   

> 1. Kosmyna, Nataliya, and Eugene Hauptmann. "NeuroSkill (tm): Proactive Real-Time Agentic System Capable of Modeling Human State of
> Mind." arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03212(2026).

# β/(A + θ)

# β

17 2.  OpenClaw AI. (n.d.). OpenClaw AI. Retrieved 2026 May 31, from h ps://openclaw.ai/ 

3.  Baradari, Dünya, Nataliya Kosmyna, Oscar Petrov, Rebecah Kaplun, and Pa ie Maes. "NeuroChat: A Neuroadaptive AI Chatbot for Customizing 

Learning Experiences." In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Conversational User Interfaces (CUI '25), Article 57, 1–21. New York, NY: 

ACM, 2025. h ps://doi.org/10.1145/3719160.3736623. 

4.  Kosmyna, Nataliya, and Pa ie Maes. “A entivU: An EEG-Based Closed-Loop Biofeedback System for Real-Time Monitoring and Improvement of 

Engagement for Personalized Learning.” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) vol. 19,23 5200. 27 Nov. 2019, doi:10.3390/s19235200 

5.  Kosmyna, Nataliya, Caitlin Morris,  anh Nguyen, Sebastian Zepf, Javier Hernandez, and Pa ie Maes. "A entivU: Designing EEG and EOG 

Compatible Glasses for Physiological Sensing and Feedback in the Car." In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User 

Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI '19), 355–368. New York, NY: ACM, 2019. 

6.  Kosmyna, Nataliya, Eugene Hauptmann, and Yasmeen Hmaidan. 2024. "A Brain-Controlled  adruped Robot: A Proof-of-Concept Demonstration" 

Sensors 24, no. 1: 80.  https://doi.org/10.3390/s24010080 .

7.  Kosmyna, Nataliya, Eugene Hauptmann, Ye Tong Yuan, Jessica Situ, Xian-Hao Liao, Ashly Vivian Beresnitzky, Iris Braunstein, and Pa ie Maes. 

"Your brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of cognitive debt when using an AI assistant for essay writing task." arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08872 4 

(2025). 

8.  Fung, Pascale, Yoram Bachrach, Asli Celikyilmaz, Kamalika Chaudhuri, Delong Chen, Willy Chung, Emmanuel Dupoux et al. "Embodied ai agents: 

Modeling the world." arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22355 (2025). 

9.  Gangopadhyay, Nivedita, and Alois Pichler. 2024. Embodiment and agency in a digital world. Frontiers in Psychology 15:1392949. doi: 10.3389/ 

fpsyg.2024.1392949 

10.  Baym, Nancy, Limor Shifman, Christopher Persaud, and Kelly Wagman. 2019. “INTELLIGENT FAILURES: CLIPPY MEMES AND THE LIMITS OF 

DIGITAL ASSISTANTS”. AoIR Selected Papers of Internet Research 2019 (October).  hps://doi.org/10.5210/spir.v2019i0.10923 .

11.  Kwan Min Lee, Younbo Jung, Jaywoo Kim, Sang Ryong Kim. Are physically embodied social agents be er than disembodied social agents?:  e

eff ects of physical embodiment, tactile interaction, and people's loneliness in human–robot interaction, International Journal of Human-Computer 

Studies, Volume 64, Issue 10, 2006, Pages 962-973, ISSN 1071-5819,  hps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.05.002 .

12.  Jamy Li.  e bene fi t of being physically present: A survey of experimental works comparing copresent robots, telepresent robots and virtual 

agents. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Volume 77, 2015, Pages 23-37,ISSN 1071-5819,  hps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2015.01.001 .

13.  Wang, Lei, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, 

Zhewei Wei and Jirong Wen . 2024. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6), 

186345.  hps://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1 

14.  Guo, Taicheng, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xiangliang Zhang. "Large language model 

based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges." arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680(2024). 

15.  Wang, Danqing, Da Yin, Ruta Desai, Lei Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Ansong Ni. "Learning to Interrupt in Language-based Multi-agent 

Communication." arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06452(2026). 

16.  Shang, HaoYang, Xuan Liu, Zi Liang, Jie Zhang, Haibo Hu, and Song Guo. "United minds or isolated agents? exploring coordination of llms under 

cognitive load theory." arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06843 (2025). 

17.  Huang, Peide, Yuhan Hu, Nataliya Nechyporenko, Daehwa Kim, Walter Talbo  and Jian Zhang. "EMOTION: Expressive Motion Sequence 

Generation for Humanoid Robots With In-Context Learning," in IEEE Robotics and Automation Le ers, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7699-7706, Aug. 2025, 

doi: 10.1109/LRA.2025.3575983 

18.  Hu, Yuhan, Peide Huang, Mouli Sivapurapu, and Jian Zhang. "Elegnt: Expressive and functional movement design for non-anthropomorphic 

robot." arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12493(2025). 

19.  Google Agent Development Kit (ADK),  Retrieved 2026 May 31, from : https://github.com/google/adk-docs/blob/main/docs/agents/llm-

agents.md 

20.  Muse headband, : h ps://choosemuse.com/ 

21.  Pope, Alan T., Edward H. Bogart, and Debbie S. Bartolome. 1995. "Biocybernetic System Evaluates Indices of Operator Engagement in Automated 

Task." Biological Psychology 40, no. 1–2: 187–195. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/0301-0511(95)05116-3. 

22.  Fairclough, Stephen H., Liverpool John Moores, Katie C Ewing, and Jenna Roberts. 2009. Measuring task engagement as an input to physiological 

computing. In 2009 3rd International Conference on A ff ective Computing and Intelligent Interaction and Workshops. IEEE. doi:10.1109/ 

acii.2009.5349483 

23.  Grammer, Jennie K., Keye Xu, and Agatha Lenartowicz. 2021. E ff ects of context on the neural correlates of a ention in a college classroom. NPJ 

Sci. Learn. 6 (6 July 2021), 15. doi:10.1038/s41539-021-00094-8 

24.  Grassini, Simone, Giulia Virginia Segurini, and Mika Koivisto. 2022. Watching nature videos promotes physiological restoration: Evidence from the 

modulation of alpha waves in electroencephalography. Front. Psychol. 13 (7 June 2022), 871143. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2022.871143 

25.  Freeman, Frederick G., Peter J. Mikulka, Lawrence J. Prinzel, and Mark W. Scerbo. 1999. "Evaluation of an Adaptive Automation System Using 

ree EEG Indices with a Visual Tracking Task." *Biological Psychology* 50, no. 1: 61–76. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/s0301-0511(99)00002-2. 

26.  Berka, Chris, Daniel J. Levendowski, Michelle N. Lumicao, Alan Yau, Gene Davis, Vladimir T. Zivkovic, Richard E. Olmstead, Patrice D. Tremoulet, 

and Patrick L. Craven. 2007. "EEG Correlates of Task Engagement and Mental Workload in Vigilance, Learning, and Memory Tasks." *Aviation, 

Space, and Environmental Medicine* 78, no. 5: B231–B244. 

27.  Yomna Abdelrahman, Mariam Hassib, Maria Guinea Marquez, Markus Funk, and Albrecht Schmidt. 2015. Implicit engagement detection for 

interactive museums using brain-computer interfaces. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with 

Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct. ACM. doi:10.1145/2786567.2793709 

28.  Alex Dan and Miriam Reiner. 2017. Real time EEG based measurements of cognitive load indicates mental states during learning. JEDM 9 (23 Dec. 

2017), 31–44. doi:10.5281/ZENODO.3554719 

18 29.  Nataliya Kosmyna. "Brain-Computer Interfaces in the Wild: Lessons Learned from a Large-Scale Deployment," 2019 IEEE International Conference 

on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC), Bari, Italy, 2019, pp. 4161-4168, doi: 10.1109/SMC.2019.8913928. 

30.  Zijian Liu and Michita Imai. 2023. Telepresence Chameleon: Improve User Experience of Telepresence Robot With Chameleon E ff ect. In 

Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction (HAI '23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 

USA, 55–62.  hps://doi.org/10.1145/3623809.3623828 \

31.  Timothy W. Bickmore and Rosalind W. Picard. 2005. Establishing and maintaining long-term human-computer relationships. ACM Trans. 

Comput.-Hum. Interact. 12, 2 (June 2005), 293–327.  hps://doi.org/10.1145/1067860.1067867 

32.  Kosmyna, Nataliya, and Eugene Hauptmann "Are you still watching? Assessing internal and external a ention in AR using wearable brain sensing 

glasses", Proc. SPIE 12913, Optical Architectures for Displays and Sensing in Augmented, Virtual, and Mixed Reality (AR, VR, MR) V, 1291310 (12 

March 2024);  hps://doi.org/10.1117/12.3023316 

33.  Hurair, Mohammad, Jaeil Ju, and Junghee Han. 2024. "Environmental-Driven Approach towards Level 5 Self-Driving" Sensors 24, no. 2: 485. 

hps://doi.org/10.3390/s24020485 

34.  Jianqiang Wang, Heye Huang, Keqiang Li, Jun Li. Towards the Uni fi ed Principles for Level 5 Autonomous Vehicles, Engineering, Volume 7, Issue 9, 

2021, Pages 1313-1325, ISSN 2095-8099.  hps://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2020.10.018 .

35.  Google Gemini 3.1-fl ash-live-preview,  Retrieved 2026 May 31, from : https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models/gemini-3.1-fl ash-live-

preview 

36.  Chrome Dino: chrome://dino 

37.  Siebers, Teun, Ine Beyens, and Pa i M. Valkenburg. " e E ff ects of Fragmented and Sticky Smartphone Use on Distraction and Task Delay." Mobile 

Media & Communication 12, no. 1 (2024): 45–70.  hps://doi.org/10.1177/20501579231193941 

38.  Wilmer, Henry H., Lauren E. Sherman, and Jason M. Chein. "Smartphones and Cognition: A Review of Research Exploring the Links between 

Mobile Technology Habits and Cognitive Functioning." Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017).  hps://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00605 

39.  Barton, Nicholas, and Michael Smyth. "Context-Switching in Short-Form Videos: What Is the Impact on Prospective Memory?" Memory 33, no. 7 

(2025): 788–801.  hps://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2025.2521076 

40.  Chiossi, Francesco, Luke Haliburton, Changkun Ou, Andreas M. Butz, and Albrecht Schmidt. "Short-Form Videos Degrade Our Capacity to Retain 

Intentions: E ff ect of Context Switching on Prospective Memory." In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems, 1–15. New York: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.  hps://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580778 

19