Title: Reinforcement Learning for Reachability: Guaranteeing Asymptotic Optimality

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24740v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 00:56:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Reinforcement Learning for Reachability: Guaranteeing Asymptotic Optimality 

Amogh Palasamudram 1 Jakub Svoboda 2 3 Suguman Bansal 1 Krishnendu Chatterjee 2

# Abstract 

Reinforcement learning (RL) for reachabil-ity specifications is fundamental in sequential decision-making, yet theoretical guarantees re-main less explored. A recent work achieves 

asymptotic convergence to optimal policies. How-ever, this approach provides limited insight into convergence dynamics. In this work, we present an alternative approach that provides deeper the-oretical insights into convergence. Our approach builds on PAC learning with assumptions. PAC learning guarantees near-optimal policies with high confidence in finite time but requires know-ing internal MDP parameters like minimum transi-tion probability. We argue that while these param-eters are unknown in RL, they can be iteratively refined and estimated with increasing accuracy. By iteratively satisfying PAC conditions, we show that exact optimality can be achieved in the limit. Empirical evaluations on standard benchmarks validate our theoretical insights into convergence dynamics. 

# 1. Introduction 

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a framework for decision-making in unknown stochastic envi-ronments modeled as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Many practical problems (Collins et al., 2005; Andrychow-icz et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Levine et al., 2016) can be expressed as reward-based objectives, which admit strong theoretical guarantees: (i) asymptotic convergence (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), where learned policies are optimal in the limit; and (ii) PAC guarantees (Valiant, 1984), where learned policies are near-optimal with high probability after finite samples. Practical implementations of these algorithms have achieved significant real-world impact. 

> 1

Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 2Institute of Science and Technology, Austria 3Dartmouth College, USA. Correspondence to: Amogh Palasamudram <amogh.p.214@gmail.com >, Jakub Svoboda <jakub.svoboda@dartmouth.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

Several recent works have focused on the RL under high-level specifications that can be expressed with Linear Tem-poral Logic (LTL) or related logical formalisms (Alur et al., 2026; Aksaray et al., 2016; Brafman et al., 2018; De Gi-acomo et al., 2019; Hasanbeig et al., 2018; Littman et al., 2017; Hasanbeig et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2019; Hahn et al., 2019; Xu & Topcu, 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2017; Icarte et al., 2018; Jothimurugan et al., 2021). LTL objec-tives describe complex temporal behaviors, including safety and liveness, that are hard to express as rewards. In addition, this focus is motivated by the expressiveness and modularity of temporal logic, but it also raises fundamental challenges for learning and analysis. Compared to classical reward-based objectives, LTL spec-ifications describe a more complicated class of behaviors, which makes them harder to learn. General LTL specifica-tions are not learnable with PAC guarantees (Yang et al., 2022; Alur et al., 2022). The feasibility of PAC guaran-tees for LTL objectives assumes dependence on internal parameters of the MDP such as the minimal transition prob-ability (Ashok et al., 2019), mixing time (Perez et al., 2023), expected distance (Svoboda et al., 2024), and the like. These parameters are typically unknown, limiting the applicability of PAC-style analysis. Asymptotic guarantees for LTL objectives remain largely unexplored. To the best of our knowledge, (Le et al., 2024) is the only prior work that achieves asymptotic convergence for LTL specifications, doing so by converting LTL to limit-average reward objectives. While this establishes theoret-ical feasibility, the approach relies on external parameters disconnected from the original MDP structure, providing no insight into convergence dynamics or when optimality emerges. A direct approach working with MDP parameters for LTL specifications, i.e. one without reward conversion, is essential for understanding how the intrinsic structure of the MDP and specifications govern convergence dynamics. Such an approach provides deeper insights into practical algorithm design and enables implementations with observ-able convergence guarantees. This motivates fundamental questions: Can asymptotic convergence be characterized directly in terms of intrinsic MDP parameters? Do asymp-totic guarantees translate into observable convergence in practice? 

1

> arXiv:2605.24740v1 [cs.LG] 23 May 2026 RL Asymptotic Guarantees

In this work, we respond to these questions in the affirmative through a direct learning approach for reachability specifi-cations in unknown MDPs (Section 3). Reachability forms a fundamental basis for RL with LTL specifications, LTL objective to reachability is well-established (Sickert et al., 2016; Baier & Katoen, 2008; Hahn et al., 2020b;a). Conse-quently, any learning algorithm for reachability induces a learning algorithm for LTL specifications. Our method provides guarantees significantly stronger than asymptotic convergence 3). Specifically, with probability one, there exists a finite threshold Kopt beyond which only optimal policies are observed. Moreover, we explicitly char-acterize Kopt using intrinsic MDP quantities, through the minimum value separation εdiff between optimal and subop-timal memoryless deterministic policies (Section 4). To achieve these guarantees, we develop a staged direct learning algorithm that incrementally refines learning pa-rameter estimates, constructs partial MDP models via sim-ulation, and computes a memoryless deterministic policy using conservative transition estimates and bounded value it-eration, with stage-wise PAC guarantees. As stages progress, the approximation tolerance eventually falls below the εdiff ,ensuring exact optimality. Combining stage-wise PAC guar-antees with a summable failure schedule yields almost-sure convergence and ensures that beyond stage Kopt only opti-mal policies are produced. Empirical evaluation on standardized benchmarks demon-strates that these theoretical guarantees translate to practice, with optimal policies emerging rapidly (Section 5). These contributions significantly strengthen prior results such as (Le et al., 2024), whose approach relies on reward-based formulations and provides only asymptotic conver-gence in value, without any characterization of the emer-gence of optimal policies. Moreover, asymptotic guarantees for reachability specifications are of fundamental signif-icance beyond reachability itself. As established in Re-mark 2.1, reachability is the core computational primitive underlying all ω-regular and LTL specifications, and any learning algorithm that achieves asymptotic guarantees for reachability immediately induces one for the full class of LTL and ω-regular specifications. Thus, a principled algo-rithm for reachability convergence is not merely a theoret-ical milestone but a concrete foundation for practical RL systems that learn from rich temporal specifications. 

Related work. Conversion of LTL to reachability speci-fications is well-studied for both known (Baier & Katoen, 2008) and unknown (Hahn et al., 2020a;b) MDPs, occur-ring via product construction with limit-deterministic B ¨uchi automata (Sickert et al., 2016). (Hahn et al., 2020a) even presents a simulatable conversion of RL from LTL to RL reachability. These results allow us to focus on reachability specifications as the fundamental problem of learning LTL objectives. The intractability framework of Alur et al. (2022) establishes that there is no optimality- or near-optimality-preserving translation from reachability objectives into discounted-sum rewards in RL, ruling out any reduction between the two problem classes. Reachability optimizes the probability of reaching a target state: in terms of rewards, a trajectory receives reward 1 if it visits the target and 0 otherwise. Even with these trivial rewards, discounted-sum based RL (includ-ing standard RL algorithms such as Q-learning, E3/RMAX and goal-conditioned RL) assigns a reward of γk to a trajec-tory that visits the target state at position k for the first time, and 0 otherwise, where γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor. (Le et al., 2024) proposes the first asymptotic learning for LTL objectives by reducing LTL specifications to limit-average reward optimization on product MDPs, solved via sequences of discounted-sum problems with discount fac-tors approaching one (Blackwell’s Optimality). While this establishes the theoretical feasibility of learning reachability objectives without finite-sample guarantees, it has limita-tions. First, convergence analysis relies on external parame-ters (discount factors) disconnected from the original MDP structure, providing no insight into convergence dynamics or when optimality emerges. Second, the framework remains theoretical without implementation, leaving questions about applicability and empirical convergence unanswered. (Majumdar et al., 2025) develops an algorithm for RL with LTL specifications providing regret-free guarantees . How-ever, these are significantly weaker than asymptotic guaran-tees: even with zero failure probability, regret-free frame-works permit infinitely many non-optimal policies. 

# 2. Preliminaries 

Markov Decision Process (MDP). A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple M = ( S, A, s 0, P ), where S is a finite set of states, s0 is the initial state, A is a finite set of actions, and P : S × A × S → [0 , 1] is the transition probability function, where P 

> s′∈S

P (s, a, s ′) = 1 for all 

s ∈ S and a ∈ A. We denote pmin the smallest nonzero transition probability. We define Av (s) to be the set of actions available in state s. We assume that Av (s)̸ = ∅ for all states s ∈ S.

Runs. An infinite run ζ ∈ (S × A)ω is a sequence 

ζ = s0a0s1a1 . . . , where si ∈ S and ai ∈ A for all i ∈ N.Similarly, a finite run ζ ∈ (S × A)∗ × S is a finite se-quence ζ = s0a0s1a1 . . . a t−1st. For any run ζ of length at least j and any i ≤ j, we let ζi:j denote the subsequence 

siaisi+1 ai+1 . . . a j−1sj . We use Runs (M) = ( S × A)ω

and Runs f (M) = ( S × A)∗ × S to denote the set of infinite and finite runs, respectively. 2RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Policies. Let D(A) = {∆ : A → [0 , 1] | P 

> a∈A

∆( a) = 1 }

denote the set of all distributions over actions. A policy π :

Runs f (S, A ) → D (A) maps a finite run ζ ∈ Runs f (S, A )

to a distribution π(ζ) over actions. We denote by Π( S, A )

the set of all such policies. A policy π is memoryless if it is of the form π : S → D (A). A policy π is deterministic if it is of the form π : ζ ∈ Runs f (S, A ) → A, i.e. , there is an action a ∈ A with π(ζ)( a) = 1 .

Probability and expectation measures. Given a finite run ζ = s0a0 . . . a t−1st, the cylinder of ζ, denoted by 

Cyl (ζ), is the set of all infinite runs starting with prefix 

ζ. Given an MDP M and a policy π ∈ Π( S, A ), we de-fine the probability of the cylinder set by DM 

> π

(Cyl (ζ)) = 

Qt−1 

> i=0

π(ζ0: i)( ai)P (si, a i, s i+1 ). It is known that DM 

> π

can be uniquely extended to a probability measure over the σ-algebra generated by all cylinder sets. We use DM 

> π

to denote the distribution over infinite runs in M induced by the pol-icy π and the associated expectation measure is denoted by 

EM 

> π

.

Formal Specifications and Reachability. Formal lan-guages can be used to specify properties about runs of an MDP. A language specification L ⊆ Runs is a set of desir-able runs in an MDP. Given a formal specification L, the value of a policy π w.r.t. specification L is the probability of generating a sequence in L—i.e., 

JML (π) = DM

> π

 {ζ ∈ Runs (S, A ) | ζ ∈ L} .

Let J ∗(M, L) = sup π JML (π) denote the maximum value of JML for all policies π ∈ Π( S, A ). We let Πopt (M, L)

denote the set of all optimal policies in M w.r.t. L—i.e., 

Πopt (M, L) = {π | JML (π) = J ∗(M, L)}. In many cases, it is sufficient to compute an ε-optimal policy ˜π with 

JML (˜ π) ≥ J ∗(M, L) − ε; we let Πε

> opt

(M, L) denote the set of all ε-optimal policies in M w.r.t. L.

Reachability specifications comprise an important class of formal specifications. Given a set of states G ⊆ S, let a reachability specification L(G) = {ζ = s0a0 · · · ∈

Runs (M) | ∃ i ∈ N, s i ∈ G} be the set of all runs in M that visit a state in G. We refer to G by the target states/accepting states. 

Remark 2.1 (Significance of reachability specifications) .

First, reachability is the most basic temporal specification, e.g., it corresponds to the class of open sets in the topo-logical characterization of temporal specifications. Second, if we consider general ω-regular specifications, which sub-sume LTL specifications, then parity specifications provide a canonical way to express them (Safra, 1988). For MDPs with parity specifications, the optimal value is computed as follows (Courcoubetis & Yannakakis, 1995): (a) the set of states X where the optimal value is 1 (almost-sure winning set) is computed; and (b) the optimal value is the optimal reachability probability to X. The almost-sure winning set of an MDP M only depends on the associated structure 

G(M) and not the precise probabilities, and can be com-puted efficiently (in sub-quadratic time) with discrete graph theoretic algorithms (Chatterjee & Henzinger, 2011; 2014). Thus, for all ω-regular specifications, the core task is to solve the optimal reachability problem. Third, LTLf goals (De Giacomo et al., 2013) are also expressed as reachability goals. Given that reachability is the basic specification, and it is a core problem as mentioned above, in the sequel, we only focus on reachability specifications. 

Reinforcement Learning. In reinforcement learning (RL) ,the standard assumption is that the set of states S, the set of actions A, and the initial state s0 are known but the transition probability function P is unknown. The learning algorithm has access to a simulator S which can be used to sample runs of the system ζ ∼ D M 

> π

using any policy π.We define a reinforcement learning task to be a pair ( M, L)where M is an MDP and L is a specification for M. The goal of an RL task (M, L) is to use a learning algorithm 

to produce an optimal or near-optimal policy w.r.t. L in a simulator of M. A learning algorithm A is an iterative process that in each iteration (i) either resets the simulator or takes a step in M, and (ii) outputs its current estimate of an optimal policy π. A learning algorithm A induces a random sequence of output policies {πn}∞ 

> n=1

where πn is the policy output in the nth iteration. A learning algorithm is said to converge asymptoti-cally (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) if it is probabilistically guar-anteed to converge to the optimal policy. 

Definition 2.2 (Asymptotic Guarantees) . A learning algo-rithm A is said to converge asymptotically for L if 

JML (πn) → J ∗(M, L) as n → ∞ with probability 1

In contrast, a learning algorithm is Probably Approximately Correct (PAC-MDP) (Kakade, 2003) if it is guaranteed to learn a near-optimal policy with high confidence within a finite number of iterations. For a formal definition, see Appendix A. 

# 3. Asymptotic Convergence 

This section presents our main algorithm for the asymptotic convergence of reachability specifications. The key feature is that the algorithm proceeds without any conversion to rewards, and is based only on internal MDP parameters. 3RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

3.1. Overview and Intuition 

Reachability specifications present a fundamental challenge in RL: PAC learning is impossible when transition proba-bilities are completely unknown (Alur et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). However, a key insight unlocks a path to-wards asymptotic guarantees: PAC learning becomes possi-ble when certain MDP parameters are known. For example, if we know the least non-zero transition probability pmin ,PAC learning algorithms exist (Ashok et al., 2019). Our algorithm exploits this observation to transform an impossibility result into an asymptotic guarantee. While we cannot know pmin in advance, we can systematically 

guess increasingly accurate approximations. By combining these guesses with carefully chosen but increasingly smaller approximation factors and confidence errors, we achieve exact optimality in the limit. The algorithm (Algorithm 1) operates in stages k =1, 2, 3, . . . , where three key parameters are set in each stage. These are: (a) our guess for the minimum transition proba-bility pk = 1 /2k, (b) the confidence error δk = 1 /2k, and (c) the approximation factor εk = 1 /2k. In every stage 

k, our algorithm simulates the MDP Nk times to learn a partial model of the true MDP. It then extracts the optimal policy πk in the partial model. Policy extraction involves a procedure called Bounded Value Iteration (BVI) (Haddad & Monmege, 2017) . The asymptotic guarantee follows from three key observations: 1. From Theorem 3.1 (PAC Guarantee) , once k is large enough that pk ≤ pmin (at stage KPAC ), from this point forward, we can ensure a PAC guarantee in each stage, i.e. we can ensure that there exists a number of simulations 

Nk such that the optimal policy in the partial model in stage k is εk-optimal with probability at least 1 − δk.2. As k continues to grow, εk = 1 /2k shrinks exponen-tially. Eventually, εk becomes smaller than the minimum separation between optimal and suboptimal memoryless deterministic policies εdiff . Then from Theorem 3.2 (Exact Optimality) , at stage Kopt where εk falls below this separation gap, there are no policies “in between” optimal and suboptimal. Any εk-optimal policy must be exactly optimal. Combining this with Theorem 3.1, we get that πk ∈ Πopt with probability at least 1 − δk.Morever, Section 4 presents further analysis on εdiff w.r.t. MDP parameters. 3. Finally, from Theorem 3.3 (Asymptotic Convergence) ,since the total failure probability across all stages is finite (Σ∞

> k=0

δk), by Borel–Cantelli Lemma, with probability 1, only finitely many stages can fail. Hence, eventually, all 

πk must be optimal with probability 1. Please note that Kopt and KPAC are simply analytical pa-rameters. They are only needed for the proof analysis. They are never used as inputs for our algorithm. 

3.2. Core Algorithmic Concepts Transition Probability Estimation. As the algorithm sim-ulates the MDP, it stores counters of state-action transition occurrences #( s, a, s ′) and #( s, a ) to calculate the lower estimate of the transition probability. Given an error toler-ance δP > 0, Hoeffding bound (Hoeffding, 1963) gives the following: 

Pr 



P (s, a, s ′) − #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) ≥ c



≤ δP ,

where c =

q ln( δP /2)  

> −2·#( s,a )

is the width of the estimation error. The computation is given in Appendix B. Then, the lower estimate of transition probabilities ˆP is given by ˆP (s, a, s ′) = max 

n

0, #( s,a,s ′)#( s,a ) − c

o

.These choices of c and the lower-estimate ˆP are crucial to the PAC guarantee in Theorem 3.1. 

Bounded Value Iteration (BVI). When transition prob-abilities are known, the optimal state values are com-puted as V (s) = max a∈A V (s, a ) where V (s, a ) =P 

> s′∈S

P (s, a, s ′) · V (s′) for s ∈ S \ G and V (s) = 1 

for s ∈ G. When transition probabilities are unknown, we use a well-established technique called Bounded Value Iter-ation (BVI) (Haddad & Monmege, 2017) to compute lower and upper estimates of the optimal state values, denoted by 

L(s) and U (s), respectively. A crucial concept here is of end-components . An end-component (EC) C is a set of state-action pairs (s, a ) ∈

S × A in an MDP such that (a) for all states t ∼ P (s, a ),there exists an action b such that (t, b ) ∈ C, and (b) the graph induced by the state-action pairs in C forms a strongly connected component . An end-component C is said to be maximal if there does not exist another end-component 

C′̸ = C s.t. C ⊆ C′. For example, the set {(s1, a ), (s2, a )}

is a maximal EC in Fig 1. For all (s, a ) ∈ C, we call a

a staying action in state s. For all a ∈ Av (s) such that 

(s, a ) /∈ C, we call a an exit action in state s.

BVI in the absence of ECs. BVI computes L and U itera-tively. It initializes L(s) = 1 for s ∈ G and L(s) = 0 for 

s ∈ S \ G, and U (s) = 1 for all s ∈ S. These values are iteratively updated using the following equations: 

L(s) = max  

> a∈Av (s)

L(s, a ) and U (s) = max  

> a∈Av (s)

U (s, a ) ,

where we define the lower and upper bounds of the state-4RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

s0start 

s1 s2

T     

> a, 0.5
> a, 0.5
> a, 1.0
> a, 1.0
> Figure 1. Simple MDP with EC

s0start 

ss 

T      

> a, 0.5
> a, 0.5
> (s1, a ),1(s2, a ),1
> Figure 2. Collapsed MDP

action pair values as follows: 

L(s, a ) = X

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′) · L(s′)

U (s, a ) = 

 X

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′) U (s′)



+

1 − X

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′)



These update equations, taken from (Ashok et al., 2019), guarantee that for all s ∈ S, L(s) ≤ V (s) ≤ U (s) when we use lower estimates for transition probabilities. 

BVI in the presence of ECs. In the presence of ECs, BVI may not converge. For example, in Fig 1, C = {(s1, a ), (s2, a )}

forms an EC. Since neither of the states is a goal state, lower and upper bounds will initialize to 0 and 1, respectively. As per the iterative updates, these values will remain the same. This affects the convergence L and U in the initial state s0,which will stabilize to 0.5 and 1, respectively. To prevent this, each maximal EC (MEC) is collapsed to a single super state . In Figure 2, the MEC {(s1, a ), (s2, a )}

is collapsed to a super state ss . The actions in the super state ss are of the form (s, a ) where s is a state in the MEC and a ∈ Av (s). The transitions within the MEC are converted to self-loops on the super state. For ex-ample, in Fig 2, the transition (s1, a, s 2) is converted to 

(ss, (s1, a ), ss ). Transitions outside the MEC are retained with the new actions, i.e., (s, a, s ′) becomes (ss, (s, a ), s ′).Transition probabilities are retained across all. Further-more, for BVI to converge, for all (s, a ) in the MEC, we set L(ss, (s, a )) = U (ss, (s, a )) = 0 in the collapsed MDP if G ∩ M EC = ∅. If G ∩ M EC ̸ = ∅, then there is a target or goal state in the MEC. We would then set 

L(ss, (s, a )) = U (ss, (s, a )) = 1 . A formal description of the collapsing procedure is in Appendix C. BVI, as described previously, is run on the collapsed MDP till convergence. For instance, In Fig 2, the initialization of upper and lower bounds on ss, (s1, a ) and ss, (s2, a )

ensures that L(ss ) = U (ss ) = 0 upon executing the BVI iterations, eventually leading to L(s0) = U (s0) = 0 .5.Note, once we have collapsed the MDP, P M C , we reset all the upper and lower bounds for all states and state-action pairs. All upper bounds are reinitialized to 1. All lower bounds for state s and state-action pair (s, a ) are set to either 0 if s / ∈ G or 1 if s ∈ G. We do this to prevent previous stage errors from propagating to later stages. 

Policy extraction. Once the lower and upper value esti-mates of the partial model are given by BVI, we can extract a memoryless deterministic policy. For a state s that is not in an MEC, any action is chosen from its best action set 

where Best Action (s) = arg max a∈Av (s) U (s, a ).We solve MEC C as a separate reachability problem. For a state s within an MEC C, if the state has a set of actions, 

A′ ⊆ Av (s) s.t. A′ is a subset of the best exit actions (C),then any action from A′ is chosen. We treat such s as a target in C; there is at least one such s, or the reachabil-ity is 0. Since some states in C were changed to a target (with no outgoing actions), we solve the reachability on this simplified MDP recursively. Note that the value vector of a policy is the same if for other states that do not have the best exit action, we choose randomly a ∈ Av (s) and 

a is in the staying actions of C: Best Exit Action (C) = arg max a / ∈ stay actions (s) U (ss, (s, a )) where ss is the super-state that C is collapses to. A memoryless deterministic policy extracted in this manner is optimal w.r.t. the target set in the partial model. 

3.3. Main algorithm 

Our algorithm (Algorithm 1) runs in stages k = 1 , 2, 3, · · · 

where each stage is parameterized by pk, εk, and δk. In every state k, the algorithm simulates the MDP to build its partial model and maintain counters for #( s, a ) and 

#( s, a, s ′). We then compute lower and upper value bounds in the partial model using BVI, followed by optimal policy extraction in the partial model. For the sake of exposition, the pseudocodes are provided by ignoring parameters that are clear from context. 

Simulation. Algorithm 2 describes the simulation proce-dure. A simulation terminates if the run either visits the target set G or is stuck in an EC, as that indicates that the simulation is stuck in a cycle. We use a simple heuristic (Algorithm 3) to detect whether an execution is stuck in an EC. The procedure stops a simu-lation when three conditions are met: the current state has 5RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Algorithm 1 RL from Reachability with Asymptotic Guar-antees  

> 1:

function ASYMPTOTIC (MDP M, target/goal set G) 

> 2:

k ← 0 

> 3:

PM ← ∅ { Current partial model } 

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

k ← k + 1  

> 6:

δk ← 12k , εk ← 12k , pk ← 12k 

> 7:

for Nk times do  

> 8:

X ← SIMULATE (M, G ) {Returns visited states } 

> 9:

P M ← P M ∪ X 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

PMC ← COLLAPSE MEC S(P M ) 

> 12:

for i = 1 to 2k · | S| do  

> 13:

BVI-U PDATE (PMC ) 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

πk ← OPTIMAL POLICY (P M ) 

> 16:

until convergence  

> 17:

end function 

been visited before (indicating a cycle), there exists a candi-date set C in the explored partial model that forms an EC, and the algorithm is δC -sure that C is truly an EC in the ac-tual MDP. For simplicity, the explored partial model for EC detection is based on the counters #( s, a ) and #( s, a, s ′)

and not the estimated transition probabilities ˆP .The δC -sure EC detection provides a probabilistic guarantee without excessive sampling. If a state-action pair (s, a ) has an exit from the EC candidate C, that exit probability must be at least pk, where we assume that pk is the minimum non-zero transition probability. After sampling (s, a ) for n times, the probability of missing such an exit is (1 − pk)n, which should be smaller than δC . This yields the required number of samples: n ≥ ln( δC )ln(1 −pk ) . The algorithm verifies that all staying state-action pairs in the EC candidate have been sampled at least n times. A practical efficiency improvement is that the algorithm uses aggregated counters kept across all simulations rather than requiring n samples within a single simulation. Finally, with probability 1 − μ, the simulation procedure in stage k + 1 chooses the best actions according to the best actions determined in the previous stage k, for k ≥ 1. Note, in the first stage, it chooses the best actions randomly from 

Av (s) for all s ∈ S. With probability μ, the simulation procedure in stage k + 1 chooses an action at random from 

Av (s). μ is the exploration factor; it can be set as any arbitrary value, where μ ∈ R(0 , 1] .

Number of Simulations. Next, we need to determine the number of simulations Nk in each stage k.We choose the number of simulations Nk such that it en-sures that the partial model (w.r.t. the estimated transition probabilities) is such that the optimal policy in the partial model is an εk optimal policy in the original MDP with probability 1 − δk:

Theorem 3.1. In Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC there exists a number of simulations Nk

s.t. Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − δk. I.e. policy πk is εk-optimal in MDP M with confidence 1 − δk.Proof Sketch. We present a proof sketch with the key ideas here. The complete rigorous proof has been presented in Appendix E.6. Let the integer KPAC be such that pKPAC = 12KPAC 

≤ pmin 

where pmin is the minimum non-zero probability in the MDP M. Note that even though the value pmin is unknown (and never inputted into the algorithm), such a KPAC will certainly exist. By running the algorithm continuously, we guarantee that stage KP AC is eventually reached. Our objective is to show that we can bound the error in com-puting a near-optimal policy in all stages k ≥ KPAC . The primary question is how many simulations do we require in each stage k to bound the total error. Let us call an action a relevant in a state s if the action is among the best actions in the partial MDP that can be chosen by the simulation in that given stage k. The corresponding transitions are called relevant . Intuitively, an action/transi-tion is relevant if those are the actions the simulation would explore. A more formal definition of relevant action and transition can be found in Appendix E.2 Then (Ashok et al., 2019) proves that given p, a lower bound on the minimum non-zero transition probability, an approx-imation factor ε, and an arbitrary error δ, there exists a number s such that if each relevant transition is sampled s

times, we can guarantee learning a ε-optimal policy with error δ. Extending this to our multi-stage scenario, when 

k ≥ KPAC , we can guarantee the existence of such an sk

for pk, εk, and an arbitrary error δT P (note this may be different from δk). Note, this works for EC-free MDPs. We include an extra δEC error to account for the detection and collapsing of MECs in the MDP. Now, it remains to show that there exists a number of simu-lations Nk such that each relevant transition is seen at least 

sk times. We compute a (conservative) lower bound on the probability of seeing the least likely transition in a single simulation (including relevant transitions). We calculate this bound for all transitions, not just relevant ones, to account for the rare occasion the simulation does not sample from the true 

relevant actions in earlier stages; in this case, the algorithm 6RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

can adjust and correct itself by seeing all transitions enough times. We calculate this value, p, to be p ≥

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|

, as proved in Appendix E.4 Then, we will compute the number simulations Nk required to visit the least likely relevant tran-sition sk times. Note that visiting the least likely transition subsumes visiting all relevant transitions. Let a random variable X ∼ Binomial (Nk, p ). Then, we want to ensure that the cumulative distribution function of 

X i.e. F [X ≤ sk − 1] = Psk −1

> i=0

 Nk

> i

 · pi · (1 − p)Nk −i

is bounded, say by δNk , as this indicates the probability with which despite Nk simulations, the least likely relevant transition has not been visited at least sk times. To conclude, we compute the total confidence producing an εk-optimal policy after Nk simulations are performed in stage k ≥ KPAC . There are three main sources of error: 

δT P from incorrectly producing a non-εk-optimal policy due to incorrectly estimating transition probabilities, δEC 

for incorrectly detecting and collapsing ECs, and δNk from the failure to sample relevant transitions at least sk times. Hence, the error is δT P + δEC + δNk . We can choose δk

such that δk = δT P + δEC + δNk . Therefore, with 1 − δk

probability, stage k ≥ KP AC will produce a εk-optimal policy. Next, we strengthen the previous argument to guarantee that the number of simulations Nk is sufficient to learn optimal policies with high probability, as opposed to learning near-optimal policies with high probability. This utilizes our choice to decrease the approximation error εk in each stage: 

Theorem 3.2. In Algorithm 1, there exists an integer Kopt ∈

N s.t. for all k ≥ Kopt there exists a number of simulations 

Nk s.t. Pr[ πk ∈ Πopt ] ≥ 1 − δk,. I.e. policy πk is an optimal policy in MDP M with probability at least 1 − δk.Proof. In our algorithm, we consider only memoryless de-terministic policies in M. Note that (i) in the set of optimal policies, there exists a deterministic memoryless policy, and (ii) for a given M, there are only finitely many memoryless deterministic policies. Let εdiff be the difference between the value of the optimal memoryless deterministic policy π∗ and the first runner-up memoryless deterministic policy π∗ 

> 2

that does not achieve the optimal value. Note that since there are only finitely many policies, we have εdiff > 0.Let Kopt be such that (a) Kopt ≥ KPAC from Theorem 3.1 and (b) εdiff ≥ 12Kopt . Then, from Theorem 3.1, we get that for all k ≥ Kopt , there exists an Nk s.t. Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥

1 − δk. Note that εk = 12k ≤ 12Kopt ≤ εdiff . Since πk is a memoryless and deterministic policy εk-optimal policy in the original MDP M, πk must be an optimal policy in M.Hence, we get that for all k ≥ Kopt there exists an Nk s.t. 

Pr[ πk ∈ Πopt ] ≥ 1 − δk. Note, even though Kopt is never inputted or known to the algorithm, it certainly exists. By running the algorithm continuously, we guarantee that stage 

Kopt is eventually reached. A deeper analysis on εdiff has been presented in Section 4. The final piece of our argument is to guarantee convergence to optimal policies with probability 1. So far, our procedure guarantees that beyond a stage, i.e., for all k > K opt , the stage returns the optimal policy with an error of δk. Gen-erally, it is not sufficient to ensure convergence to optimal policies with probability 1 when each stage has a bounded error because the sum of these errors could diverge. How-ever, in our case, the sum of these errors is guaranteed to converge to a finite value as we have carefully chosen 

δk = 12k :

Theorem 3.3. Algorithm 1 returns an optimal policy with asymptotic guarantees. Proof. Consider the infinite sequence of events {Ek}k≥1

where Ek is the event that the policy πk returned in the 

k-th stage is not an optimal policy. Let Kopt be from Theo-rem 3.2. Then, that sum of the probability of all events Ek is finite 

Σ∞ 

> k=1

= Σ Kopt  

> k=1

Pr[ Ek] + Σ ∞ 

> k=Kopt

Pr[ Ek] = Σ Kopt  

> k=1

Pr[ Ek] + Σ∞ 

> k=Kopt

δk ≤ Kopt + Σ ∞

> k=Kopt

12k ≤ Kopt + 1 . By the Borel–Cantelli Lemma, the probability that infinitely many events Ek occur is 0. In other words, only finitely many events Ek can occur with probability 1. Therefore, with probability 1, there exists a K s.t. for all k ≥ K, πk is opti-mal. In other words, our algorithm asymptotically converges to the optimal policy. Note that our guarantee is stronger than the general defini-tion of asymptotic convergence. The general definition only requires the policies in each stage to keep getting arbitrarily close to the optimal policy with probability 1. This is, in fact, what (Le et al., 2024) proves. In contrast, our approach ensures that beyond a point, we produce optimal policies only with probability 1. Furthermore, the stage beyond which this becomes possible, i.e., Kopt depends only on εdiff . In the following section, we argue that εdiff depends only on the internal parameters of the true MDP. As a consequence, if these parameters were known, we could even predict the exact stage beyond which the optimal-policy-only behavior is observed. We expand on this further in the next section. 7RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

# 4. Bound on εdiff 

Theorem 3.2 shows that there exists a constant εdiff such that the difference between an optimal policy and any non-optimal policy is at least εdiff . In this section, we give precise bounds on εdiff . Only for this section, we assume that all probability values are rational. Our approach relies on techniques from linear algebra and adapts the approach of (Chatterjee et al., 2023) for MDPs with reachability. Technical details of the proofs and defini-tions are in Section F. We suppose that all the probabilities in the transition function are rational numbers. Moreover, we parametrize εdiff by transition complexity, which can be viewed as of order of 1/p min (In theory, it can be higher than 1 

> pmin

if pmin is adversarially large). We express the value vector of any policy as a solution to a matrix equation 

v = vA + r , (1) where the A is square matrix with entries indexed by S

and S × A. For policy π, states s ∈ S \ G, s′ ∈ S and action a ∈ A, we have As, (s,a ) = 1 if π(s) = a. We have 

A(s,a ),s ′ = P (s, a, s ′). Other entries of A are 0. For vector 

r, on index s ∈ S, we have rs = 1 (or in general ws, the reward for reaching s ∈ G) and 0 for all other indices. 

Transition complexity. For one action-state pair, let the transition complexity for state s and action a, Ds,a , be the smallest common multiple of all denominators of the transition function in the state s after selecting action a.For the whole MDP, let the transition complexity D be the maximum of the transition complexities of all state-action pairs, that is, D = max (s,a )∈S×A (Ds,a ).With the formulation of the problem as a matrix equation and the knowledge of the transition complexity, we can prove the main theorem. The theorem provides a lower bound on the difference between optimal and non-optimal policies. 

Theorem 4.1. For all memoryless deterministic policies 

π, π ′ ∈ Π, we have || vπ − vπ′ || 1 ≥ (2 D)−2|A|·| S| 2−2|S| or 

|| vπ − vπ′ || 1 = 0 .Proof Sketch. We present a proof sketch. For details, refer to the Appendix F. First, we construct the matrix F , a diagonal matrix, such that, after multiplying A (from Equation (1)) by F , the entries of F A are integers. Note that the entries of F are bounded by D, the transition complexity. Second, we express the solution of vF (Id − A) = F r by using Cramer’s rule. The rule states that the value of every variable is the ratio between the determinant of F (Id − A)

with some rows and columns omitted and the determinant of 

F (Id − A). However, the determinant of an integer matrix (recall that F (Id − A) is an integer matrix) is always an integer. Third, we provide the bounds on the determinant of F (Id −

A) that is at most (2 D)|A|·| S| · 2|S|. Comparing two poli-cies where the value vectors are expressed as fractions with denominators bounded by (2 D)|A|·| S| · 2|S| means that the values in one state are either the same for both states or different. In this case, the difference is at least 

(2 D)−2|A|·| S| 2−2|S|.

# 5. Implementation and Empirical Validation 

Our theoretical contributions establish that Algorithm 1 achieves guarantees significantly stronger than standard asymptotic convergence: with probability one, beyond stage 

Kopt only optimal policies are produced. This section demonstrates that these theoretical guarantees translate to observable convergence in practice. We developed a Python implementation 1 with practical adjustments to improve performance on real-world bench-marks while preserving the core algorithmic structure (Ap-pendix G). We evaluate on 9 standardized MDP benchmarks from the Quantitative Verification Benchmark Set (Hart-manns et al., 2019). Each benchmark was evaluated over 10 independent trials (36-hour time limit, single CPU core, 1 GB memory, 2.4 GHz). The complete set of results and plots for all benchmarks are in Appendix H. 

5.1. Empirical Results 

Our experiments validate two key theoretical predictions. 

Emergence of optimal-policy-only behavior. Theo-rem 3.2 establishes that beyond stage Kopt , only optimal policies are produced with probability 1 − δk. Figure 3c demonstrates this for the Dining Philosophers benchmark: policy accuracy (empirical reachability probability) con-verges at stage k = 2 and remains stable thereafter. Across all benchmarks, policy accuracy converges at median k = 2 

and average k = 2 .3, confirming rapid emergence of the optimal-policy-only regime. 

Bounds convergence versus policy optimality. A strik-ing empirical observation is that optimal policies emerge sig-nificantly earlier than tight value bounds. While policy accu-racy stabilizes at k = 2 , bounds L(s0) and U (s0) only begin converging around k = 16 (Figures 3a-3b). This shows the algorithm finds optimal policies even when U (s0) − L(s0)

remains non-trivial, suggesting effective value separation exceeds worst-case εdiff in practice. 

> 1https://github.com/amoghp214/asymptotic-ltl-reachability

8RL Asymptotic Guarantees          

> (a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k(b) Error vs. Stage k(c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k
> Figure 3. Performance on Dining Philosophers benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00.

Figure 3a shows value bound convergence for Dining Philosophers (expected value [1 , 1] ): both U (s0) and L(s0)

approach 1.0. Figure 3b compares theoretical sample size 

Nk versus practical implementation, showing similar con-vergence profiles that validate our modifications preserve essential dynamics. Low standard deviations across trials (Figures 3b-3c) confirm robust convergence despite stochas-tic sampling variation. Note, in Figure 3c, the policy accuracy is equivalent to the reachability probability of the learned policy. A low policy accuracy does not mean the algorithm performed poorly on the benchmark. The algorithm performs well if the policy accuracy converges to the true reachability probability of the optimal policy. These values can be seen in Table 1 in Appendix H. For example, the policy accuracy for the Zeroconf benchmark is 0. However, the optimal policy’s reachability probability is also 0, meaning the algorithm works as expected. 

# 6. Concluding Remarks and Future Work 

We present the first direct learning approach for reachability that achieves guarantees significantly stronger than asymp-totic convergence: with probability one, beyond a finite stage, only optimal policies are produced, where the stage is characterized through intrinsic MDP parameters. While our algorithm uses pmin , the staged refinement framework can be generalized to other PAC guarantees under alternative assumptions such as mixing time (Perez et al., 2023) or ex-pected conditional distance (Svoboda et al., 2024), opening opportunities for further theoretical analysis under different structural parameters. Our current approach is model-based. Extending this frame-work to model-free methods—where policies are learned directly without explicit model construction—represents the critical path toward practical deployment and scalable RL for temporal specifications. 

Acknowledgment 

Research reported in this publication was partly supported by an Amazon Research Award, Fall 2024. J.S. and K.C. were supported by the European Research Council (ERC) CoG 863818 (ForM-SMArt) and Austrian Science Fund (FWF) 10.55776/COE12. J.S. was supported by Dartmouth College. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance trustwor-thy Machine Learning, in particular the, theory of RL under qualitative specifications. The contributions of this work are primarily theoretical and do not warrant any immediate societal consequence, to the best of our knowledge. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Aksaray, D., Jones, A., Kong, Z., Schwager, M., and Belta, C. Q-learning for robust satisfaction of signal tempo-ral logic specifications. In Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 6565–6570. IEEE, 2016. Alur, R., Bansal, S., Bastani, O., and Jothimurugan, K. A framework for transforming specifications in reinforce-ment learning. In Principles of Systems Design: Essays Dedicated to Thomas A. Henzinger on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday , pp. 604–624. Springer, 2022. Alur, R., Bansal, S., Bastani, O., and Jothimurugan, K. Specification-guided reinforcement learning. Communi-cations of the ACM , 69(2):80–87, 2026. Andrychowicz, O. M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Jozefowicz, R., McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G., Ray, A., et al. Learning dexterous in-hand 9RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20, 2020. Ashok, P., K ˇret ´ınsk `y, J., and Weininger, M. Pac statisti-cal model checking for markov decision processes and stochastic games. In International Conference on Com-puter Aided Verification , pp. 497–519. Springer, 2019. Baier, C. and Katoen, J.-P. Principles of model checking .MIT press, 2008. Brafman, R., De Giacomo, G., and Patrizi, F. Ltlf/ldlf non-markovian rewards. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Chatterjee, K. and Henzinger, M. Faster and dynamic algo-rithms for maximal end-component decomposition and re-lated graph problems in probabilistic verification. In Ran-dall, D. (ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2011, San Francisco, California, USA, January 23-25, 2011 , pp. 1318–1336. SIAM, 2011. Chatterjee, K. and Henzinger, M. Efficient and dynamic algorithms for alternating b ¨uchi games and maximal end-component decomposition. J. ACM , 61(3):15:1–15:40, 2014. Chatterjee, K., Meggendorfer, T., Saona, R., and Svoboda, J. Faster algorithm for turn-based stochastic games with bounded treewidth. In Bansal, N. and Nagarajan, V. (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-crete Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023 , pp. 4590–4605. SIAM, 2023. Collins, S., Ruina, A., Tedrake, R., and Wisse, M. Effi-cient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic walkers. 

Science , 307(5712):1082–1085, 2005. Courcoubetis, C. and Yannakakis, M. The complexity of probabilistic verification. J. ACM , 42(4):857–907, 1995. De Giacomo, G., Vardi, M. Y., et al. Linear temporal logic and linear dynamic logic on finite traces. In Ijcai , vol-ume 13, pp. 854–860, 2013. De Giacomo, G., Iocchi, L., Favorito, M., and Patrizi, F. Foundations for restraining bolts: Reinforcement learning with ltlf/ldlf restraining specifications. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , volume 29, pp. 128–136, 2019. Haddad, S. and Monmege, B. Interval iteration algorithm for mdps and imdps. Theoretical Computer Science , 2017. Hahn, E. M., Perez, M., Schewe, S., Somenzi, F., Trivedi, A., and Wojtczak, D. Omega-regular objectives in model-free reinforcement learning. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pp. 395–412, 2019. Hahn, E. M., Perez, M., Schewe, S., Somenzi, F., Trivedi, A., and Wojtczak, D. Faithful and effective reward schemes for model-free reinforcement learning of omega-regular objectives. In International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis , pp. 108–124. Springer, 2020a. Hahn, E. M., Perez, M., Schewe, S., Somenzi, F., Trivedi, A., and Wojtczak, D. Good-for-mdps automata for probabilis-tic analysis and reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pp. 306–323. Springer, 2020b. Hartmanns, A., Klauck, M., Parker, D., Quatmann, T., and Ruijters, E. The quantitative verification benchmark set. In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pp. 344–350. Springer, 2019. Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., and Kroening, D. Logically-constrained reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08099 , 2018. Hasanbeig, M., Kantaros, Y., Abate, A., Kroening, D., Pap-pas, G. J., and Lee, I. Reinforcement learning for tem-poral logic control synthesis with probabilistic satisfac-tion guarantees. In Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 5338–5343, 2019. Hoeffding, W. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the American statistical association , 58(301):13–30, 1963. Horn, R. A. and Johnson, C. R. Matrix Analysis . Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2012. Icarte, R. T., Klassen, T., Valenzano, R., and McIlraith, S. Using reward machines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2107–2116. PMLR, 2018. Jiang, Y., Bharadwaj, S., Wu, B., Shah, R., Topcu, U., and Stone, P. Temporal-logic-based reward shaping for con-tinuing learning tasks, 2020. Jothimurugan, K., Bansal, S., Bastani, O., and Alur, R. Compositional reinforcement learning from logical spec-ifications. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:10026–10039, 2021. Kakade, S. M. On the sample complexity of reinforcement learning . University of London, University College Lon-don (United Kingdom), 2003. 10 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Kumar, A., Zhou, A., Tucker, G., and Levine, S. Con-servative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 1179–1191, 2020. Le, X. B., Wagner, D., Witzman, L., Rabinovich, A., and Ong, L. Reinforcement learning with ltl and ω-regular objectives via optimality-preserving translation to average rewards. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:117109–117132, 2024. Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(1):1334–1373, 2016. Li, X., Vasile, C.-I., and Belta, C. Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 3834–3839. IEEE, 2017. Littman, M. L., Topcu, U., Fu, J., Isbell, C., Wen, M., and MacGlashan, J. Environment-independent task specifica-tions via GLTL, 2017. Majumdar, R., Salamati, M., and Soudjani, S. Regret-free reinforcement learning for temporal logic specifications. In Singh, A., Fazel, M., Hsu, D., Lacoste-Julien, S., Berkenkamp, F., Maharaj, T., Wagstaff, K., and Zhu, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 42nd International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 42691–42711. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025. Perez, M., Somenzi, F., and Trivedi, A. A pac learning algorithm for ltl and omega-regular objectives in mdps. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12248 , 2023. Safra, S. On the complexity of omega-automata. In 29th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, White Plains, New York, USA, 24-26 October 1988 , pp. 319–327. IEEE Computer Society, 1988. Sickert, S., Esparza, J., Jaax, S., and K ˇret ´ınsk `y, J. Limit-deterministic b ¨uchi automata for linear temporal logic. In 

International Conference on Computer Aided Verification ,pp. 312–332. Springer, 2016. Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction . MIT press, 2018. Svoboda, J., Bansal, S., and Chatterjee, K. Reinforcement learning from reachability specifications: PAC guaran-tees with expected conditional distance. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. Valiant, L. G. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM , 27(11):1134–1142, 1984. Watkins, C. J. and Dayan, P. Q-learning. Machine learning ,8(3-4):279–292, 1992. Xu, Z. and Topcu, U. Transfer of temporal logic formulas in reinforcement learning. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 4010–4018, 7 2019. Yang, C., Littman, M., and Carbin, M. Reinforcement learn-ing with general ltl objectives is intractable. In Combining Learning and Reasoning: Programming Languages, For-malisms, and Representations , 2022. Yuan, L. Z., Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., and Kroening, D. Modular deep reinforcement learning with temporal logic specifications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11591 , 2019. 11 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

# A. PAC Definition 

Definition A.1 (PAC-MDP) . A learning algorithm A is said to be PAC-MDP for L if, there is a function h such that for all 

p > 0, ε > 0, and all RL tasks (M, L) with M = ( S, A, s 0, P ), taking N = h(|S|, |A|, |L| , 1 

> p

, 1 

> ε

), with probability at least 

1 − p, we have n

n | πn /∈ Πε

> opt

(M, L)

o

≤ N. 

We say a PAC-MDP algorithm is efficient if the sample complexity function h is polynomial in |S|, |A|, 1 

> p

and 1 

> ε

.

A.1. Splitting δk

δk is broken up such that δk = δT P + δEC + δNk .

Probabilistic Error of Estimating Transition Probabilities ( δT P ) δT P is the confidence error from estimating all the transition probability errors using the Hoeffding bounds. From this, we get the error for each transition’s estimated probabilities: 

δP = δT P · pk

|SA |

where |SA | is the number of seen state-action pairs. Formally, for each transition (s, a, s ′), δP is an upper bound for the probability that the value of ˆP (s, a, s ′) > P (s, a, s ′), meaning ˆP (s, a, s ′) is not the lower bound of the true transition probability, P (s, a, s ′). In other words, with 1 − δT P confidence, ˆP is a lower bound for P .

Probabilistic Error of Detecting End Components ( δEC ) To account for probabilistic error in EC detection and MDP collapsing, δEC is the confidence error for determining whether the topology of the collapsed partial MDP is equivalent to the topology of the collapsed true MDP we are sampling from. Because EC decomposition and the collapsing process itself are deterministic, the only probabilistic error rises from the topology of the partial model being incorrect. An incorrect or incomplete learned topology could result in the EC decomposition algorithm (1) missing an SCC or (2) falsely collapsing an EC candidate because an unseen transition would make a current staying action and exit action. However, if the topology of the partial MDP is correct, EC decomposition will not fail. Thus, we use δEC error to account for topological errors. For the partial MDP topology to be incorrect, either there are unseen but reachable states or unseen transitions. Because unseen reachable states cannot be seen without unseen transitions, the problem boils down to checking for unseen transitions. The maximum number of possible transitions is |SA | 

> pk

, so the number of unseen transitions will be less than this value. Therefore, we can split δEC among |SA | 

> pk

potential unseen transitions. Doing this, we see that 

δC = δEC · pk

|SA | .

Now, for each potentially unseen transition, we must be δC -sure that it does not exist. The probability a transition is unseen but exists is at most (1 − pk)y . Where y is the number of samples taken for #( s, a ). Hence, 

δC ≥ (1 − pk)y .

To be rigorous, each state-action pair must take at least y ≥ ln( δC )ln(1 −pk ) samples. If an unseen transition, (s, a, s ′) occurs, and 

s′ /∈ S, state s′ and its possible actions must be sampled y times as well. This requirement is satisfied by the choice of Nk

as proven in Theorem 3.1. Hence, the probability error that the partial MDP is not collapsed properly is bounded by δEC .

Probabilistic Error of Seeing each transition sk times with Nk simulations ( δNk ) δNk is defined such that we are 

1 − δNk confident that Nk has been chosen such that the simulation phase runs Nk times and every transition has been seen at least sk times. sk is defined and formalized in the proof of Theorem 3.1. δNk is also split up into |SA | 

> pk

parts. This is because there will be at most |SA | 

> pk

transitions. Hence, for each relevant transition we say that there is an δn chance that it has not been seen at least sk times after Nk simulations. δn is defined as 

δn = δNk · pk

|SA | .

12 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

# B. Hoeffding Bound 

The two-sided Hoeffding bound (Hoeffding, 1963) claims that for a random variable X where each Xi is bounded by [ai, b i]

P r [| ˆX − μ| ≥ ϵ] ≤ 2 exp 

 −2n2ϵ2

Pni=1 (bi − ai)2



where ¯X is the empirical mean, and μ is the true mean. In the case of transition probabilities, the empirical and true mean translate to the empirical and true probability of a transition’s probability of occurring. All transition probabilities are bounded by [0 , 1] , so ai = 0 and bi = 1 for all transitions. Replacing ϵ with c (the confidence width), ¯X with #( s,a,s ′)#( s,a ) , μ

with P (s, a, s ′), and n with #( s, a ). The inequality becomes 

P r 

 #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) − P (s, a, s ′) ≥ c



≤ 2 · exp −2#( s, a )2c2

P#( s,a ) 

> i=1

(1 − 0) 2

!

= 2 · exp 

 −2#( s, a )2c2

#( s, a )



= 2 · e−2#( s,a )c2

This Hoeffding bound for each transition must not be greater than δP . Therefore, for each possible transition (i.e. each possible and valid P (s, a, s ′) combination), 

P r [| #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) − P (s, a, s ′)| ≥ c] ≤ δP

2 · e−2#( s,a )c2

≤ δP

−2#( s, a ) · c2 ≥ ln( δP /2) 

c2 ≥ ln( δP /2) 

−2 · #( s, a )

c ≥

s

ln( δP /2) 

−2 · #( s, a )

Therefore, using a two-sided Hoeffding bound, the minimum confidence width of a transition c is c =

q ln( δP /2)  

> −2·#( s,a )

, such that 

P r 

 #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) − P (s, a, s ′) ≥ c



≤ δP

# C. Collapsed MDP 

Definition C.1 (Super State) . A super state is a single state that represents an MEC. Formally, if we have an MEC E that is made of state set SE , super state ss is such that ss = S ∩ SE . SE is essentially treated as a single state. All staying transitions are self-loops, (ss, (s, a ), ss ). All non-staying transitions are normal transitions with an altered state, action format. The non-staying transition (s, a, s ′) becomes (ss, (s, a ), s ′). s′ can be a state or a super state. Note, a single state and the corresponding state-action pairs can be collapsed into a super state if the state and actions form an MEC. A more rigorous explanation of all cases for transition changes can be found in Appendix C.1. 

Definition C.2 (Collapsed MDP) . A collapsed MDP MC is an MDP where MC = ( SC , A C , S C, 0, P C ). SC contains all states not part of MECs and all collapsed MECs in the form of super states. AC includes all actions from states not in MECs and all actions from super states. An action from a super state is defined as a state-action pair. For example, if super state ss ,has state s1 with action a, the super state’s action is (s1, a ). sC, 0 is defined as the initial state or super state of the MDP, 

sC, 0 ∈ SC . PC is defined as the transition probabilities for the collapsed MDP. For PC (s, a, s ′), the states s, s ′ ∈ SC and action a ∈ AC .For BVI convergence, super states in the collapsed MDP are treated like normal states with one exception. If an action is 13 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

staying, its value bounds are [0 , 0] . Formally, 

L(s, a ) = 



0 is staying action(a) and G ∩ E = ∅

1 is staying action(a) and G ∩ E̸ = ∅

P 

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′) · L(s′) else 

U (s, a ) = 



0 is staying action(a) and G ∩ E = ∅

1 is staying action(a) and G ∩ E̸ = ∅P 

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′) U (s′)



+



1 − P 

> s′:#( s,a,s ′)>0

ˆP (s, a, s ′)



else 

C.1. Collapse MDP Operation 

Assuming all the MECs of an MDP have been correctly identified, the algorithm must deterministically collapse the MECs into super states; see Definition C.1. This turns MDP M into MDP MC , where M = ( S, A, S 0, P ) and MC =(SC , A C , S C, 0, P C ). The following transition cases are defined for a collapsed MDP’s behavior (Haddad & Monmege, 2017): If a state s takes action a which transitions to another state s′, there is no difference with the topology or transition probabilities for M or MC .If a state is a super state and it’s transition leads to a normal state, then actions are rewritten to incorporate the state as well. If we look at state-action pair (s, a ) where s is part of super state ss , transition (s, a, s ′) becomes (ss, (s, a ), s ′).If s is a state and it takes action a which has at least 1 transition that goes into super state ss , then all transitions that go into super state ss from s are combined into one single transition with the summed transition probability. For example, with 

P (s, a, s ′) and P (s, a, s ′′ ) where s′ and s′′ are part of super state ss , PC (s, a, ss ) = P (s, a, s ′) + P (s, a, s ′′ ).Finally, if state s is part of a super state ss and has action a that transitions to one or more states that are part of the super state ss ′, the actions would incorporate the state as mentioned earlier, and the transitions would be merged into a single transition with the summed transition probability. For example, with P (s, a, s ′) and P (s, a, s ′′ ) where s is part of super state ss , and s′ and s′′ are part of super state ss ′, PC (ss, (s, a ), ss ′) = P (s, a, s ′) + P (s, a, s ′′ ).

C.2. Collapse MDP Algorithm 

The collapse MDP algorithm is the COLLAPSE MECs(PM) algorithm as shown in Algorithm 1. To be δEC sure that the topology of the partial MDP is correct, we ensure each state-action pair has been sampled a total of y times as mentioned in Appendix A.1. Then, Tarjan’s algorithm is run recursive (every function call, all exit actions are removed). This results in a deterministic EC decomposition. Now that the ECs are known with 1 − δEC confidence, the collapse MDP operation is run on each state, as mentioned in Appendix C.1 

# D. Simulation Algorithms 

Simulation algorithms are given in Algorithms 2 to 4. Please note, the μ value influences the randomness of the simulation. μ should be set such that μ ∈ R(0 , 1] for the algorithm to work and for all the theoretical guarantees to hold. Intuitively, μ controls whether the explorative or exploitative nature of the algorithm dominates. A small value for μ will result in the best action heuristic being used more often while a larger μ

value will result in a more explorative approach via. more random sampling. 

# E. Proof of Theorem 3.1 

E.1. δk Split Guarantee Explanation for Theorem 3.1: 

Putting everything together, there is at most (a) δEC confidence error of the collapsed MDP topology and EC detection being incorrect, (b) δT P confidence error of the transition probabilities being incorrect which influences sk, and (c) δNk

14 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Algorithm 2 Simulate sampling from the true MDP  

> 1:

function SIMULATE (MDP M, target G) 

> 2:

X ← ∅ { States visited during this simulation } 

> 3:

s ← s0 

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

X ← X ∪ { s} 

> 6:

a ← sampled uniformly with 1 − μ probability from B EST ACTION (s) and with μ probability from all actions  

> 7:

s′ ← sampled according to P (s, a ) 

> 8:

INCREMENT #( s, a, s ′) 

> 9:

s ← s′ 

> 10:

until s ∈ G or LOOPING (X, s ) 

> 11:

return X ∪ { s} { Include last state in returned path } 

> 12:

end function Algorithm 3 Looping - Check whether we are probably looping and should stop the simulation  

> 1:

function LOOPING (State set X, State s) {X = visited states, s = current state } 

> 2:

if s / ∈ X then  

> 3:

return false {No loop possible yet } 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

return ∃ C ⊆ X : C is an EC in partial model ∧ s ∈ C ∧ δC -S URE -EC (C) 

> 6:

end function 

confidence error that Nk simulations does not sample every relevant transition at least sk times. This is the start to finish of the proof. It was defined in Appendix A.1 that δk = δT P + δEC + δNk . This means that there exists a KP AC s.t. for every 

k ≥ KP AC , there exists an Nk s.t. with confidence at least ( 1 − δk), U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk. Note, the lower and upper bound found are actually for sC, 0 instead of s0, since BVI is run on the collapsed partial MDP. For simplicity, this is left our of the proof sketch. However, it is seen in the rigorous proof of the theorem. 

E.2. Relevant State-Actions/Transitions 

A relevant action is an action unique to a state, s. It is such that a ∈ Av (s) where a ∈ best action (s) and state s has reachability from s0 > 0 if the algorithm runs a simulation using the guiding heuristic in Algorithm 2. Note that the guiding heuristic utilizes U from stage k − 1 of the algorithm. Additionally, a relevant transition is any transition seen from a relevant action. 

E.3. Existence and Calculation of sk

Lemma E.1. Let ˆM = ( S, A, ˆP , s 0) be our partial MDP and ˆMC = ( SC , A C , ˆPC , s C, 0) be ˆM collapsed as mentioned in Algorithm 1. If k ≥ KP AC , then after running BVI on ˆMC , if P r [U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − δT P , then 

P r [U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC )

Proof. The algorithm runs BVI on the collapsed MDP, which is derived from the discovered partial MDP, as mentioned in Section 3.2. Therefore, we can only provide guarantees on U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk if we provide guarantees on the collapsed partial model. Note that the algorithm is 1 − δEC sure that the topology of the discovered MDP is correct, given that each state-action pair has been sampled at least y times as mentioned in Appendix A.1. EC decomposition is deterministic and based on MDP topology. The algorithm has collapsed the discovered partial MDP into ˆMC , and with high confidence, ˆMC has the same topology as the ground truth collapsed MDP, MC , where MC = ( SC , A C , s C, 0, P C ) (for all reachable states). This means the collapsed partial MDP is correct w.r.t. the collapsed version of the true MDP with δEC error. 

ˆM and ˆMC will have the same optimal policy. The only difference between these two MDPs is the set of states in ECs. The optimal policy for such states would be to deterministically take actions that stay in the EC until we visit the state where 

best exit action (EC ) exists. Once we visit that state, the best exit action is taken. This process is described in Section 3.2. 15 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Algorithm 4 Checks whether C is an end-component with δC confidence  

> 1:

function δC SURE EC(State set C, min probability pk) 

> 2:

required samples ← ln( δC )ln(1 − pk) 

> 3:

B ← { (s, a ) | s ∈ C ∧ ¬ (s, a ) exits C} { Staying state-action pairs } 

> 4:

return ^

> (s,a )∈B

 #( s, a ) > required samples  

> 5:

end function 

For the collapsed MDP, once we land in a super state, we simply choose the best exit action since all the EC states are now a single state. Thus, we can optimally preserve and translate the policy of ˆMC to a policy for ˆM with the sample reachability value. If we find a policy πC that is an εk-optimal policy for MC , then with probability 1 − δEC , we can translate πC into policy π which is εk-optimal for M.A policy on MC is optimal if and only if BVI converges such that U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk. Moreover, we know the estimated transition probabilities have at most δT P error. Therefore, we say, if P r [U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − δT P ,then P r [U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC ).

Lemma E.2. In Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC , if all relevant transitions are sampled at least 

sk times, then 

Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC ).

Proof. Note, this proof of calculating sk was inspired from (Ashok et al., 2019). Let the integer KPAC be such that pKPAC = 12KPAC 

≤ pmin where pmin is the minimum non-zero probability in the ground truth MDP M. Note that even though the value pmin is unknown, such a KPAC will certainly exist. A policy π is εk-optimal if U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk. This is because L(s0) ≤ V (s0) ≤ U (s0). Any value taken within the range of the lower and upper bound of the initial state is guaranteed to be within εk of V (s0).We aim to prove that there exists a KP AC s.t. for all k ≥ KP AC , there exists an Nk s.t. P r [U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − δk.Since Algorithm 1 collapses the partial MDP to handle ECs, we can use Lemma E.1 and say that by proving BVI finds an 

εk-optimal policy for the collapsed MDP, it has found an εk-optimal policy for the uncollapsed MDP as well, with δEC more probabilistic error. Formally, if k ≥ KP AC , then after running BVI on ˆMC , if P r [U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − δT P ,then P r [U (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC ).Now, it will be proven that for the collapsed discovered MDP, BVI converges. Proving BVI convergence for the collapsed discovered MDP proves the convergence of the uncollapsed MDP since no transitions are lost, and collapsing the MDP is actually the correct way of deflating U . Therefore, it must be proven that P r [U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk] ≥ 1 − δT P 

where sC, 0 is the initial state of the collapsed discovered MDP. Because we are at least 1 − δEC confident that the collapsed discovered MDP’s topology is equal to that of MC , it can be said that the initial states for both collapsed MDPs are sC, 0

with at least 1 − δEC confidence. We can prove this lemma if the lower bound of the collapsed discovered MDP’s initial state can be bounded such that 

V (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk 

> 2

since this can be done for the upper bound, U (s0), as well. The logic remains the same. 

V (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk

2

U (sC, 0) − V (sC, 0) ≤ εk

2

U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk

This proof sums error along MDP paths. Thus, the proof requires the MDP to be acyclical. Let Mr be the unrolled version of MDP MC with a step counter that allows for a maximum of r steps. Formally, Mr has the state space SC × [r], where [r] is the set of all natural numbers in the range [0 , r ]. Actions and transitions work the same, 16 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

except they increment the step counter. Transition (s, a, s ′) becomes (( s, r ), a, (s′, r + 1)) . The step counter makes Mr

acyclical since it is not possible to go back to a smaller r. Additionally, the depth of the MDP is r steps. This means that any transition going to a state where the value of the step counter is greater than r leads to a sink state, ss with V (ss ) = 0 .Let V (MC ) denote the true value from the initial state of the true, collapsed MDP. Formally, V (MC ) = V (sC, 0). For an unrolled MDP, the reachability objective is satisfied when a target/goal state is reached in the state component of the MDP. It can be said that V (Mr ) ≤ V (MC ). This is because the reachability for Mr is an r-horizon task, i.e. a task that can be done with at most r steps. However, V (MC ) is an infinite horizon task as there is no limit to the number of steps the agent can take. Therefore, the paths that reach the goal for MC are the paths that reach the goal for Mr plus the paths of length 

(r + c) where c ∈ N+. The paths shorter than r step have the same reachability probability for both MC and Mr . Hence, 

V (Mr ) ≤ V (MC ).It can also be shown that lim r→∞ V (Mr ) = V (MC ). As r increases, the number of paths that satisfy the reachability objective either stays equal or increases. As r → ∞ , the reachability objective turns into one for an infinite-horizon task, meaning all possible paths that satisfy the reachability objective will be accounted for. Thus, lim r→∞ V (Mr ) = V (MC ).Let V ( ˆMr ) be the value of sC, 0 in Mr if the estimated transition probabilities, ˆPC , were used instead of PC . All remaining probabilities will be directed towards a sink state of value 0. V ( ˆMC ) is the limit of BVI for the partial MDP constructed according to (Ashok et al., 2019). By this definition V ( ˆMC ) is the limit of the best lower bound, L(sC, 0), which BVI can obtain using ˆP . Let the number of BVI iterations be at least r (which can be assumed since the number of BVI iterations increases more than linearly with k). This means that the lower bound calculated from BVI is L(sC, 0) ≥ V ( ˆMr ), given the number of BVI iterations is at least r according to (Ashok et al., 2019). The objective is to prove that with 1 − δk confidence, 

V (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk

2

Assume an r has been chosen such that 

V (MC ) − V (Mr ) ≤ εk

4

Such an r is guaranteed to exist as lim r→∞ V (Mr ) = V (MC ). The explanation above states that L(sC, 0) ≥ V ( ˆMr ).Therefore, the condition can be rewritten. 

V (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk

2

V (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ V (sC, 0) − V ( ˆMr )= V (MC ) − V ( ˆMr )= V (MC ) − V (Mr )+ V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr )

≤ εk

4 + V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr )

It is shown that 

εk

4 + V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) ≤ εk

2

V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) ≤ εk

4

Therefore, to prove convergence, it must be proved that V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) ≤ εk 

> 4

. In other words, the error of using ˆPC

instead of PC should be bounded by εk 

> 4

.Given Lemma E.3, we see that for all i ∈ Z where i ≥ 0, P : Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

> pk

i

· i, where Vr (s) and ˆVr (s) are the values of a state s ∈ SC × [r] for MDPs Mr and ˆMr respectively. Note, i denotes the longest path length from state s

to an accepting state or sink state. 17 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

The longest path in the unrolled MDP, Mr is r steps since each transition in Mr increments the step counter by 1, and after 

r steps, we reach a terminal state. Therefore, for any state s ∈ S,

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

r

· r

Now, the confidence width c must be found such that the error of using ˆPC instead of PC is less than εk 

> 4

. To do this, 

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

r

· r

2c ·

 1

pk

r

· r ≤ εk

4

The confidence width, c, is calculated using the two-sided Hoeffding bound as mentioned in Section 3.2 

c =

s

ln( δP /2) 

−2 · #( s, a )

Substituting results in 

2 ·

s

ln( δP /2) 

−2 · #( s, a ) ·

 1

pk

r

· r ≤ εk

4

where #( s, a ) is the number of samples require for each state-action pair. We define sk (mentioned earlier in the proof) as 

sk = #( s, a ). Rewriting, 

sk ≥ 32 · ln (2 /δ P ) · r2

ε2 

> k

· p2·rk

If every relevant transitions has been sampled at least sk times, the necessary confidence width would be achieved for the algorithm to converge to a maximum error of εk. This is because, sampling every relevant transition at least sk times means 

V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) ≤ εk

4 .

Since it is assumed that 

V (MC ) − V (Mr ) ≤ εk

4

it can be said that 

V (s0) − L(s0) ≤ εk

2

The same argument can be made for the upper bound. Henceforth, if each relevant state-action (or each relevant transition if we take an upper bound) has been seen at least sk times, U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk.Note, the induction argument is satisfied for relevant actions in a state because when induction is done backwards from a target or sink state all the way to s0, we are only looking at actions that we would select (as mentioned by the definition and choice of a1 and a2 in the setup of the induction). We are creating an optimal policy. The optimal policy is created by sampling the best actions. The optimal policy will be only the best actions from each state. Therefore, the set of all relevant actions is equal to the set of all actual actions that could be taken. Hence, if we sample each relevant transition sk times and have the error bound for seeing each relevant transition, it will mean the error is bound for all actions used in the policy. Thus we need to make sure the error bounded by each state-action pair seen in this optimal policy is withing εk. As a result, we only care about relevant transitions. To ensure there are no issues with the MDP’s topology, each transition (not just relevant transitions) must be sampled at least y times where y ≥ ln( δC )ln(1 −pk ) as mentioned in Appendix A.1. Since y << s k, we can say that all transitions must be sampled at least sk times for us to guarantee that U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk with high confidence. 18 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Additionally, by requiring each transition to be seen at least sk times, we can account for the rare case when the relevant 

actions seen are not the true relevant actions. By not restricting the sampling requirement to only relevant actions, we ensure the algorithm adjusts and corrects itself in the future, regardless of previous stage outputs. In this proof, the only probabilistic errors possible to prove that U (sC, 0) − L(sC, 0) ≤ εk with sk samples were from collapsing ECs and estimating transition probabilities. These two parts have confidence errors δEC and δT P as defined in Appendix A.1. Therefore, we see that if each relevant transition is sampled at least sk times, Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥

1 − (δT P + δEC ).

Lemma E.3. For all i ∈ Z where i ≥ 0, Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

> pk

i

· i. We define Vr (s) and ˆVr (s) as the value of a state 

s ∈ SC × [r] for MDPs Mr and ˆMr respectively. Note, i denotes the longest path length from state s to an accepting state or sink state. Proof. The following induction argument proves that this inequality will be satisfied. Intuitively, we bound the approximation error in estimating the value of a state. Let Vr (s) and ˆVr (s) be the value of a state s ∈ SC × [r] for MDPs Mr and ˆMr

respectively. The proposition is as follows. For every state s ∈ SC × [r],

P : Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

i

· i

where i ≥ 0, and i denotes the longest path length from state s to an accepting state or sink state. Because Mr is acyclic and unrolled to a maximum of r steps, i ≤ r. Therefore, by proving, this inequality for all s ∈ SC × [r], it inherently proves that 

Vr (sC, 0) − ˆVr (sC, 0) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

r

· rV (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

r

· r

meaning, V (Mr ) − V ( ˆMr ) is bounded, and with the right confidence width c, can be less than εk 

> 4

.Continuing the induction: Base case: let i = 0 . The subset of states with longest path of 0 steps are sink states and goal states. For all these states, 

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

0

· 0

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 0

This is accuracy as all goal states and sink states have values 1 and 0 respectively for Mr and ˆMr . The value difference is 0

because no transitions occur on these paths, meaning PC and ˆPC have note been used. Inductive Hypothesis: for a state s ∈ SC × [r] that reaches a goal or sink state with longest path of length at most i steps, 

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

i

· i

Induction Step: for any state s ∈ SC × [r] that reaches a goal or a sink state with longest path of length at most i + 1 , let 

a1 be the best possible (highest value) action from s that maximizes Vr (s). Let a2 be the best possible action from s that maximizes ˆVr (s). More formally, a1 ∈ argmax a1∈Av (s)Vr (s, a 1) and a2 ∈ argmax a2∈Av (s) ˆVr (s, a 2), where Vr (s, a )

and ˆVr (s, a ) are the values of state-action pairs in Mr and ˆMr . From this, 

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) = Vr (s, a 1) − ˆVr (s, a 2)

≤ Vr (s, a 1) − ˆVr (s, a 1)= X

> s′

h

P (s, a 1, s ′)Vr (s′) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′) ˆVr (s′)

i

19 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Because there are at most 1 

> pk

transitions per state-action pair, s′′ can be defined as the state that maximizes 

P (s, a 1, s ′)Vr (s′) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′) ˆVr (s′). Thus, the expression can be rewritten as 

≤ 1

pk

h

P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′′ ) ˆVr (s′′ )

i

Now, if it is shown that 

P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′′ ) ˆVr (s′′ ) ≤ 2c

 1

pk

i

(i + 1) 

the induction will be complete as 

≤ 1

pk

h

P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′′ ) ˆVr (s′′ )

i

≤ 1

pk

· 2c

 1

pk

i

(i + 1) = 2 c

 1

pk

i+1 

(i + 1) 

Note that s′′ is a successor of s. Because the longest path length from s to a goal or sink state is at most i + 1 , the longest path from s′′ to a goal or sink state must be at most i. Therefore, Vr (s′′ ) − ˆVr (s′′ ) can be used as the inductive hypothesis. Before continuing the proof of the induction step, it is known that with the two-sided Hoeffding bound on the transition probabilities, the algorithm is 1 − δT P confident that for all transitions, 

P (s, a, s ′) − #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) ≥ c

Considering that 

ˆP (s, a, s ′) = #( s, a, s ′)#( s, a ) − c

with at most δT P confidence error, it can be assumed that for all ˆP (s, a, s ′),

P (s, a, s ′) − 2c ≤ ˆP (s, a, s ′) ≤ P (s, a, s ′)

Now, the induction is continued by proving the following: 

= P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′′ ) ˆVr (s′′ )

≤ P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − (P (s, a 1, s ′′ ) − 2c) ˆVr (s′′ )= P (s, a 1, s ′′ ) · (Vr (s′′ ) − ˆVr (s′′ )) + 2 c · ˆVr (s′′ )

≤ P (s, a 1, s ′′ ) · 2c ·

 1

pk

i

· i + 2 c · ˆVr (s′′ )= 2 c ·

" 1

pk

i

· i · P (s, a 1, s ′′ ) + ˆVr (s′′ )

#

≤ 2c ·

" 1

pk

i

· i · 1 + ˆVr (s′′ )

#

≤ 2c ·

" 1

pk

i

· i · 1 + 1 

#

≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

i

· (i + 1) 

20 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Therefore, it is shown that 

≤ 1

pk

h

P (s, a 1, s ′′ )Vr (s′′ ) − ˆP (s, a 1, s ′′ ) ˆVr (s′′ )

i

= 1

pk

· 2c

 1

pk

i

(i + 1) = 2 c

 1

pk

i+1 

(i + 1) 

Hence, it has been proven that for all s ∈ SC × [r] and for all i ≥ 0

Vr (s) − ˆVr (s) ≤ 2c ·

 1

pk

i

· i

E.4. Calculating the Probability of Seeing the Least Likely Relevant Transition Lemma E.4. The lower bound for the probability of the least likely transition occurring in a single simulation is 

p ≥

 μ · pk

|A|

|S|

.Proof. p is defined as the probability that the least likely transition occurs in a single simulation of the algorithm. Because of 

μ (defined in Appendix D), there is a non-zero chance that the algorithm lands on state s of any (relevant and/or non-relevant) action, and there is a non-zero chance that the action a is sampled. Therefore, for every action, there is a non-zero chance that the action is seen. Because a transition is any seen transition from an action, it is implied that transitions also have a non-zero probability of being seen during a simulation. Now we know that p > 0. To calculate the minimum value bound of p, we consider the least likely transition. Such a transition would require the algorithm to go through at most |S| states during the simulation to get to state s. State s is where this action can be run. In the simulation, going from one state to another requires either sampling the best action or random sampling, based on μ as mentioned in Appendix D. In the worst case, the action is not one of the best actions to take, and we need the simulation algorithm to randomly sample the action. there will be at most |A| actions from the current state; only one of those actions has a transition to the next desired state, and that transition is with minimum probability pk.Therefore, going from one state to another in the simulation will have a minimum probability of μ·pk 

> |A|

. Because we need to traverse through at most |S| states, we will take at most |S| − 1 steps. Thus, we can get to the state where the least likely transition can occur with probability ≥

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|− 1

. Finally, the probability of seeing the relevant transition is at least μ·pk 

> |A|

.Therefore, the minimum probability of seeing the least likely relevant transition is 

p ≥

 μ · pk

|A|

|S|

.

E.5. Existence of Nk

Lemma E.5. Given that each transition must be seen at least sk times, and given that the least likely transition is seen with probability p ≥

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|

in a single simulation, there exists an Nk s.t. the probability of not seeing each transition at least 

sk times is bounded by at most δNk as defined in Appendix A.1. 

21 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

Proof. We assume that p =

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|

is the minimum probability with which a relevant transition can be done. Let 

X be a random variable that counts the number of times the least likely transition has occurred. X follows a Binomial Distribution with parameters (Nk, p ), meaning X ∼ B(Nk, p ). The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of X is 

F (X ≤ sk − 1) = Psk −1

> i=0

 Nk

> i

 · pi · (1 − p)Nk −i. This CDF gives the probability of Nk simulations not choosing the least likely relevant transition at least sk times. It would be ideal for F (X ≥ sk) = 1 . Unfortunately, this is impossible as there will always be some probability that fewer than sk samples are seen: F (X < s k) > 0. However, the algorithm can choose a large Nk such that F (X < s k) ≤ δn (which would be possible with a large enough Nk, i.e. there exists an Nk s.t. 

F (X < s k) ≤ δn since lim Nk →∞ F (X < s k) = 0 ). Note, δn is the upper bound for the error that a relevant transition was not seen sk times. δn has been defined in Appendix A.1 as δn = δNk ·pk 

> |SA |

, where |SA | is the number of state-action pairs discovered. δNk is essentially partitioned into several δn errors that are consumed by each relevant transtion. Since the number of relevant transitions is no greater than the number of possible transitions, |SA | 

> pk

, the confidence error of not seeing a single relevant transition at least sk times is bounded by δNk . Hence, with δNk confidence error, it can be said that given 

sk is the minimum number of times to see the least likely relevant transition, running Nk simulations will run each relevant transition at least sk times. 

E.6. Entire Proof of Theorem 3.1 Theorem 3.1 In Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC there exists a number of simulations Nk s.t. 

Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − δk.

I.e. policy πk is εk-optimal in MDP M with confidence 1 − δk.

Proof. By Lemma E.2, in Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC , all transitions must be sampled at least sk times to guarantee Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC ).

By Lemma E.4, there exists a minimum probability for the least likely transition, p. Lemma E.4 also states that p ≥

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|

.We now can assume that each transition must be seen at least sk times and that the least likely transition is seen with probability p ≥

 μ·pk

> |A|

|S|

. Therefore, by Lemma E.5, there exists an Nk s.t. the probability of not seeing each relevant transition at least sk times is bounded by at most δNk .The above statement proves that there exists an Nk for an sk, given δNk . This, along with Lemma 1, indicates that in Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC there exists a number of simulations Nk s.t. 

Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − (δT P + δEC ) − δNk .

Because δk = δEC + δT P + δNk (as shown in Appendix A.1), we hence prove that in Algorithm 1, there exists a KPAC ∈ N

s.t. for all k ≥ KPAC there exists a number of simulations Nk s.t. 

Pr[ πk ∈ Πεk

> opt

] ≥ 1 − (δk).

I.e. policy πk is εk-optimal in MDP M with confidence 1 − δk.Note, it must be true that k ≥ KP AC . Otherwise, our estimate of the minimum transition probability, pk, would be greater than the true pmin . This would prevent the assumptions in the proof from being correct. 

# F. Technical details for bound on εdiff 

In this section, we provide the missing proofs and technical details from Section 4. 

Matrix expression. Here, we motivate the formulation of Equation (1). In a known environment M, given a memoryless deterministic policy π, we get a value vs for a state s. In reachability for all transient states s ∈ S \ G, we have 

vs = X

> s′∈S

P (s, π (s), s ′)vs′

22 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

and for s ∈ G, we have vs = ws, where ws is the general reward (usually 1 or 0). To argue about the exact values, we expand the equation and express the values of choosing state-action pairs 

vs,a = X

> s′∈S

P (s, a, s ′)vs′ ,

then we express the values of states under a deterministic policy as 

vs = vs,π (s) .

Observe that all policies can be encoded in such a way. Two policies only differ in the choice of vs.Note that the solution to Equation (1) might not be unique; the value of reachability is the smallest solution to the equation. However, we suppose the MDP M is halting : all policies eventually reach some s ∈ G. Halting MDPs have only a unique solution to the equation v = vA + r.

Transition complexity. Here, we describe the transition complexity in more detail. The transition complexity Di of a matrix row is a number such that multiplying all entries in row i by Di gives integers. For s ∈ S in the row As, ·, we have 

Ds = 1 , since all entries are either 0 or 1. For s ∈ S and a ∈ A, for the row A(s,a ),·, we express Pa(s, s ′) for a ∈ A and 

s, s ′ ∈ S as a fraction 

P (s, a, s ′) = p(s,a ),s ′

q(s,a ),s ′

where p(s,a ),s ′ , q (s,a ),s ′ ∈ Z. We define 

Ds,a = lcm s′∈S (q(s,a ),s ′ ) ,

where lcm is the lowest common multiple of inputs. Then, the transition complexity of the whole matrix is defined as the maximum over all rows. In our case, it is 

D = max  

> (s,a )∈S×A

(Ds,a ) .

Proof of Theorem 4.1. We rewrite the equation v = vA + r as 

v (Id − A) = r ,

where Id is an identity matrix. We define a diagonal matrix F indexed by S and S × A such that Fs,s = 1 and 

F(s,a ),(s,a ) = Ds,a . Then, in the matrix F (Id − A), the corresponding row with index (s, a ) is multiplied by its transition complexity Ds,a . That means the entries of the matrix F (Id − A) are all integers. Now, we argue about the solution of 

vF (Id − A) = F r .

To solve the matrix equation, we can use Cramer’s rule to get an explicit expression of the solution. In our situation, Cramer’s rule states that 

vi = det( Bi)det( F (Id − A)) ,

where Bi be the matrix created from F (Id − A) by replacing its column with index i by the vector F r. Moreover, all entries of the matrix Bi are integers since r is an integer vector, F is an integer diagonal matrix, and F (Id − A) is an integer matrix. Observe that the determinant of an integer matrix is an integer since the determinant only sums products of different permutations. Since det( Bi) is always an integer, we bound the value of det( F (Id − A)) . From multiplicativity of determinant, we have 

det( F (Id − A)) = det( F ) · det( Id − A).We bound det( F ), but the determinant of a diagonal matrix is only the product of all entries. Therefore, we have 

det( F ) = Y

> s∈S

Ds

!

·

 Y

> (s,a )∈S×A

Ds,a 

 ≤ D|S|·| A| ,

23 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

since we have Ds = 1 for s ∈ S and Ds,a ≤ D for (s, a ) ∈ S × A.Now, we bound the value of det( Id − A). First, since A is square matrix, we have det( Id − A) = det( Id − AT ). Then from (Horn & Johnson, 2012)[Prop. 5.6.P10] we have that 

det( Id − AT ) ≤ Y

> i∈S∪(S×A)

|| (Id − A)i, ·|| 1 .

That means we can upper-bound the determinant by the product of sums of absolute values in each row. But A is a matrix that describes a stochastic process, which means the sum of absolute values over rows is at most 1. For the identity matrix, we also have that the absolute value of the sum of rows is 1. From the triangle inequality, we have the absolute value of a row of a matrix Id − A is at most 2.Since there is |S| + |S| · | A| rows, we have the determinant of the matrix Id − A is at most 2|S|+|S|·| A|. That means we have 

det( F (Id − A)) ≤ (2 D)|A|·| S| · 2|S| .

So, for any given policy π, we know that all the reachability values can be expressed as a fraction 

pq ,

where p, q ∈ Z and q is a fixed number for all s (for fixed policy) bounded by (2 D)−| A|·| S| · 2−| S|.Observe that immediately implies that the difference between values of two states under one policy is either 0 or at least 

(2 D)−| A|·| S| · 2−| S|.Now, we examine the reachability value of state s under policy π and π′. We have that vs can be expressed as pq and p′ 

> q′

for 

p, p ′, q, q ′ ∈ Z for policy π and π′ respectively. Moreover, we have q, q ′ ≤ (2 D)−| A|·| S| · 2−| S|. Then, we can express the difference as pq − p′

q′ = pq ′ − p′qqq ′ .

This value is either 0 or at least 1 

> qq ′

, which is at least 1/



(2 D)−| A|·| S| · 2−| S|

2

.For two policies π, π ′, the value of state s is either 0 or differs by at least 

(2 D)−2|A|·| S| 2−2|S| .

# G. Practical Modifications 

Choosing Nk: The theoretical value of Nk is astronomically large and cannot be used. Therefore, we use a different value for Nk. In the implementation, we have Nk grow quadratically with respect to k and linearly with respect to the number of states in the partial discovered MDP. This, however, leads to another complication. The δc-sure EC algorithm works simply by checking if each potential EC has the right number of samples for the given confidence level. With the implementation’s chosen Nk, the number of simulations per main-loop iteration grow slower (quadratically) than the number of samples required for δc-sure EC detection (super-exponential). Therefore, after a certain iteration of the main loop, the simulation phase of the algorithm will not be able to sample the actions in the EC candidate enough times for the EC to be detected. This will cause BVI to run on a semi-collapsed version of the learned MDP which would not result in the optimal policy. To avoid this optimality loss, we make another change to the algorithm. We do not only check if the required number of samples are taken for EC candidates, but we also run extra samples if they are needed. This way, actual ECs will always be detected. 

Utilizing Heuristic for is looping Criteria: The theoretical algorithm’s is looping check runs SCC detection recursively on the staying MDPs found. For large automata and MDPs, this can be very expensive. To quicken this process, we utilize 24 RL Asymptotic Guarantees                                                                             

> Table 1. Benchmark Performance and Policy Convergence Statistics
> Description Exploration Policy Performance
> Benchmark Name # of States # of Trans. % States Seen % Trans. Seen Exp. Acc. Obs. Acc. Stages Conv. Samples to Conv. Consensus 2 272 492 100.0 98.4 1.00 1.00 2397,467 CSMA 2-2 1038 1282 93.1 92.5 0.50 0.49 2569,282,328 Firewire Abst 623 750 100.0 99.9 1.00 1.00 23,377,329 IJ 3 721 100.0 71.4 1.00 1.00 155 IJ 10 1023 8960 100.0 99.8 1.00 1.00 2822,547 Pacman 498 620 47.2 48.4 0.55 0.54 79,950,147 Philosophers MDP 3 956 3696 46.0 35.4 1.00 1.00 235,487 Rabin 3 27766 137802 3.9 2.0 1.00 1.00 2453,868 Zeroconf 670 997 14.2 12.9 0.00 0.00 111,732

a heuristic. If the number of states seen in the run does not change within |S|2 samples, it is likely that the simulation is stuck. Therefore, is looping returns true and the algorithm exits the simulation run. Because we run millions of simulation iterations, it is extremely likely in practice that we will find all relevant transitions. 

Choosing Number of BVI Iterations: The number of BVI iterations, nBV I , should grow with |S| so that all states can propagate their value bounds to the initial state. Through inspection, we found that choosing an nBV I that grows linearly with |S| and k works well. The BVI run converges while also not wasting computing power. 

Convergence Check: In practice, we want the algorithm to exit rather than run infinitely. Therefore, we have a convergence check. Given the same δk, pmin , and nBV I as the previous iteration, BVI is run on the current iteration. If the error of the initial state’s bounds ( U (s0) − L(s0)) is less than that of the previous iteration by more than an input threshold, the algorithm has not converged and continues. Otherwise, it stops. We also added a minimum number of iterations to run the algorithm’s main loop since the error of some experiments only improves after a certain number of samples have been seen. 

# H. Empirical Results 

MDP PRISM Benchmark Results Table: The tabular results from the 9 benchmarks the algorithm was tested on can be found in Table 1 

MDP PRISM Benchmark Plots: Figures 4 to 12 detail the plots for all 9 benchmarks that we tested our algorithm on.          

> (a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k(b) Error vs. Stage k(c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k
> Figure 4. Performance on the Consensus 2 benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00.

25 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 5. Performance on the CSMA 2-2 benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 0.50. 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 6. Performance on the Firewire Abst benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00. 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 7. Performance on the IJ 3 benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00. 

26 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 8. Performance on the IJ 10 benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00. 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 9. Performance on the Pacman benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 0.55. 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 10. Performance on the Dining Philosophers benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00. 

27 RL Asymptotic Guarantees 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 11. Performance on the Rabin 3 benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 1.00. 

(a) Value Bounds vs. Stage k (b) Error vs. Stage k (c) Policy Accuracy vs. Stage k

Figure 12. Performance on the Zeroconf benchmark. The values plotted are the median values over 10 trials. Optimal Policy Reachability Value: 0.00. 

28