Title: Reasoning Provenance for Autonomous AI Agents: Structured Behavioral Analytics Beyond State Checkpoints and Execution Traces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21692v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 01:57:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
Preprint 1

# Reasoning Provenance for Autonomous AI Agents: Structured Behavioral Analytics Beyond State Checkpoints and Execution Traces 

Neelmani Vispute 

Oracle Cloud Infrastructure 

neelmani.vispute@oracle.com 

March 2026 

Abstract. As AI agents transition from human-supervised copilots to autonomous platform infrastructure, the ability to analyze their reasoning behavior across populations of investigations—not just debug individual executions— becomes a pressing infrastructure requirement. Existing operational tooling addresses adjacent needs effectively: state checkpoint systems (LangGraph) enable fault tolerance; observability platforms (LangSmith, Langfuse, Data-dog) provide execution traces for debugging; telemetry standards (OpenTelemetry GenAI) ensure interoperability; provenance models (PROV-AGENT) capture causal lineage for scientific reproducibility. These systems, individu-ally and in combination, provide strong coverage of the mechanical layer of agent execution. What current systems do not natively provide as a first-class, schema-level primitive is structured reasoning prove-nance —normalized, queryable records of why the agent chose each action, what it concluded from each observation, how each conclusion shaped its strategy, and which evidence supports its final verdict. While reasoning-like infor-mation may exist within trace data as unstructured natural language in model responses, or may be partially approxi-mated through extensible metadata fields, it is not captured as a canonical, comparable semantic object designed for cross-run behavioral analytics. This paper introduces the Agent Execution Record (AER) , a structured reasoning provenance primitive that captures intent, observation, and inference as first-class queryable fields on every step, alongside versioned plans with revision rationale, evidence chains, structured verdicts with confidence scores, and delegation authority chains. We formalize the distinction between computational state persistence and reasoning provenance, argue that the latter cannot in general be faithfully reconstructed from the former, and show how AERs enable population-level behavioral analytics: reasoning pattern mining, confidence calibration, cross-agent comparison, and counterfactual regression testing via mock replay. We present a domain-agnostic model with extensible domain profiles, a reference implementation and SDK, and outline an evaluation methodology informed by preliminary deployment on a production platformized root cause analysis agent. Preliminary storage analysis suggests AERs are substantially more compact than cumulative state checkpoints while retaining higher long-term analytical value. The paper’s primary contribution is the AER abstrac-tion and its formalization; empirical validation across diverse workloads is ongoing work. 

Keywords: Reasoning provenance, agent behavioral analytics, autonomous AI agents, execution records, mock replay, confidence calibration 

1 Introduction 

The operational model for AI agents is shifting from interactive copilots to fully autonomous platform in-frastructure. In the copilot model, the human opera-tor serves as the implicit audit trail—they observe the agent’s reasoning, validate outputs, and can reconstruct decisions from memory. In the autonomous model, agents are triggered by events, execute investigation plans in seconds without oversight, and produce out-puts that feed downstream systems or other agents. The only record of the agent’s reasoning is what the infras-tructure captures. 

Running example. Throughout this paper, we use a concrete incident to illustrate AER’s design. A plat-formized root cause analysis (RCA) agent, serving mul-tiple engineering teams in a multi-cloud infrastructure organization, is triggered by Jira ticket DBINFRA-1458: “DB connectivity failures on SCAN IP.” The agent operates fully autonomously—it reads the ticket, retrieves relevant runbook context, formulates an inves- 

> arXiv:2603.21692v1 [cs.AI] 23 Mar 2026 Preprint 2

tigation plan, executes it by querying monitoring sys-tems and database tools, encounters unexpected evi-dence that causes it to revise its plan, and ultimately diagnoses the root cause as an out-of-memory (OOM) condition on a RAC cluster node. This single investiga-tion illustrates every component of the AER model. Current systems offer two well-developed answers to the question of what to capture. State checkpoint sys-tems (exemplified by LangGraph’s checkpointer) save serialized snapshots of the agent’s computational state at every execution step, enabling fault tolerance, time-travel debugging, and human-in-the-loop workflows. 

Observability platforms (LangSmith, Langfuse, Data-dog) capture execution traces showing every tool call, LLM interaction, token usage, and latency. Together— and they are often used together—these provide com-prehensive operational tooling for individual agent exe-cutions. But as organizations scale to platformized agents handling hundreds of investigations daily, a different class of question emerges: • “In what percentage of database incidents does the agent re-plan after the first step?” 

• “When our agent reports confidence below 0.7, how often does a human expert disagree with the ver-dict?” 

• “Would the new prompt version produce systemati-cally different reasoning across 200 historical inci-dents?” 

• “What evidence pattern most commonly precedes a wrong diagnosis?” 

These are population-level behavioral analytics questions . They require structured, queryable reason-ing data across thousands of investigations. Answering them from individual traces or serialized state snapshots is not impossible in principle—one could build custom extraction pipelines, attach metadata to traces, or run NLP over model responses. But these are post-hoc re-construction approaches operating on data not designed for this purpose. The resulting representations are frag-ile, unstandardized across runs, and lack the schema guarantees that enable reliable cross-run comparison. This paper introduces the Agent Execution Record (AER) , an infrastructure primitive that captures rea-soning provenance —structured annotations of agent in-tent, observation, and inference—at execution time, as a first-class schema-level construct. AER operates at a different analytical level from state checkpoints and execution traces. The relationship is analogous to the distinction between Application Performance Monitor-ing (APM) and Business Intelligence (BI): APM tells you a request took 340ms and called three services; BI tells you conversion dropped 12% in the southeast after a pricing change. Both valuable, both necessary, oper-ating at different analytical levels. AERs provide the BI layer for autonomous agent reasoning. The contributions of this paper are: • A formalized distinction between computational state persistence and reasoning provenance (Sec-tion 3), with a non-identifiability argument show-ing that reasoning provenance cannot in general be faithfully reconstructed as a stable, queryable repre-sentation from state checkpoints alone. • The AER model (Section 4), capturing intent, observation, and inference as first-class queryable fields, alongside versioned plans, evidence chains, structured verdicts, delegation authority chains, and retrieval provenance—with extensible domain pro-files. Illustrated throughout with the DBINFRA-1458 running example. • Three replay modes (Section 5), with mock re-play enabling counterfactual model/prompt com-parison on real production data without live system access—a capability not natively provided by exist-ing systems. • A reference implementation and preliminary analysis (Sections 6–7), including a file-based SDK, a streaming scale-out architecture, prelim-inary storage comparison with cumulative check-points, and an evaluation methodology for the be-havioral analytics claims. 

2 Related Work 

We survey existing approaches not to argue they are inadequate—they are excellent at their intended purposes—but to precisely locate the analytical level at which AER operates. Our claim is not that existing systems cannot capture reasoning information; it is that they do not natively represent it as a canonical, compa-rable, schema-constrained semantic object designed for cross-run behavioral analytics. 

2.1 State Checkpoint Systems (LangGraph) 

LangGraph’s checkpointer saves serialized Mes-sagesState snapshots (message history, channel values, tool call results) at every super-step, persisted to PostgreSQL, DynamoDB, or SQLite. It enables time-travel debugging, human-in-the-loop workflows, conversational memory, and fault tolerance. This is mature, production-grade infrastructure that AER does Preprint 3

not aim to replace. A checkpoint for step 2 of the DBINFRA-1458 inves-tigation would contain the accumulated message history including the user’s initial request, the agent’s prior re-sponses, and the tool call result “Node3: TNS-12541 no listener.” A human reading this checkpoint can infer what the agent was doing. What the checkpoint does not contain as a structured field is why the agent chose to check the listener at this point (intent), that the agent 

concluded this directly explains the reported connectiv-ity failures (observation), or that this conclusion caused the agent to abandon its original plan and formulate a new one (inference + plan revision). This informa-tion may exist as unstructured text within the model’s response, but it is not a normalized, queryable field. Checkpoints are also cumulative —each contains all prior state. Preliminary analysis (Section 7) suggests this results in substantially higher per-investigation stor-age than AER, with value that decays rapidly after ex-ecution completes, whereas AER value appreciates as investigations become regression test cases and pattern references. 

2.2 Observability Platforms (LangSmith, Lang-fuse, Datadog) 

Observability platforms capture execution trees with tool calls, LLM inputs/outputs, tokens, and latency. LangSmith supports Annotation Queues for expert re-view, dataset-based evaluation for regression testing, and monitoring dashboards. These capabilities are sig-nificant: combined with a checkpointer, an observabil-ity platform provides comprehensive operational visi-bility into individual agent runs. We acknowledge that observability platforms are more extensible than early versions of this work sug-gested. Custom spans, metadata tags, evaluation scores, and downstream analytics pipelines can be built on top of traces. However, the resulting reasoning represen-tations are ad-hoc : they depend on implementation-specific conventions, lack cross-run schema guarantees, and do not form a canonical data model designed for population-level behavioral comparison. The difference is analogous to storing customer addresses in free-text notes versus structured city/state/zip columns. 

2.3 OTel GenAI, Provenance Models, and Audit Trails 

OpenTelemetry GenAI semantic conventions standard-ize telemetry transport (model spans, agent spans, tool execution)—an important interoperability layer that AER can emit as a side effect. PROV-AGENT [3] ex-tends W3C PROV with agent-centric entities for scien-tific workflow provenance, providing formal causal lin-eage. Agent audit trail systems capture identity, autho-rization, and delegation chains for compliance. Each addresses a real need; AER subsumes audit trail capa-bilities via its delegation chain while adding the reason-ing layer these systems were not designed to capture. 

2.4 Positioning 

Table 1 summarizes how each approach addresses dif-ferent analytical levels. The symbols indicate: ⋆ = na-tive, first-class support; G# = achievable through exten-sion or custom work; ◦ = not a design target. 

3 Computational State vs. Reasoning Prove-nance 

This section formalizes the distinction motivating AER. We define both constructs, state the observability boundary, and argue that reasoning provenance cannot in general be faithfully reconstructed from computa-tional state as a stable, queryable representation. 

3.1 Definitions Definition 1 (Computational State). The computa-tional state at step k of an agent execution is the per-sisted snapshot Sk = ( Mk, C k, T k) where Mk is the ac-cumulated message history, Ck is the set of framework-specific channel values, and Tk is the set of tool call records (function name, arguments, return value). This corresponds to what LangGraph’s checkpointer persists at each super-step boundary. 

Definition 2 (Reasoning Provenance). The reasoning provenance at step k is the tuple Rk = ( Ik, O k, N k, P k)

where Ik is a structured intent statement (why the agent chose this action), Ok is a structured observation (what the agent concluded from the tool result in context), Nk

is a structured inference (how this conclusion updates the agent’s strategy), and Pk is the plan version that mo-tivated the step. Each component is a normalized, typed field with a stable schema across runs. 

Definition 3 (Observability Boundary). The observ-ability boundary is the set of information available for post-hoc analysis after execution completes. Un-der state checkpointing, this includes S1..K (all check-points). Under combined checkpointing and tracing, it additionally includes the execution tree of spans. Cru-cially, intermediate model generations —the full text of every LLM response—are included within the observ-ability boundary. We do not assume any information is Preprint 4                                             

> Table 1: Analytical levels and support across existing approaches.
> Analytical Level LG Chkpt Obs. Plat. OTel Prov. Audit AER
> Fault tolerance / resumption ⋆◦◦◦◦◦
> Per-run debugging / tracing G#⋆⋆G#◦G#
> Identity / authority provenance ◦◦◦G#⋆⋆
> Structured reasoning provenance ◦G#◦G#◦⋆
> Population-level behavioral analytics ◦G#◦◦◦⋆
> Mock replay / counterfactual testing ◦◦◦◦◦⋆
> Note: G#for observability platforms acknowledges that custom pipelines can approximate these capabilities. AER’s claim is native, schema-level support—not exclusive capability.

hidden. 

3.2 Non-Identifiability Argument 

We do not claim that reasoning provenance is logically impossible to extract from computational state. Our argument concerns faithful reconstruction as a stable, queryable representation .

Proposition. Given only the persisted computa-tional state S1..K , reasoning provenance R1..K can-not in general be faithfully reconstructed as a normal-ized, schema-conforming, cross-run-comparable repre-sentation without contemporaneous capture at execu-tion time. 

Argument. We identify three sources of non-identifiability: 

(1) Intent multiplicity. Consider two independent runs of the DBINFRA-1458 investigation. In run A, the agent checks the listener because its plan is to system-atically check each infrastructure layer top-down. In run B, the agent checks the listener because it detected “TNS” in the error message. Both produce identical 

tool calls and state at step 2. The intent differs. Apost-hoc extractor may find a rationale in the model’s response, but (a) the model may not state its intent, (b) the stated intent may be post-hoc rationalization, and (c) across runs, extracted text will have different surface forms, preventing schema-normalized comparison. 

(2) Observation ambiguity. The tool returns “Node1: OK, Node2: OK, Node3: TNS-12541 no lis-tener.” The state records this string. The observation —“Node 3 listener is down, which directly explains the client connectivity failures reported in the ticket”—is the agent’s contextual interpretation. Extracting this from surrounding text (planning, hedging, formatting) is an NLP extraction problem with inherent error. 

(3) Inference volatility. After observing the lis-tener failure, the agent’s inference is: “Proximate cause found. Revising plan to investigate Node 3.” This forward-looking strategic reasoning may or may not ap-pear in the response, and its form varies with model family, temperature, and prompt style. Across 1,000 investigations, post-hoc-extracted inferences will have high variance in form and completeness. We therefore distinguish three approaches: • Post-hoc extraction : NLP on model responses. Possible but fragile and non-standardized. • Extensible annotation : custom metadata on trace spans. Possible if implemented, but ad-hoc. • Contemporaneous structured capture (AER) :explicit, schema-constrained fields at execution time. Stable, normalized, cross-run comparable by design. 

3.3 Limitation: Self-Reported Reasoning 

A necessary acknowledgment: AER’s reasoning fields are populated by the agent itself. They record what the agent reports about its reasoning, not a ground-truth ac-count of its internal computation. This creates several known risks: • Post-hoc rationalization : the agent may construct a coherent narrative that does not reflect its actual decision process. • Format gaming : the agent may produce plausible-sounding but vacuous reasoning annotations. • Model-family style differences : different LLM families produce systematically different self-explanation styles. • Prompt-induced verbosity : prompts requesting structured reasoning may elicit more words without more insight. We argue that self-reported reasoning, despite these limitations, is (a) substantially more useful for behav-ioral analytics than no structured reasoning at all; (b) analogous to established practices in medicine and law, where case notes and legal reasoning opinions are self-reported and still foundational for audit and quality im-Preprint 5

provement; and (c) empirically validatable through the very infrastructure AER provides. Specifically, AER’s structured verdict with confidence scores enables cal-ibration against ground truth (human expert assess-ments), and action/intent consistency can be measured across the AER corpus (do agents that report “rule out DNS” actually perform DNS-related checks?). The in-frastructure for capturing structured reasoning must ex-ist before the faithfulness of that reasoning can be stud-ied systematically. We consider faithfulness validation a critical direction for future work. 

4 The Agent Execution Record Model 

We present the AER model using the DBINFRA-1458 running example to illustrate each component. 

4.1 File Structure 

agent-executions/incidents/DBINFRA-1458/ envelope.json # Identity, trigger, delegation plans.jsonl # Plan v1, Plan v2 (revised) steps.jsonl # Steps 1-4 with reasoning verdict.json # OOM Kill + evidence chain metadata.json # Duration, cost, pin status 

4.2 Envelope: Identity, Authority, and Retrieved Context 

The envelope is written once at investigation start. For DBINFRA-1458: 

{"investigation_id": "DBINFRA-1458", "trigger": {"source":"jira-sd", "reference":"DBINFRA-1458", "summary":"DB connectivity failures on SCAN IP", "severity":"P2"}, "agent": {"agent_version":"rca-v2.4.1", "model":"codex-5.3", "prompt_version":"rca-prompt-v7.2"}, "authority": {"delegated_by":"oncall:sre-payments", "delegation_mechanism": "iam-policy:rca-agent-role-v3", "permissions_scope": ["monitoring:read:payments"], "authority_chain": [{"principal":"incident-auto-trigger", "type":"system"}, {"principal":"sre-payments-team", "type":"team"}, {"principal":"rca-agent-v2.4.1", "type":"agent"}]}, "context_snapshot": {"retrieval_context": {"sources": [{"type":"rag", "query":"SCAN IP failure RAC", "chunks_retrieved":3, "chunk_ids":["rb-0042","rb-0108", "inc-2891"], "total_tokens":2840}]}, "system_context": {"service":"payments-db", "region":"us-ashburn-1"}}} 

The delegation chain records under whose author-ity the agent acts. The retrieval context captures what actually entered the agent’s context window (specific RAG chunk IDs, token counts) rather than what the agent could have queried—following a principle of re-trieval provenance over availability provenance .

4.3 Versioned Plans 

For DBINFRA-1458, the agent formulates an initial plan and later revises it: 

{"plan_version":1, "rationale":"DB connectivity issue. Check: 1) SCAN DNS, 2) listeners, 3) network, 4) recent changes.", "steps_intended":["check_dns", "check_listeners","check_net", "review_changes"]} {"plan_version":2, "supersedes":1, "revision_trigger":"step_002", "rationale":"Listener down on node 3. Deep-dive: instance status, logs, memory/reboot events.", "steps_intended":["check_node3_crs", "check_node3_syslogs"]} 

The plan version chain captures adaptive reason-ing —the agent’s strategic response to unexpected evi-dence. The revision_trigger pointer ( step_002 ) ex-plicitly links the re-plan to the observation that caused it. 

4.4 Steps with Reasoning Provenance 

Each step captures the intent/observation/inference triple alongside mechanical tool calls. Steps 1 and 2 of DBINFRA-1458: 

{"step_id":"step_001","plan_version":1, "sequence":1, "intent":"Verify SCAN DNS resolution to rule out network-layer cause", "tool_calls":[{"tool":"nslookup", "input":"payments-scan.internal", "output":"Resolves to 10.0.1.50,.51,.52 - all 3 VIPs", "duration_ms":120}], "observation":"SCAN DNS is healthy. All 3 VIPs responding.", "inference":"DNS ruled out. Move to listener verification.", "tokens":{"input":847,"output":213}} {"step_id":"step_002","plan_version":1, "sequence":2, "intent":"Check RAC listener status on all nodes to identify failing node", "tool_calls":[{"tool":"lsnrctl_status", "input":"all_nodes", "output":"Node1:OK, Node2:OK, Node3:TNS-12541 no listener", "duration_ms":340}], "observation":"Node 3 listener is down. Directly explains connectivity failures.", Preprint 6         

> "inference":"Proximate cause identified. Does not explain root cause. Re-planning to investigate Node 3.", "tokens":{"input":890,"output":313}}

Note the progression: step 1’s inference (“rule out DNS, move to listeners”) leads to step 2’s intent (“check listeners to identify failing node”). Step 2’s inference triggers plan revision. This causal chain is captured as structured data, not as text buried in a model response. 

4.5 Evidence Chain and Structured Verdict 

After investigating Node 3’s CRS status and system logs (steps 3–4), the agent produces:                                       

> {"root_cause_category": "Infrastructure >Memory >OOM Kill", "root_cause_summary":"OOM on Node 3killed PMON, triggering watchdog reboot. CRS failed auto-restart, leaving listener and instance offline, causing SCAN connectivity failures.", "confidence":0.95, "affected_components":["node3", "payments-db-cluster","payments-service"], "evidence_chain": ["step_002","step_003","step_004"], "alternatives_rejected":[ {"hypothesis":"SCAN DNS misconfiguration", "rejected_by":"step_001", "reason":"All 3VIPs resolving"}, {"hypothesis":"Network partition", "rejected_by":"step_001", "reason":"All nodes reachable"}], "remediation":["Start CRS on Node 3", "Investigate memory consumer", "Add OOM monitoring alert"]}

The evidence chain (steps 2 →3→4) is distinct from the full execution tree (steps 1 →2→3→4). Step 1 was exploratory and did not contribute to the verdict. The 

alternatives rejected with disconfirming step pointers capture the agent’s hypothesis elimination process. 

4.6 Domain Profiles 

The AER core is domain-agnostic. Domain profiles extend steps and verdicts with domain-specific vo-cabulary: RCA (root cause taxonomy, blast radius), Coding (files modified, test results), Security (MITRE ATT&CK mapping), Deployment (canary metrics, roll-back decisions). Profiles are versioned independently of the core. 

5 Replay: From Records to Regression Suites 

5.1 Three Modes Narrate: Read-only step-by-step walkthrough. Zero cost, zero execution. For debugging, incident reviews, onboarding. 

Mock: Re-runs reasoning with recorded tool outputs under a different model or prompt version. The agent receives exact same tool results but reasons with a new model. For each step, the report compares: did the new model reach the same observation? The same infer-ence? At the end: did it reach the same verdict? This is, to our knowledge, not natively provided by any existing system. LangGraph’s time-travel resumes against live systems. LangSmith’s evaluation uses synthetic inputs. Mock replay uses real production investigations as test cases, automatically, with zero live API calls .

Live: Re-executes the original plan against live sys-tems. Different results (world has changed). Useful for verifying resolution. 

5.2 Mock Replay: Running Example 

Suppose we upgrade from codex-5.3 to codex-6.0 and mock-replay DBINFRA-1458:                                                         

> $aer replay DBINFRA-1458 \--mode mock --model codex-6.0 Mock replay: DBINFRA-1458 original: codex-5.3, new: codex-6.0 step_001: "DNS ruled out. Check listeners." new: "DNS healthy. Listeners next." >> Functionally equivalent step_002: "Proximate cause. Re-planning." new: "Listener down. Check CRS." >> Divergence: new model skips re-plan step_004: Verdict: OOM Kill (0.95) new: Verdict: OOM Kill (0.91) >> Verdict converged Summary: 3/4 matched. Verdict converged. Note: codex-6.0 is more direct (skips explicit re-plan step)

Batch mock-replay across 50 pinned investigations produces a population-level behavioral comparison: verdict convergence rate, re-plan frequency shift, hy-pothesis breadth change. 

6 Architecture and Preliminary Storage Anal-ysis 

6.1 Local-First File-Based Capture 

The reference implementation writes JSONL files to a configurable directory. Zero infras-tructure required. A Python SDK exposes: 

start_investigation() , log_plan() ,

log_step() , record_verdict() . Automatic lifecycle management: count-based eviction (default 50), time-based eviction (default 14 days), pin/promote workflow. Preprint 7

6.2 Scale-Out Streaming Architecture 

For enterprise deployment: async emission to a Kafka-compatible streaming platform partitioned by investi-gation ID; materializer assembles complete AER doc-uments; wire format transitions from JSONL to Avro for compactness and schema enforcement; hot storage in a JSON-native document database; search index for full-text exploration. 

6.3 Preliminary Storage Comparison 

The following analysis is based on a stylized 10-step investigation and should be treated as preliminary mo-tivation, not a validated empirical result. Actual com-pression ratios will vary with workload characteristics.             

> Table 2: Preliminary storage comparison for a 10-step inves-tigation.
> Metric Cum. Chkpt AER
> Per investigation ∼560 KB ∼25–130 KB Estimated ratio 1×4–22 ×com-pact Value trajectory Decays Appreciates Retention model Binary Graduated

7 Evaluation Methodology 

This section describes our planned evaluation method-ology. Preliminary deployment informs the design; full empirical results are ongoing work. 

7.1 Behavioral Analytics Enablement 

We define 10 population-level behavioral analytics questions that a platform team operating autonomous agents needs to answer. For each, we assess whether it is answerable from (a) AER metadata in seconds, (b) checkpoint data with custom extraction, (c) observabil-ity trace data with custom pipelines. We hypothesize that AER provides immediate answers for all 10; check-points and traces require significant custom work for 2– 4 and cannot practically address the remaining 6–8. 

7.2 Mock Replay Regression Testing 

Record AERs for 50 incidents with raw capture. Batch mock-replay substituting a different prompt version. Measure: verdict convergence rate, evidence chain overlap, reasoning pattern divergence. 

7.3 Storage Economics (Empirical) 

Measure actual storage for 100 real investigations rep-resented as (a) LangGraph checkpoints, (b) AER with-out raw, (c) AER with raw, (d) AER with value-based compaction. 

7.4 Expressiveness Comparison 

For 20 sampled incidents: can the representation an-swer (a) “why step 3?” (intent), (b) “why plan changed?” (plan versioning), (c) “which evidence?” (evidence chain), (d) “under whose authority?” (delega-tion), (e) “what context seen?” (retrieval provenance). Score each representation. 

7.5 Faithfulness Validation (Preliminary) 

As an initial check on self-reported reasoning fidelity: (a) expert rating of intent correctness on 50 randomly sampled steps, (b) action/intent consistency score (do agents that report “rule out DNS” actually perform DNS checks?), (c) predictive validity of confidence (does higher AER confidence predict higher expert agree-ment?). These are preliminary indicators; comprehen-sive faithfulness validation is future work. 

8 Discussion 

8.1 Complementarity 

AER occupies a different analytical level from state checkpoints and observability platforms. The rela-tionship is layered: checkpointers handle operational resilience; observability platforms handle per-run de-bugging; audit trails handle compliance; AER handles population-level behavioral analytics. A production de-ployment benefits from all four. AER does not replace existing systems; it fills an analytical gap that emerges at scale and autonomy. 

8.2 Adoption Cost and Agent Cooperation 

Unlike passive checkpoints and traces, AER requires the agent to produce structured reasoning annotations. This means prompts must elicit intent/observation/in-ference as structured output, and the SDK must be in-tegrated into the execution loop. We consider this a lightweight adoption cost and note that requesting struc-tured reasoning annotations often improves response quality by imposing organizational discipline on the model’s output. However, the quality of AER data de-pends on prompt engineering quality. 

8.3 Schema Evolution and Privacy 

Core schema uses additive-only evolution (new fields, never removing old ones). Domain profiles ver-sioned independently. Raw capture is configurable per-deployment with field-level redaction for promoted Preprint 8

AERs. The delegation chain is subject to IAM policy visibility constraints. 

8.4 Beyond Single-Agent Records 

Multi-agent investigations require a higher-order Inves-tigation Record composing multiple AERs from collab-orating agents. The deterministic investigation ID pro-vides the join key. Cross-agent evidence chain compari-son is a natural application of AER’s structured verdict. We consider this important future work. 

9 Conclusion 

Existing systems provide strong operational tooling for individual agent executions: state checkpoints for fault tolerance, execution traces for debugging, telemetry for performance monitoring, audit trails for compli-ance. What they do not natively provide as a first-class, schema-level construct is structured reasoning prove-nance: normalized, queryable records of why the agent made each decision, how observations shaped its strat-egy, which evidence supports its conclusions, and how its reasoning patterns behave across populations. Agent Execution Records address this gap by cap-turing the reasoning layer as first-class structured data at execution time, enabling population-level behavioral analytics—reasoning pattern mining, confidence cali-bration, cross-agent comparison, and counterfactual re-gression testing via mock replay—that is difficult or im-practical to achieve through post-hoc extraction from existing artifacts. AER complements existing infrastructure rather than competing with it, occupying a different analytical layer in the agent stack. As organizations transi-tion from agent experimentation to platformized au-tonomous agents at enterprise scale, the ability to sys-tematically understand, test, and improve agent reason-ing becomes essential infrastructure. Agent Execution Records provide a foundation for that capability. 

References