Title: MemCollab: Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23234v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 01:35:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Yurui Chang 1 Yiran Wu 1 Qingyun Wu 2 Lu Lin 1

Abstract 

Large language model (LLM)–based agents rely on memory mechanisms to reuse knowledge from past problem-solving experiences. Existing ap-proaches typically construct memory in a per-agent manner, tightly coupling stored knowledge to a single model’s reasoning style. In modern deployments with heterogeneous agents, a natural question arises: can a single memory system be shared across different models? We found that naively transferring memory between agents of-ten degrades performance, as such memory entan-gles task-relevant knowledge with agent-specific biases. To address this challenge, we propose MEM COLLAB , a collaborative memory frame-work that constructs agent-agnostic memory by contrasting reasoning trajectories generated by different agents on the same task. This contrastive process distills abstract reasoning constraints that capture shared task-level invariants while sup-pressing agent-specific artifacts. We further intro-duce a task-aware retrieval mechanism that condi-tions memory access on task category, ensuring that only relevant constraints are used at infer-ence time. Experiments on mathematical reason-ing and code generation benchmarks demonstrate that M EM COLLAB consistently improves both accuracy and inference-time efficiency across di-verse agents, including cross-modal-family set-tings. Our results show that the collaboratively constructed memory can function as a shared rea-soning resource for diverse LLM-based agents. 

1. Introduction 

Large Language Model-based agents are increasingly ap-plied to solve complex tasks that require multi-step reason-ing and tool use. Despite their strong capabilities, they still face the limitations of episodic information: knowledge acquired from previous problem-solving trajectories is not 

> 1

Pennsylvania State University, USA 2AG2AI. Correspondence to: Yurui Chang <yuruic@psu.edu >, Lu Lin <lulin@psu.edu >.

Preprint. March 25, 2026. 

persistently retained, and inference is constrained to a fixed context window (Laban et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2025a). As a results, agent may repeatedly explore the similar rea-soning strategies, encounter the same error patterns, and fail to utilize the tool feedback from prior executions (Pink et al., 2025; Anthropic, 2025). To address these challenges, memory mechanism is leveraged to enable agents to store and retrieve reusable information when solving related tasks in the future inference (Zhong et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025). Recent work has shown that augmenting LLMs with mem-ory can improve reasoning ability. For example BoT (Yang et al., 2024) distills reasoning template from past experi-ences and retrieves them at the inference time. Most prior ap-proaches couple memory tightly with the underlying model or agent: the memory is constructed from that model’s own reasoning traces and the agent’s own interaction trajectories, and is then reused by the same model or agent. In contrast, modern deployments increasingly involve heterogeneous model ecosystems: multiple agents with different model sizes or architectures operating within the same application (e.g., via specialization, orchestration, or routing among models). This motivates a natural question: can a single memory system be shared across different models? 7B Baseline 7B + Memory (7B) 7B + Memory (32B) 7B + MemCollab      

> 32B Baseline 32B + Memory (32B) 32B + Memory (7B) 32B +MemCollab
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80 Accuracy (%)
> Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct
> 7B baseline 32B baseline Gain over baseline (7B) Gain over baseline (32B)

Figure 1. Accuracy on MATH500 dataset with memory from different resources. 

A naive approach is to directly transfer the memory built from one agent to another. In Figure 1, we study how ex-ternal memory affects agent performance. We compare the no-memory baseline to variants that use memory built from the same model and memory built from another model. The 1

> arXiv:2603.23234v1 [cs.AI] 24 Mar 2026 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation

results indicate that directly utilizing memory across models would lead to worse performance than using memory dis-tilled from own trajectories. This indicates that the memory tends to reflect the originating model’s preferences and rea-soning style such as preferred solving strategies and habitual heuristics, rather than objective and transferrable knowl-edge. This motivates studying whether we can construct more transferable memory by leveraging and contrasting tra-jectories from different models, extracting shared, reusable guidance while reducing agent-specific bias. In this paper, we propose M EM COLLAB , a memory frame-work designed to produce agent-agnostic memory. Such memory can be reused across heterogeneous models while 

outperforming memory distilled from a model’s own trajectories (Figure 1). M EM COLLAB extracts reusable reasoning guidance and tool-usage instructions by identify-ing universal invariances and discrepancies across agents instead of encoding model-specific preferences. This con-trastive approach filters out agent-specific biases while preserving transferrable reasoning constraints and error-forbidden patterns. To ensure that memory entries capturing task-relevant reasoning procedures and error patterns are retrieved for a specific task, we design our task-aware re-trieval mechanism that retrieving memories conditioned on the task’s category. We summarize our contributions below: • We identify and systematically study the problem of using a single memory to support multiple LLM-based agents, a setting that is increasingly relevant as modern deploy-ments involve collections of agents with different model sizes, architectures, and roles, but remains unexplored in existing agent-memory works. • We introduce a new memory collaboration paradigm that derives memory through contrastive analysis of reasoning traces generated for the same task. Instead of accumu-lating raw experiences, the memory distills transferrable reasoning strategies and cross-model failure modes. By decoupling the underlying logical structure from individ-ual architectural biases, we produce a refined memory that captures the essence of the problem-solving process. • Through rigorous evaluation on complex mathematical reasoning and code generation benchmarks, we show that MEM COLLAB consistently enhances the performance of both weaker and stronger models. Beyond accuracy gains, our approach improves inference-time efficiency by pro-viding highly distilled, low-noise reasoning prompts. 

2. Related Works 

2.1. Memory for LLM Agents 

Memory has become a core module for LLM-based agents, enabling them to address limited context windows and reuse information across episodes (Zhang et al., 2025; Nuxoll & Laird, 2012). Memory content can take the form of free-form text or structured artifacts, and can be retrieved to guide subsequent reasoning and tool use by agents (Ouyang et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2024; Packer et al., 2023).Existing memory mechanisms include episodic memory that records interactions and manage multi-tier context (Packer et al., 2023), long-term interaction memory that supports contin-ual recall and update (Zhong et al., 2024), and reasoning oriented memory that distills reusable guidance to support problem solving (Yang et al., 2024; Suzgun et al., 2025; Ouyang et al., 2025). Beyond the types of content stored in memory, many studies investigate memory organization and operations, including agentic linking and evolution of memory graphs (Xu et al., 2025), as well as training-based memory management that learns what to store, update, and retrieve through reinforcement learning (Zhou et al., 2025; Yan et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025). While these approaches demonstrate strong performance, they typically focus on improving a single agent. Memory is synthesized from an agent’s own trajectories and subsequently consumed by the same agent, thereby limiting the scope of the guidance to cross-agent reuse. In contrast to prior approaches, our work investigates how a single memory system can be constructed to benefit multiple agents with different model sizes and architectures. Rather than storing episodic traces or learn-ing agent-specific memory policies, we construct memory by contrasting agent trajectories generated for the same task, distilling normative reasoning constraints and error-forbidden patterns that are invariant to different agents. This design targets transferable reasoning guidance that can be reused across agents, a setting which has received limited attention in existing work. 

2.2. Retrieval-Augmented Model Generation 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) extends LLMs with access to external corpora and has been widely adopted to improve factuality and coverage by conditioning model out-puts on passages retrieved by an auxiliary retriever (Lewis et al., 2020). Subsequent work has shown that both the type of retrieval source and the granularity of retrieval units substantially influence generation quality (Gao et al., 2023). Beyond unstructured text corpora (Li et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2024), retrieval sources have been extended to semi-structured (Zha et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023) and structured data (Gaur et al., 2022; He et al., 2024; Edge et al., 2024), as well as content generated or distilled by LLMs themselves (Yu et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2023). In parallel, prior studies explore retrieval at different granular-ities, ranging from coarse-grained units such as full docu-ments or long passages (Yu et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2023) to fine-grained units such as sentences, entities, or code snippets (Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). In contrast to document-centric RAG, our method retrieves reasoning-oriented memory rather than external knowledge. We adopt 2MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation Trajectory Generation   

> Agent A
> (Small Model)
> Training
> Tasks
> Agent B
> (Large Model)
> Collaborative Memory
> Construction
> Contrastive
> Analysis
> Cross -model
> Comparision
> Bias
> Filtering
> Collaborative
> Memory
> •Reasoning
> Strategies
> •Error Patterns
> Trajectory
> B
> Raw Data
> Trajectory
> A
> Raw Data
> Agent B
> (Large Model)
> Retrieve
> Inference with
> Memory Augmentation
> New Task
> Task
> Classifer
> Inferenc e
> Model A or B
> Final Answer

Figure 2. Framework of M EM COLLAB . Left : Using different agents to generate trajectory pairs for the same task. Middle : Contrasting the trajectory pairs to construct the memory. Right : Augmenting inference-time generation with retrieved memory. 

a coarse-grained memory representation but perform task-level classification prior to retrieval, allowing the system to restrict the search space and reduce irrelevant or incom-patible memory. This design enables precise retrieval of task-relevant reasoning guidance while avoiding the over-head and noise associated with fine-grained retrieval. 

3. Methodology 

We propose M EM COLLAB , a memory collaboration frame-work that improves the agent’s reasoning by inducing contrast-derived problem-solving strategies from heteroge-neous agent trajectories. The core idea is to distill reusable high-level reasoning strategies and error-forbidden con-straints that distinguish successful reasoning from failures, while filtering out agent-specific biases. MEMCOLLAB consists of two stages: (1) contrast-derived memory construction , which extracts abstract reasoning constraints from paired agent trajectories; and (2) task-aware memory retrieval and inference , which conditions agent reasoning on relevant memory entries at test time. An overview of the framework is shown in Fig-ure 2. 

3.1. Problem Setup and Notation 

Let A = {Aw, A s} denote the pair of agents with hetero-geneous reasoning capacities (e.g., different model sizes or architectures). Each agent Ai is instantiated with a base backbone LLM fi and produces a multi-step reasoning tra-jectory when solving a task. Given a task instance x, each agent independently generates a reasoning trajectory 

τ (x) 

> i

= ( r1, r 2, . . . , r Ti ), (1) where each element rt represents an intermediate reasoning step, which may incorporate natural language reasoning, code, and code execution feedback. We assume access to a training set of tasks D, each with a ground-truth solution or executable verifier. Our goal is to construct a shared memory bank M that can be retrieved and reused by multiple agents at inference time. 

3.2. Contrast-Derived Memory Construction 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the detailed procedure for memory bank construction, with major steps explained as below. 

Trajectory Pairing and Preference Selection. For each task x ∈ D , we collect a pair of trajectories (τw, τ s) by executing both agents on the same input. To determine which trajectory reflects correct reasoning, we employ an indicator model I(·), which evaluates a trajectory against the task’s ground truth (e.g., by checking the final answer or code execution result). The preferred and unpreferred trajectories are defined as: 

(τ +, τ −) = 

(

(τw, τ s) if I(τw) = 1 ,

(τs, τ w) otherwise. (2) This formulation allows the preferred trajectory to origi-nate from either agent, ensuring robustness to failures of incorrect trajectories from the weaker agent Aw.

Contrastive Trajectory Analysis. Rather than perform-ing step-by-step comparison, M EM COLLAB summarizes the trajectory comparison by contrasting trajectories at the structural reasoning level, including the high-level solution algorithms, planning steps, and the interpretation of the tool feedback. Specifically, given a preferred trajectory τ + and an unpreferred trajectory τ −, we summarize their differ-ences into structured guidance, using the backbone model 

fs of agent As (see Appendix G for detailed prompt). By contrasting these trajectories, we distill (1) violation pat-terns that characterize systematic reasoning failures in τ −

(e.g., premature computation and incorrect symbolic map-ping), and (2) reasoning invariants preserved in τ + but absent or violated in τ − (e.g., structural principles required to avoid failures). These invariants and discrepancies in the 3MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Algorithm 1 Contrast-Derived Memory Construction 

Require: Agent pairs A = {Aw, A s} with heterogeneous capacities; training tasks D; corresponding base LLM pairs F = {fw, f s}; maximal number of summarized memory K

Ensure: Memory bank M 

> 1:

Initialize memory bank M ← ∅  

> 2:

for each task instance x ∈ D do  

> 3:

Generate traces τw ← Aw(x) and τs ← As(x) 

> 4:

Determine correctness indicators I(·) 

> 5:

if I(τw) = 1 then  

> 6:

τ + ← τw; τ − ← τs 

> 7:

else  

> 8:

τ + ← τs; τ − ← τw 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

{mk}(x) 

> k≤K

← fs(τ +, τ −) 

> 11:

Add {mk}(x) 

> k≤K

to M 

> 12:

end for 

reasoning procedure reflect transferrable guidance that maps correct outcomes to incorrect ones while abstracting away model- or instance-specific content. Formally, summarization over contrastive pairs could be defined as a discrepancy operator: 

∆( τ −, τ +) = {(vk, i k)}Kk=1 , (3) where vk denotes a violated reasoning pattern observed in 

τ −, and ik denotes the corresponding reasoning invariant preserved in τ +. Example pairs are provided in Appendix F. The parameter K controls the maximum number of extracted entries per task. This abstraction focuses on guidance of on how the task is solved rather than what specific solu-tion is produced, enabling generalization beyond individual problem instances. 

Memory Bank Construction. Each contrastive pair is distilled into a normative reasoning constraint of the form: 

mk = ( enforce ik; avoid vk), (4) which jointly specifies a required reasoning invariant and an explicitly forbidden pattern. These constraints are expressed using abstract reasoning concepts (e.g., accumulation, con-ditioning, proportionality, case enumeration, variable isola-tion) rather than task-specific details. All extracted constraints are aggregated into a memory bank: 

M = [

> x∈D

{m(x) 

> k

}Kk=1 , (5) where each task instance x contributes up to K extracted memory entries. Note that this memory bank stores only 

normative, abstract reasoning constraints , not raw trajec-tories, demonstrations, or solutions. 

Algorithm 2 Task-Aware Memory Retrieval and Inference 

Require: Query q; memory bank M; retrieval count p;Agent A ∈ A ; base LLM f ;

Ensure: Solution y 

> 1:

procedure SOLVE (q, M, p ) 

> 2:

(cq , u q ) ← f (q) ▷ LLM-based task classification  

> 3:

Mq ← Top-p({m ∈ M | cm = cq , u m = uq }) 

> 4:

y ← A(q, Mq ) 

> 5:

return y 

> 6:

end procedure 3.3. Task-Aware Memory Retrieval and Inference 

Algorithm 2 summarizes agent inference procedure, aug-mented with contrastive memory. Given a new task q, the agent A now needs to first retrieve task-related memory from the bank M. Different tasks impose fundamentally different reasoning requirements, including how constraints are represented and how tools are integrated during the problem solving. Retrieving memory entries that are in-compatible with the current task can therefore introduce noise and interfere with inference. To address this chal-lenge, we organize memory bank using task-aware structure and condition retrieval on the query’s task category. 

Task Categorization. We use the agent’s base LLM f ∈ F 

as a task classifier. Given a task input x, the model classify it into a task category and subcategory: 

(cx, u x) = f (x). (6) This task categorization procedure is applied consistently in two stages: (1) Memory Organization . During memory construction, each memory entry m := m(x) inherits the task category of the task instance x from which it is derived, i.e., (cm, u m) = ( cx, u x). These labels are computed once and stored for efficient retrieval. (2) Inference-Time Routing . At inference time, the same model is used to classify the query q into categories (cq , u q ),which later determines the subset of memory bank eligible for retrieval. 

Memory Retrieval. During inference, given the predicted task category of query (cq , u q ), the agent retrieves the top-p

most relevant entries conditioned on the task classification: 

Mq = Top-p ({m ∈ M | cm = cq , u m = uq }) . (7) This two-stage process, task-based filtering followed by relevance ranking, substantially reduces the retrieval search space and mitigates interference from irrelevant reasoning constraints, compared to solely similarity based retrieval. 

Memory-Guided Inference. Finally, the agent reasons and generates the solution by conditioning on the retrieved 4MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

normative constraints: 

y = A(q, Mq ). (8) The retrieved constraints act as soft guidance that encour-ages structurally valid reasoning and discourages previously observed failure patterns, including tool-usage mistakes. 

3.4. Why Contrast Works 

Constructing transferable memory across agents is chal-lenging because raw reasoning trajectories entangle task-relevant structure with agent-specific bias , such as stylis-tic preferences and heuristic shortcuts. Memory distilled from a single agent often preserves such bias, limiting its usefulness when transferred to other agents. Suppose we can model the agent trajectory as τ = g(s, b ),where s represents the task-relevant structures required to solve this problem, and b captures agent-specific bias. While 

b varies across agents, successful trajectories for the same task share similar s. The goal of collaborative memory is thus to capture the shared invariants s while suppressing agent-specific information b. Accordingly, we interpret the distilled memory m to be an encoding of the reasoning invariant, i.e., m = ϕ(s). By contrasting a preferred trajec-tory against an unpreferred one generated for the same task, MEM COLLAB highlights the essential reasoning factors that distinguish success from failure, while suppressing varia-tions that do not affect correctness. This intuition aligns with principles from contrastive learning , where meaning-ful features emerge by contrasting positive samples from negative ones. Appendix D provides more discussions. 

4. Experiments 

This section evaluates the effectiveness of our framework, MEM COLLAB , for constructing a single collaborative mem-ory system that benefits multiple agents through contrastive memory learning. We first study the performance of the shared memory within a single model family and across different model families. We then analyze the inference-time efficiency introduced by incorporating memory during agent reasoning. Finally, we examine how the number of retrieved memory entries and different retrieval strategies affect overall performance. 

4.1. Experimental Settings Models and Datasets. We conduct experiments us-ing Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Team et al., 2024), Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct (Team et al., 2024), and LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) as backbone models. Our evaluation covers two categories of reasoning tasks: mathe-matical reasoning and code generation. For mathematical reasoning, we use the MATH500 (Lightman et al., 2023; Hendrycks et al., 2021) and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) datasets. From each dataset, we randomly sample 1000 in-stances to construct the memory system and evaluate perfor-mance on a disjoint set of 500 randomly selected instances, reporting accuracy as the metric (Kang et al., 2025b). For code generation, we evaluate on MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) and HumanEval (Chen, 2021). We provide more informa-tion about the dataset in Appendix A. Full experimental settings and implementation details are provided in the Ap-pendix C. 

Baselines. We compare M EM COLLAB against two groups of baselines. (i) Memory content baselines. Buffer of Thoughts (BoT) (Yang et al., 2024) maintains a meta-buffer of reusable, high-level thought templates distilled from prior problem-solving processes; at test time, it retrieves a rele-vant template and instantiates it to guide reasoning, with a buffer manager to support updating the buffer over time. Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC) (Suzgun et al., 2025) equips an LLM with a persistent and evolving cheatsheet at inference time, which is iteratively updated to store reusable guidance for future queries. (ii) Memory source baselines. To isolate the effect of collaborative construction versus naive transfer, we consider variants that differ only in where memory is derived: w/ Memory(7B) and w/ Memory(8B) use mem-ory summarized from 7B or 8B agent’s trajectories respec-tively; w/ Memory(32B) uses memory summarized from the 32B agent’s trajectories; and w/ Self-Contrast Memory constructs memory by contrasting multiple sampled trajec-tories generated by the same agent. The memory extraction is based on BoT (Yang et al., 2024). Detailed prompts for summarizing the memories are shown in Appendix G. 

4.2. Main Results 

4.2.1. R ESULTS WITHIN A SINGLE MODEL FAMILY 

Table 1 reports results for agents within the same model family (Qwen-2.5) on different tasks. 

Contrastive memory learning effectively transfers rea-soning capability from larger models to smaller ones. 

When equipped with M EM COLLAB , the smaller model achieves substantial gains across all benchmarks, improv-ing from 52.2% to 67.0% on MATH500 and from 47.9% to 57.6% on MBPP, approaching or even surpassing the performance of stronger baselines. These improvements indicate that contrast-derived memory across agents cap-tures transferable guidance for agent reasoning rather than model-specific behaviors. 

Contrastive memory benefits both weaker and stronger models. For the 32B model, M EM COLLAB consistently improves performance over the vanilla setting, achieving the highest accuracy on MATH500 (73.8%), GSM8K (93.6%), and MBPP (64.3%). This demonstrates that collaborative 5MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation Backbone Method Accuracy (%) ↑                                                                      

> MATH500 GSM8K MBPP HumanEval Average Qwen-2.5-7B
> Vanilla 52 .285 .447 .942 .757 .1
> Buffer of Thoughts 45 .886 .457.6 62 .263 .0
> Dynamic Cheatsheet 66 .083 .836 .740 .756 .8
> w/ Memory (Self) 60 .086 .250 .242 .759 .8
> w/ Memory (Qwen-32B) 50 .686 .648 .634 .155 .0
> w/ Self-Contrast Memory 58 .485 .652 .573 .367 .5
> MEM COLLAB 67.0 87.4 57.6 74.4 71.6 Qwen-2.5-32B
> Vanilla 63 .893 .058 .068 .370 .8
> Buffer of Thoughts 68 .293 .063 .884 .177 .3
> Dynamic Cheatsheet 73 .490 .857 .664 .671 .6
> w/ Memory (32B) 69 .693 .260 .379 .375 .6
> w/ Self-Contrast Memory 69 .693 .458 .787.8 77 .4
> MEM COLLAB 73.8 93.6 64.3 86 .679.6
> Table 1. Performance of Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct– and Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct–based agents on mathematical reasoning and code benchmarks.

memory does not merely compensate for weaker agents, but also enhances stronger agents by reducing systematic reasoning and tool-usage errors. 

Directly transferring memory from one model to an-other leads to performance degradation. Using memory distilled solely from the 32B model ( w/ Memory (32B) ) de-grades performance for the 7B agent on MATH500 (50.6% vs. 52.2%) and HumanEval (34.1% vs. 42.7%), highlighting the limitations of naive memory transfer. In contrast, self-contrast memory yields partial improvements, but remains inferior to M EM COLLAB , underscoring the importance of cross-agent contrast in filtering out agent-specific biases while preserving reusable reasoning invariants. 4.2.2. R ESULTS ACROSS MODEL FAMILIES 

Table 2 presents the results when collaborative memory is constructed from agent pairs with different model architec-tures, demonstrating the generality of M EM COLLAB beyond architectural homogeneity. 

Contrastive memory construction is not constrained by the model architectures. By using cross-family agent pairs, MEM COLLAB continues to yield consistent improvements across all benchmarks. For example, the Llama3-8B agent equipped with cross-family contrastive memory achieves 74.4% accuracy on MATH500 and 48.8% on HumanEval, substantially outperforming both the vanilla baseline and memory transferred directly from a single source model. Similarly, the 32B agent benefits from collaboratively con-structed memory despite architectural differences among contributing agents. These results indicate that contrastive memory captures reusable reasoning strategies that gen-eralizes across model architectures, rather than encoding behaviors specific to a single model family. 

In some cases, constructing memory across model ar-chitectures can outperform same-family memory con-struction. For the Qwen2.5-32B model, memory con-structed by contrasting with an architecturally different model LLaMA3-8B yields higher accuracy than memory constructed within the same model family Qwen2.5-7B, improving performance (95.2% vs. 93.6%). This observa-tion suggests that cross-architecture contrast can potentially expose complementary reasoning patterns and further sup-press model-specific biases, leading to more effective and transferable memory. 

4.3. Inference-Time Efficiency Memory improves inference-time efficiency. We evaluate inference-time efficiency by comparing the average num-ber of reasoning turns required by a vanilla agent and by MEM COLLAB . As shown in Table 3, agents equipped with collaborative memory consistently require fewer reasoning turns while achieving better overall performance. It indi-cates that contrast-derived memory provides effective guid-ance that reduces redundant exploration and unnecessary trial-and-error during inference. By discouraging previously observed failure patterns and instructing valid reasoning procedures, memory enables agents to converge to correct solutions more efficiently. 

4.4. Case Study 

In Figure 3, we present a case on how M EM COLLAB works. For the source problem, the unpreferred response mistakenly assumes independence in a setting with dependencies in a probability problem. In contrast, the preferred response 6MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation Backbone Method Accuracy (%) ↑

MATH500 GSM8K MBPP HumanEval Average Llama-3-8B 

Vanilla 27 .4 73 .0 37 .0 29 .3 41 .7

Buffer of Thoughts 20 .6 73 .6 43 .2 34 .2 42 .9

Dynamic Cheatsheet 29 .4 71 .2 27 .2 17 .1 36 .2

w/ Memory (Self) 29 .2 63 .2 47 .1 42 .7 45 .6

w/ Memory (32B) 18 .8 56 .6 35 .8 34 .1 36 .3

w/ Self-Contrast Memory 23 .6 61 .0 51.4 43.9 45 .0

MEM COLLAB 42.4 74.4 49 .8 48.8 53.9 Qwen-2.5-32B 

Vanilla 63 .8 93 .0 58 .0 68 .3 70 .8

w/ Memory (32B) 69 .6 93 .2 60.3 79 .3 75 .6

MEM COLLAB 70.6 95.2 60.3 86.6 78.2 

Table 2. Performance of Llama3-8B-Instruct– and Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct–based agents on mathematical reasoning and code benchmarks. Extracted Memory Guidance 

- When dealing with dependent events, enforce calculation of 

joint probabilities by multiplying conditional probabilities; 

avoid treating events as independent without justification. 

- When constructing intermediate variables, enforce clear 

distinction between initial conditions and transformed states; 

avoid conflating setup and solution steps 

Source Problem:    

> Two cards are dealt at random from a standard deck of 52 cards. What is the
> probability that the first card is a King and the second card is a $ \\heartsuit $?
> Unpreferred Trajectory (Output Snippet)
> Thought:
> I need to calculate the
> probability…
> Code:
> prob_first_king = 4 / 52
> prob_second_heart_given_king = 12
> / 51
> …

Issue: The second probability should 

be conditional on the first draw.    

> Thought:
> I need to calculate the probability…
> Code:
> from fractions import Fraction
> prob_king_first = Fraction(4, 52)
> prob_heart_second_not_king_of_hearts =
> Fraction(13, 51)
> prob_heart_second_king_of_hearts =
> Fraction(12, 51)
> …

Key step: Conditioning second event 

on the outcome of the first; 

Partitioning cases explicitly.  

> Preferred Trajectory

Target Problem: 

> Paul and Jesse each choose a number at random from the first
> six primes. What is the probability that the sum of the numbers
> they choose is even?
> Original false trajectory (Output Snippet )

Issue: Collapsing the sample space 

and assuming independence rather 

than performing conditional, case -

based counting       

> Thought:
> To solve this problem, …
> Let's break down the problem into steps:
> 1. Identify the first six prime numbers.
> 2. Calculate the probability of both
> choosing an even number.
> 3. Calculate the probability of both
> choosing an odd number.
> 4. Sum these probabilities to get the
> final answer.
> …
> Code:
> from sympy import primerange
> primes = list( primerange (1, 16))[:6]
> even_prime = 2
> odd_primes = [p for p in primes if p !=
> even_prime ]
> prob_even_even = (1/ len (primes)) *
> (1/ len (primes))
> …

Key step: Explicitly enumerating outcomes and 

avoiding unjustified independence assumptions       

> Correct Trajectory with Memory
> Guidance (Output Snippet)
> Thought:
> I need to determine the
> probability…
> Since there is only one even
> prime number (2), the only way
> to get an even sum is if both
> numbers chosen are odd.
> …
> Code:
> …
> total_outcomes =len (primes)
> ** 2 \n\n
> favorable_outcomes =
> (len (primes) -1) ** 2
> probability =
> favorable_outcomes /
> total_outcomes
> …

Figure 3. Case study to compare the trajectories with and without the extracted memory guidance. Left : The contrasted trajectories pairs given a same question and the corresponding extracted memory guidance. Right : Changes in the agent’s output after incorporating the memory guidance. Note: all Key step and Issue are summarized, see full output is in Appendix E. 

Dataset Vanilla MEM COLLAB 

MATH500 2.7 2.2 GSM8K 1.8 1.6 MBPP 3.1 1.4 HumanEval 3.3 1.5 

Table 3. Average number of reasoning turns for Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct based agent. 

correctly models the joint probability by conditioning on earlier events and systematically enumerating the relevant cases. The resulting memory guidance distills this central distinction between the two reasoning trajectories. When solving the target problem, the vanilla agent exhibits the same failure mode, again relying on an implicit inde-pendence assumption and an underspecified enumeration of cases. After retrieving the contrastive memory, the agent can adopt explicit case analysis, leading to a coherent joint-probability formulation and the correct solution. 

4.5. Effect of the Number of Retrieved Memory Entries 

Figure 4 shows that agent performance initially improves as the number of retrieved memories increases, but degrades beyond a task-dependent threshold. Since the agent consis-tently achieves strong performance when retrieving the top three most relevant tasks, we set p = 3 in all experiments. This behavior can be interpreted from a spatial pruning per-spective, where failure patterns stored in memory implicitly constrain the agent’s search space by pruning irrelevant regions, thereby improving the signal-to-noise ratio. The-oretically, let b denote the original branching factor and d the search depth. If k erroneous patterns are identified and disabled through retrieved contrastive memories, the effec-7MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

tive search space contracts with ratio ρ =  1 − kb

d. As long as k ≥ 1, we have ρ < 1, implying strict exponential contraction of the search space. However, as the retrieval size increases, additional memories expand the representa-tion subspace to include weakly relevant or noisy directions, weakening the pruning effect and increasing attention disper-sion. This trade-off explains the observed non-monotonic trend and the existence of an optimal retrieval budget, which varies across tasks depending on the locality and complexity of their underlying solution manifolds. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Number of Retrieved Memory 

> 60
> 70
> 80 Performance
> MATH GSM8K MBPP HumanEval

Figure 4. Ablation on the number of retrieved memories 

4.6. Effect of Retrieval Strategies on Performance 

To demonstrate the relationship between task categories and error patterns, we analyze the pairwise Jensen–Shannon di-vergence (JSD) between task categories on the MATH500 dataset using the Qwen2.5-7B model, as shown in Figure 5. Each task category is represented by an empirical distri-bution over error types aggregated from model-generated trajectories. For each data sample and its corresponding trajectory, we use GPT-4o-mini to annotate both the task category and the error type, and compute the JSD between all pairs of categories. Prealgebra 

> Algebra
> Number Theory
> Counting & Probability
> Precalculus
> Intermediate Algebra
> Geometry
> Prealgebra
> Algebra
> Number Theory
> Counting & Probability
> Precalculus
> Intermediate Algebra
> Geometry
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> Jensen Shannon divergence

Figure 5. Task-category similarity of error-type distributions on MATH500. 

Task categories exhibit characteristic and consistent error patterns. The results in Figure 5 reveal that alge-braically related tasks, including Prealgebra, Algebra, Inter-mediate Algebra, and Precalculus, form a low-divergence cluster, indicating highly similar error distributions domi-nated by reasoning and execution-related failures. In con-trast, categories such as Number Theory and Counting & Probability exhibit are diviated from this cluster, indicat-ing distinct failure mechanisms. These findings support the design of our task-aware retrieval mechanism, as they indicate that memory entries derived from the same task category are more likely to persist relevant reasoning con-straints and error-forbidden patterns. Retrieving memories conditioned on task category therefore enables more precise and effective guidance during agent reasoning. MATH500 GSM8K MBPP HumanEval 020 40 60 80 

> Performance (%)
> 63.4 84.2 55.2 62.1 61.6 85.2 54.8 65.9 67.0 87.4 57.6 74.4
> Prompting Embedding MEM COLLAB

Figure 6. Performance comparison with different retrieval methods 

We also evaluate two retrieval variants that does not use task classification, instead retrieving memory entries directly based on (1) embedding similarity and (2) prompting the model to select the top-p relevant tasks. As shown in Fig-ure 6, this results highlights the benefit of first classifying the task and then retrieving memory conditioned on the predicted class. 

5. Conclusions 

In this work, we study the problem of constructing a single shared memory to support multiple LLM-based agents. We show that directly transferring memory between agents is in-effective, as agent-specific biases and reasoning patterns can be entangled with reusable knowledge. To address this chal-lenge, we propose a collaborative memory framework that synthesizes memory by contrasting trajectories generated by different agents for the same task, distilling high-level reasoning guidance and error-forbidden patterns. Exten-sive experiments across mathematical and coding bench-marks demonstrate that the resulting memory generalizes across heterogeneous agents, improving both accuracy and inference-time efficiency. Future work may extend this contrastive formulation to multi-agent settings by selecting a preferred trajectory and treating others as unpreferred, pointing toward shared memory systems that scale to larger collections of interacting agents. 8MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose primary goal is to ad-vance the field of machine learning by improving the ef-ficiency and reusability of memory systems for large lan-guage model–based agents. By enabling a single shared memory to support multiple heterogeneous agents, our ap-proach has the potential to reduce redundant computation and resource usage in practical deployments, which may contribute to more scalable and energy-efficient AI systems. At the same time, the proposed method operates entirely on model-generated reasoning trajectories and does not intro-duce new data collection, personalization, or user profiling mechanisms. The memory distilled by our approach focuses on abstract reasoning guidance and error-forbidden patterns rather than storing raw interactions, sensitive information, or task-specific solutions, which mitigates risks related to data privacy or memorization.We do not anticipate ethical con-cerns beyond those commonly associated with deploying large language models, and the societal implications of this work are consistent with well-established considerations in the machine learning literature. 

References 

Anthropic. Effective context engineering for ai agents, September 2025. URL https: //www.anthropic.com/engineering/ effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents .Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M., Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C., Terry, M., Le, Q., et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 , 2021. Chen, M. Evaluating large language models trained on code. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. Chen, T., Wang, H., Chen, S., Yu, W., Ma, K., Zhao, X., Zhang, H., and Yu, D. Dense x retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we use? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 15159–15177, 2024. Cheng, X., Luo, D., Chen, X., Liu, L., Zhao, D., and Yan, R. Lift yourself up: Retrieval-augmented text genera-tion with self-memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:43780–43799, 2023. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. Edge, D., Trinh, H., Cheng, N., Bradley, J., Chao, A., Mody, A., Truitt, S., Metropolitansky, D., Ness, R. O., and Larson, J. From local to global: A graph rag ap-proach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 , 2024. Gao, Y., Xiong, Y., Gao, X., Jia, K., Pan, J., Bi, Y., Dai, Y., Sun, J., Wang, H., and Wang, H. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2(1), 2023. Gaur, M., Gunaratna, K., Srinivasan, V., and Jin, H. Iseeq: Information seeking question generation using dynamic meta-information retrieval and knowledge graphs. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 36, pp. 10672–10680, 2022. Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Vaughan, A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. He, X., Tian, Y., Sun, Y., Chawla, N., Laurent, T., LeCun, Y., Bresson, X., and Hooi, B. G-retriever: Retrieval-augmented generation for textual graph understanding and question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:132876–132907, 2024. Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., Arora, A., Basart, S., Tang, E., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring math-ematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874 , 2021. Kang, M., Chen, W.-N., Han, D., Inan, H. A., Wutschitz, L., Chen, Y., Sim, R., and Rajmohan, S. Acon: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00615 , 2025a. Kang, M., Jeong, J., Lee, S., Cho, J., and Hwang, S. J. Distilling llm agent into small models with retrieval and code tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17612 , 2025b. Laban, P., Hayashi, H., Zhou, Y., and Neville, J. Llms get lost in multi-turn conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06120 , 2025. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., K ¨uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt ¨aschel, T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020. Li, X., Nie, E., and Liang, S. From classification to gener-ation: Insights into crosslingual retrieval augmented icl. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06595 , 2023. Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., and Cobbe, K. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. 9MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Logeswaran, L. and Lee, H. An efficient framework for learning sentence representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02893 , 2018. Luo, Z., Xu, C., Zhao, P., Geng, X., Tao, C., Ma, J., Lin, Q., and Jiang, D. Augmented large language mod-els with parametric knowledge guiding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04757 , 2023. Nuxoll, A. M. and Laird, J. E. Enhancing intelligent agents with episodic memory. Cognitive Systems Research , 17: 34–48, 2012. Oord, A. v. d., Li, Y., and Vinyals, O. Representation learn-ing with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. Ouyang, S., Yan, J., Hsu, I., Chen, Y., Jiang, K., Wang, Z., Han, R., Le, L. T., Daruki, S., Tang, X., et al. Rea-soningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25140 , 2025. Packer, C., Fang, V., Patil, S., Lin, K., Wooders, S., and Gonzalez, J. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. 2023. Pink, M., Wu, Q., Vo, V. A., Turek, J., Mu, J., Huth, A., and Toneva, M. Position: Episodic memory is the missing piece for long-term llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06975 , 2025. Saunshi, N., Plevrakis, O., Arora, S., Khodak, M., and Khandeparkar, H. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 5628–5637. PMLR, 2019. Shi, F., Chen, X., Misra, K., Scales, N., Dohan, D., Chi, E. H., Sch ¨arli, N., and Zhou, D. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 31210– 31227. PMLR, 2023. Suzgun, M., Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Jurafsky, D., and Zou, J. Dynamic cheatsheet: Test-time learning with adaptive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07952 ,2025. Team, Q. et al. Qwen2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671 , 2(3), 2024. Wang, L., Yang, N., and Wei, F. Learning to retrieve in-context examples for large language models. In Proceed-ings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 1752–1767, 2024. Xu, W., Liang, Z., Mei, K., Gao, H., Tan, J., and Zhang, Y. A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 , 2025. Yan, S., Yang, X., Huang, Z., Nie, E., Ding, Z., Li, Z., Ma, X., Kersting, K., Pan, J. Z., Sch ¨utze, H., et al. Memory-r1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19828 , 2025. Yan, S.-Q., Gu, J.-C., Zhu, Y., and Ling, Z.-H. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. 2024. Yang, L., Yu, Z., Zhang, T., Cao, S., Xu, M., Zhang, W., Gonzalez, J. E., and Cui, B. Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 113519–113544, 2024. Yang, L., Yu, Z., Cui, B., and Wang, M. Reasonflux: Hierar-chical llm reasoning via scaling thought templates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06772 , 2025. Yu, W., Iter, D., Wang, S., Xu, Y., Ju, M., Sanyal, S., Zhu, C., Zeng, M., and Jiang, M. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language models are strong context generators. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10063 , 2022. Yu, W., Zhang, H., Pan, X., Cao, P., Ma, K., Li, J., Wang, H., and Yu, D. Chain-of-note: Enhancing robustness in retrieval-augmented language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pp. 14672–14685, 2024. Zha, L., Zhou, J., Li, L., Wang, R., Huang, Q., Yang, S., Yuan, J., Su, C., Li, X., Su, A., et al. Tablegpt: Towards unifying tables, nature language and commands into one gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08674 , 2023. Zhang, Z., Dai, Q., Bo, X., Ma, C., Li, R., Chen, X., Zhu, J., Dong, Z., and Wen, J.-R. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47, 2025. Zhong, W., Guo, L., Gao, Q., Ye, H., and Wang, Y. Memo-rybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-ficial Intelligence , volume 38, pp. 19724–19731, 2024. Zhou, Z., Qu, A., Wu, Z., Kim, S., Prakash, A., Rus, D., Zhao, J., Low, B. K. H., and Liang, P. P. Mem1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning for efficient long-horizon agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15841 , 2025. 10 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

A. Dataset 

• MATH500 : A curated reasoning benchmark consisting of 500 problems sampled from the MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021) following the protocol of Lightman et al. (2023). The benchmark spans seven mathematical domains, including Prealgebra, Algebra, Number Theory, Counting and Probability, Geometry, Intermediate Algebra, and Precalculus, ensuring to provide diverse coverage of problem types and reasoning requirements. • GSM8K A grade-school mathematics benchmark consisting of 8,500 natural-language word problems that require multi-step arithmetic reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021). Each problem is paired with a step-by-step solution and a final numeric answer, and the dataset is commonly used to evaluate an agent’s ability to perform structured mathematical reasoning. • MBPP (Mostly Basic Programming Problems): A benchmark for evaluating code generation and program synthesis, consisting of 974 Python programming tasks (Austin et al., 2021). Each task provides a natural-language problem description, a reference solution, and a set of test cases, and is designed to assess an agent’s ability to generate correct and executable code from textual specifications. • HumanEval : A widely used benchmark for evaluating code generation and program synthesis capabilities of large language models, consisting of 164 hand-written Python programming tasks (Chen, 2021). Each task specifies a function signature and a natural-language docstring, and models are evaluated based on functional correctness using unit tests, typically reported with pass@k metrics. 

B. Baselines 

• Buffer of Thoughts (Yang et al., 2024): proposes a reasoning-oriented memory mechanism that distills reusable thought templates from prior problem-solving traces. During inference, the agent retrieves and instantiates these templates to guide its reasoning process, aiming to improve consistency and efficiency on complex reasoning tasks. • Dynamic Cheatsheet (Suzgun et al., 2025): introduces an inference-time memory mechanism that maintains a persistent, editable cheatsheet of task-relevant guidance. The cheatsheet is updated online based on model successes and failures, enabling black-box language models to adapt their behavior across tasks without parameter updates. • Vanilla: is to use the basic agent wthout memory augmentation. • w/ Memory (7B): is to utilize the memory constructed exclusively from reasoning trajectories generated by Qwen2.5-7B. During inference, the model retrieves the stored memory and conditions its generation on the retrieved content to guide problem solving. • w/ Memory (32B): has the setting mirrors w/ Memory (7B), except that the memory is constructed from reasoning trajectories generated by Qwen2.5-32B instead of Qwen2.5-7B. • w/ Self-Contrast Memory: constructs memory by contrasting the model’s own self-generated reasoning trajectories, using the resulting memory to guide inference. 

C. Experimental Details 

All experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPUs with CUDA 12.8. We adopt smolagents’ CodeAgent as the underlying agent framework. During inference, we set the temperature to 0 and top-p to 0.8. For memory retrieval, we retrieve the top-3 most similar samples within the task-filtered subset using TF-IDF similarity scores; each retrieved sample contributes up to 3 extracted memory entries, which are then provided to the agent. For the self-contrast baseline, each model generates two sampled outputs to construct contrastive memory. We use the random seed 42 for all experiments. 

D. Additional Theoretical Details 

This appendix provides supplementary theoretical analysis to support our interpretation of our contrastive memory construc-tion. 11 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

D.1. Discussion on Contrastive Memory 

In this section, we provide analysis for interpreting the validity of constructing our collaborative memory by contrasting agents’ trajectories. Our analysis clarifies the memory synthesized process through the lens of the contrastive learning. 

D.2. Contrastive Learning 

Contrastive learning provides a statistical framework for understanding how representations can be shaped by the comparison between the positive and negative pairs. The widely used comtrastive objective loss function is the infoNCE loss: 

LInfoNCE = −E

"

log exp( g(x, x +)) exp( g(x, x +)) + P 

> j

exp( g(x, x − 

> j

)) 

#

, (9) where g(·, ·) denotes the scoring function, x and x+ are from positive pairs, and {x− 

> j

} are negative samples (Logeswaran & Lee, 2018). The simplified version of the loss function could be defined as (Saunshi et al., 2019): 

−E



log exp( g(x, x +)) exp( g(x, x +)) + exp( g(x, x −)) 



, (10) 

D.3. Contrastive Memory Learning 

We analyze the behavior of the contrast-derived memory from the perspective of the contrastive learning. Suppose an agent trajectory is represented as τ , which is composed of two factors: a task-specific reasoning strategies and agent-specific bias. Formally, we assume: 

τ = f (s, b ), (11) where s denotes the underlying reasoning structure required to solve the task, and b captures agent-dependent variations such as architectural preferences or stylistic choices. Accordingly, we interpret the contrast-derived memory m as a function of the reasoning component, i.e., m = ψ(s), while being largely insensitive to the bias term b. Given these assumputions, we define a proxy optimization objective for the contrastive memory learning as: 

LMemNCE = −E

"

log exp( g(τ, m )) exp( g(τ, m )) + P 

> j

exp( g(τ − 

> j

, m )) 

#

, (12) where {τ − 

> j

} denote false trajectories corresponding to the same task. In our setting, contrast is performed over a single preferred trajectory and a single flawed trajectory, corresponding to the pairwise case with j = 1 negative sample. Oord et al. shows that even with a single negative sample, pairwise contrast preserves the density-ratio interpretation central to contrastive learning. Under this view, the LMemNCE provides an interpretive tool for understanding the effectiveness of the contrast-derived memory. Instead of directly optimizing this objective, our goal is to introduce a proxy learning objective that clarifies the underlying memory extraction mechanism. By contrasting preferred and unlike trajectories, the distilled memory emphasizes reasoning factors and recurring pitfalls that persist across problem-solving processes, while ignoring the agent-specific biases and noises. Unlike episodic storage or direct trajectory reuse, our collaborative memory encourages memory distillation into abstract reusable, high-level guidance. This perspective helps explain why memory constructed through contrast can generalize across tasks and agents. 

E. Details of the Case Study 

We provide the complete trajectories for the case study, including both the memory summarization process and the memory-augmented retrieval in 7 and 8. The memory used for augmentation is in Figure 3. 12 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation Source Problem: 

Two cards are dealt at random from a standard deck of 52 cards. What is the probability that the first card 

is a King and the second card is a $ \\heartsuit $? 

Unpreferred Trajectory (Output Snippet) 

Thought: To solve this problem, we need to 

calculate the probability of two events happening 

in sequence: 

1. The first card being a King. 

2. The second card being a heart. 

3. We can calculate the probability of the first 

event as there are 4 Kings in a deck of 52 

cards. So, the probability is 4/52. 

4. After drawing the first card, there are now 51 

cards left in the deck. If the first card was a 

King of Hearts, there would be 12 hearts left. 

If it wasn't, there would be 13 hearts left. We 

need to consider both cases. 

5. Let's calculate the probabilities for both 

scenarios and then combine them to get the final 

probability. 

Code: 

# Probability of the first card being a King 

prob_first_king = 4 / 52 

# Probability of the second card being a heart 

after drawing a King 

prob_second_heart_given_king = 12 / 51 

# Probability of the second card being a heart 

after drawing a non -King of hearts 

prob_second_heart_given_non_king = 13 / 51 

# Total probability 

total_prob = prob_first_king *

(prob_second_heart_given_king +

prob_second_heart_given_non_king )

total_prob 

Thought: 

To solve this problem, we need to calculate 

the probability of two independent events 

happening in sequence: drawing a King first 

and then drawing a heart. The probability of 

drawing a King first is 4/52 since there are 

4 Kings in a deck of 52 cards. After drawing 

a King, there are 51 cards left in the deck. 

If the King drawn is not a heart, the 

probability of drawing a heart next is 13/51. 

If the King drawn is a heart, the probability 

of drawing a heart next is 12/51. We need to 

consider both cases and sum their 

probabilities. 

Code: 

from fractions import Fraction 

# Probability of drawing a King first 

prob_king_first = Fraction(4, 52) 

# Probability of drawing a heart second if 

the King drawn is not a heart 

prob_heart_second_not_king_of_hearts =

Fraction(13, 51) 

# Probability of drawing a heart second if 

the King drawn is a heart 

prob_heart_second_king_of_hearts =

Fraction(12, 51) 

# Total probability \ntotal_prob =

prob_king_first *

(prob_heart_second_not_king_of_hearts *

Fraction(3, 4) + 

prob_heart_second_king_of_hearts *

Fraction(1, 4)) 

final_answer (total_prob )

Preferred Trajectory 

Thought: 

The code executed successfully and returned the 

probability as a float. However, we need to 

return the final answer in LaTeX format. Let \'s 

convert the float to a fraction and then format 

it accordingly. 

Code: 

from fractions import Fraction 

# Convert the float to a fraction 

fraction_prob =

Fraction( total_prob ). limit_denominator () 

# Return the final answer in LaTeX format 

final_answer (f" \\\\boxed{{{ fraction_prob }}}")’ 

…

Figure 7. Full trajectory used for memory summarization 

F. Invariant Reasoning Patterns in Summarized Memory 

This section presents representative retrieved trajectory pairs in which agents with different reasoning capacities preserve the same underlying reasoning invariants despite variations in symbolic form, execution order, and implementation detail. Each example in Table 4 highlights how invariant alignment manifests across heterogeneous trajectories, illustrating that retrieval can match problems at the level of problem decomposition rather than surface-level reasoning steps. 

G. Prompts 

We use the following prompt in Table 5, adapted from Buffer of Thoughts (Yang et al., 2024), to extract high-level reasoning behavior from a model’s single trajectory. We also provide the prompt for contrasting trajectories on the math problems in Table 6. 13 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation Original False Trajectory 

Thought: 

To solve this problem, I need to determine the 

probability that the sum of two randomly chosen 

prime numbers from the first six primes is even. 

The first six prime numbers are: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 

13. 

For the sum of two numbers to be even, both 

numbers must either be even or odd. Since there is 

only one even prime number (2), the only way to 

get an even sum is if both numbers chosen are odd. 

Let's calculate the total number of possible 

outcomes and the number of favorable outcomes. 

Code: 

# First six prime numbers 

primes = [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13] 

# Total number of possible outcomes 

total_outcomes = len (primes) ** 2 

# Number of favorable outcomes (both numbers are 

odd) 

favorable_outcomes = ( len (primes) - 1) ** 2 

# Probability calculation 

probability = favorable_outcomes / total_outcomes 

Probability 

Thought: To solve this problem, we need to 

determine the probability that the sum of two 

randomly chosen prime numbers from the first 

six primes is even. The sum of two numbers is 

even if both numbers are either even or odd. 

Since there is only one even prime number 

(2), the other five primes are odd. We need 

to calculate the probability of both Paul and 

Jesse choosing an even number or both 

choosing an odd number. 

Let's break down the problem into steps: 

1. Identify the first six prime numbers. 

2. Calculate the probability of both choosing 

an even number. 

3. Calculate the probability of both choosing 

an odd number. 

4. Sum these probabilities to get the final 

answer. 

Code: 

from sympy import primerange 

# Step 1: Identify the first six prime 

numbers 

primes = list( primerange (1, 16))[:6] 

even_prime = 2 

odd_primes = [p for p in primes if p != 

even_prime ]

# Step 2: Calculate the probability of both 

choosing an even number 

prob_even_even = (1/ len (primes)) * 

(1/ len (primes)) 

# Step 3: Calculate the probability of both 

choosing an odd number 

prob_odd_odd = ( len (odd_primes )/ len (primes)) 

* ( len (odd_primes )/ len (primes)) 

# Step 4: Sum these probabilities to get the 

final answer 

final_prob = prob_even_even + prob_odd_odd 

final_answer (final_prob )

Correct Trajectory with Memory Guidance 

Thought: 

The probability calculated is approximately 

0.6944. To express this as a fraction, we can 

simplify it. The fraction form of this 

probability is 25/36. 

Code: 

from fractions import Fraction 

# Convert the probability to a fraction 

probability_fraction =

Fraction(probability). limit_denominator () 

probability_fraction 

Target Problem: 

Paul and Jesse each choose a number at random from the first six primes. What is 

the probability that the sum of the numbers they choose is even? 

Figure 8. Full trajectory of the memory-augmented inference 

14 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Source Question :Determine the range of parameters for which a triangle exists. 

Summarized Un-preferred Trajectory :Explicitly writes triangle inequalities and solves the feasible range. 

Summarized Preferred Trajectory :Uses the same inequality-based feasibility reasoning before computation. 

Memory Guidance :When determining geometric feasibility, enforce triangle inequalities by converting them into explicit inequality constraints before solving. 

Invariants :Translate geometric existence into inequality constraints. 

Variants :One sets equations first, then simplifies; the other simplifies before imposing constraints. 

Source Question :How many intersection points are formed by a given number of circles? 

Summarized Un-preferred Trajectory :Identifies all diagonal pairs and counts only those that intersect, rather than enumerating points directly. 

Summarized Preferred Trajectory :Counts all circle pairs using  n

> 2

 and multiplies by the maximum possible intersections per pair. 

Memory Guidance : When dealing with combinatorial geometry problems involving intersections, enforce counting principles by first identifying all possible pairs of elements and then filtering based on intersection criteria; avoid direct enumeration without structured counting. When determining the probability of geometric events, enforce the calculation of favorable outcomes relative to total possible outcomes; avoid assuming uniform distribution without justification. 

Invariants : Decompose intersection problems into pairwise interactions with bounded intersection counts. 

Variants : One reasons at the geometric-object level (explicit intersection checks), while the other operates directly at the combinatorial level. One performs conditional filtering; the other applies a closed-form counting bound. 

Source Question :Determine a vector onto which multiple vectors have the same projection. 

Summarized Un-preferred Trajectory : Sets up dot-product equations equating scalar projections. 

Summarized Preferred Trajectory :Uses the same projection formula and explicitly enforces equality across vectors. 

Memory Guidance :When projecting multiple vectors onto the same vector and obtaining identical projections, enforce equality of scalar projection coefficients rather than treating each projection independently. 

Invariants :Equal projections imply a shared scalar projection constraint. 

Variants : One sets equations first, then simplifies; the other simplifies before imposing constraints. 

Table 4. Illustration of invariant reasoning patterns captured in the summarized memory entries. 

15 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

Assistant Task 

1. Core task summarization: Identify and describe the basic type and core challenges of the problem, such as classifying it as a mathematical problem (e.g., solving aquadratic equation), a data structure problem (e.g., array sorting), or an algorithmic problem (e.g., search algorithms). 2. Solution steps description: Outline the general solution steps, including how to define the problem, determine variables, list key equations or constraints, and choose appropriate solving strategies and methods. 3. General answer template: Based on the above analysis, propose a reusable template or approach that can be widely applied to this type of problem, including possible variables, functions, or class definitions. For programming problems, provide base classes or interfaces that can be instantiated to solve specific instances. Ensure the response is concise and structured so that instance-specific solutions can be generalized. 

Reusable Solution Skeleton 

1. Define symbolic variables or core data structures. 2. Express the main constraints, equations, or problem conditions. 3. Convert the problem into a canonical or solvable form. 4. Apply the appropriate mathematical, algorithmic, or structural method. 5. Solve for the required variable(s) or compute the target quantity. 6. Verify or validate the result using the original constraints or expected outputs. 

Table 5. Prompt template for single-model reasoning extraction. 

16 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

You are an expert analyst for extracting reusable REASONING MEMORY from contrastive multi-step mathematical reasoning trajectories. You are given multiple incorrect or partially correct reasoning traces or predicted outputs. Your goal is NOT to solve the problems. Your goal is NOT to correct the predictions. Your goal is to extract: 1) reusable failure-aware reasoning constraints, and 2) high-level reasoning strategies that characterize correct multi-step mathematical reasoning, expressed using abstract reasoning rules and high-level mathematical forms (rather than problem-specific calculations). Each extracted strategy must combine: - a trigger (when this strategy should be considered), and - an enforcement rule (what must be enforced or avoided). 

ANALYSIS SCOPE 

Analyze failures and near-misses at the reasoning level, focusing on: - explicit formalization of constraints and domains - correct construction and use of intermediate variables - alignment between mathematical structure and solution method - ordering of steps: formalize → transform → solve → verify - separation between intermediate expressions and final solutions - handling of extraneous roots, boundary cases, and invalid domains Use high-level mathematical forms where appropriate, such as: - constraint systems: {f (x) = 0 , g(x) ≥ 0}

- canonical equations: ax 2 + bx + c = 0 , A · x = b

- optimization conditions: ∇f (x) = 0 

- modular forms: ax ≡ b (mod n)

- geometric invariants: distance, angle, or area relations Do NOT focus on: - surface arithmetic mistakes without structural impact - numerical simplification details - stylistic presentation or verbosity - producing corrected solution chains or final answers 

STRICT CONSTRAINTS 

- Each strategy MUST be grounded in an observable pattern across trajectories. - Do NOT introduce speculative or unverifiable strategies. - Strategies MUST be abstract and reusable across different mathematical domains. 

REQUIRED OUTPUT 

Each strategy MUST: - be written as one sentence - optionally reference high-level mathematical forms or invariants - follow this format exactly: When ... , enforce ... ; avoid ... At least: - 1 strategy MUST describe failure-prevention or constraint enforcement - 1 strategy MUST describe high-level reasoning structure or invariants Do NOT: - include explanations - reference specific problems, constants, or numeric values - include worked examples or derivations - add any text before or after the list 

Table 6. Prompt template for contrastive extraction of reusable mathematical reasoning memory. 

17 MEM COLLAB : Cross-Agent Memory Collaboration via Contrastive Trajectory Distillation 

You are a mathematical problem classifier. Your task is to assign each math problem to exactly one subcategory within the given main category. You will be provided with: 1. The problem statement. 2. The main category (e.g., Algebra, Precalculus, Geometry, Number Theory). 3. A list of allowed subcategories for this category. Your output must be exactly one subcategory from the allowed list. 

CLASSIFICATION RULES 

1. You MUST choose exactly one subcategory from the provided list. You may NOT output ‘‘None’’. You may NOT invent new categories. Only choose from the allowed subcategories provided. 2. If the problem clearly matches a subcategory definition, choose it, even if other superficial features appear. 3. If a problem fits multiple subcategories, choose the most specific one. 4. If a problem matches a special enforcement rule, you MUST apply that rule. These rules override all ambiguity. 

SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT RULES 

These rules override ambiguity and enforce consistent labeling: 

• Polar coordinates, polar--rectangular conversion, parametric coordinates →

Coordinate Systems .

• Vector dot products, cross products, projections, vector angles, 3D line geometry →

Analytic Geometry (Vectors & Lines) .

• Distance between points, midpoint, slope, basic coordinate geometry → Analytic Geometry (Distance & Midpoints) .

• Digit-restricted numbers or divisibility based on digit properties → Modular Arithmetic & Digit Properties .

• Proper divisors, prime factorization, number of divisors, GCD/LCM → Divisibility & Prime Factorization .

• Complex number rotation, geometric interpretation, roots of unity, transformations 

→ Complex Numbers (Geometry & Transformations) .

• Equations involving radicals or exponentials (including logarithms) → Radical &Exponential Equations . Exception: Compound interest or exponential growth/decay word problems → Exponential & Logarithmic Equations .

• Counting or arrangement problems with restrictions (e.g., adjacency constraints) →

Combinatorial Argument & Constraints .

• Constructing polynomials from values or missing coefficients → Polynomial Interpolation .

• Equations involving functional constraints (e.g., f (x + y), invariance) → Functional Equations .

OUTPUT FORMAT 

Your response must be ONLY the name of the chosen subcategory. No explanations. No justification. No additional text. 

INPUT FORMAT 

Problem: {PROBLEM }

Main Category: {CATEGORY }

Allowed Subcategories: {SUBCATEGORY LIST }

YOUR TASK 

Select exactly one subcategory from the list. 

Table 7. Prompt template for task classification used in task-aware retrieval. 

18