Title: 2606.05637v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05637v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 00:32:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
1

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

# Availability -Aware and Efficiency -Driven AI Service Chain 

# Provisioning in Multi -Domain Edge Intelligence Cloud 

Hanzhi Chang, Jing Bai, Xin Tang, Xiaomei L iu , Yiming Chen 

Abstract —In a multi -domain edge intelligence cloud ( MD EIC) 

managed by multiple network operators , AI services are 

delivered by chains of virtual network functions (VNFs) executed 

in sequence, called AI service chains (AISCs). Therefore, 

achieving an efficient and economical AISC provisioning 

approach is essential. However, the interaction between the 

environmental characteristics (heterogeneity, resource 

constraints and limited information visibility) of MDEIC and the 

time -dependence of AISCs, introduces various challenges to 

AISC provisioning in MDEIC. In this paper, we first formulate 

the AISC provisioning problem as a partially observable 

stochastic game (POSG). Then, we propose a graph -and -time -

based multi -agent AISC provisioning (GT -MAAISCP) approach 

to achieve the collaborative optimization of AISC provisioning 

cost, delay and availability. Specifically, each agent uses the 

graph -time dueling network (GTDN) architecture to extract 

network topology information and temporal relationships. 

Finally, the experimental results demonstrate that the proposed 

approach outperforms benchmark approaches in MDEIC and 

also illustrate its performance under varying network topologies 

and different numbers of local EICs (LEICs). 

Index Terms —Artificial intelligence service chain, multi -agent 

deep reinforcement learning, multi -domain edge intelligence 

cloud, virtual network function 

I. INTRODUCTION 

DGE intelligence cloud (EIC) integrates mobile edge 

computing (MEC) and artificial intelligence (AI), 

which is expected to promote the vision of ubiquitous 

intelligence in 6G networks  [1] -[3] . In EIC, the service nodes 

can run the inference and model training processes of energy -

and compute -intensive, latency - and privacy -sensitive AI 

services, bringing AI closer to data and end devices  [4] . Many 

service providers, including Google  [5] , Amazon  [6]  and 

Microsoft  [7] , have already launched EIC pilot programs. In 

real EIC, AI services such as autonomous driving and smart 

cities are provided by chains of virtual network functions 

(VNFs) executed in sequence, which are called AI service 

chains (AISCs)  [8] . AISC s can provide users with efficient 

and flexible customized AI services. 

EIC involves multiple types of resources, which are owned 

and managed by different network operators  [9] . An AISC can 

be provisioned in multi -domain EIC (MDEIC) managed by 

multiple network operators. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of 

AIS C provisioning in MDEIC. The AISC provisioning 

approach determines which EIC service nodes the VNFs run        

> Corresponding author: Jing Bai
> Hanzhi Chang, Jing Bai, Xin Tang, Xiaomei Liu and Yiming Chen are
> with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, University of International
> Relations, Beijing, China. E-mail: {hzchang, baijing, xtang, liuxiaomei,
> 20237103}@uir.edu.cn.

on and how the VNFs are interconnected on EIC service nodes. 

Therefore, it is important to carefully design the AISC 

provisioning approach to achieve efficient and economical 

selection of VNF locations and low -latency interconnection 

between VNFs. However, AISC provisioning faces the 

unresolved challenges found in traditional service function 

chain (SFC) provisioning, including heterogeneity, resource 

constraints, limited information visibility, and time -

dependence. These challenges become more critical and 

complex due to the characteristics of AISCs and MDEIC. 

Unlike t raditional SFC deployment  [10] , AISC provisioning 

focuses on AI -oriented challenges, such as cross -domain 

heterogeneity in management , satisfying specific resource 

constraints for AI , operating under limited information 

visibility, and handling complex time -dependent execution of 

sequential and parallel VNFs. In addition, AISCs tightly 

couple data locality, learning performance and service latency, 

which means that these challenges cannot be treated 

independently and must be jointly addressed in the 

provisioning process. 

 Heterogeneity: To improve model accuracy, model 

training often requires access to data from multiple 

domains, which means AISC provisioning must be 

performed across multiple domains where the relevant 

data reside. This multi -domain deployment introduces a 

significant challenge of network heterogeneity, since the 

network topologies, node locations, and resource 

capacities vary across different domains. Ignoring such 

heterogeneity in MDEIC environments would reduce the 

adaptability and performance of AISC provisioning 

approaches .

 Resource constraints: AISCs must ensure both 

computational availability and model integrity. 

Continuous model updates introduce additional potential 

security risks, such as model poisoning or biased 

updates, which further increase the requirement for 

availability. EIC service nodes with limited resources are 

more susceptible to attacks  [11] [12] . Failures caused by 

these attacks can directly compromise AISC availability. 

Once availability is degraded, the accuracy of AI services 

also declines. Consequently, AISC provisioning faces 

more stringent resource constraints, requiring intelligent 

mechanisms to maintain reliability and security under 

limited resources. 

# E2

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

Fig. 1. The illustration of AISC provisioning in MDEIC 

 Limited information visibility: In an MDEIC, different 

domains are managed by independent network operators. 

Training data collected within one domain cannot be 

freely shared with others, and private information such as 

physical topology and resource status is typically 

withheld across domains. This lack of transparency 

results in limited information visibility  [9] , making it 

more difficult to achieve efficient coordination and 

global optimization in AISC provisioning. 

 Time -dependence: In AISCs, multiple VNFs exhibit may 

need to be executed either in sequence or in parallel  [13] .

Parallel VNFs often perform tasks such as feature 

extraction or data cleaning simultaneously before feeding 

their outputs to downstream inference VNFs, which 

introduces complex data flow synchronization 

requirements. If these parallel VNFs are deployed far 

apart or connected through low -bandwidth links, the 

latency advantages of parallel execution may be negated. 

Furthermore, multiple AISCs may arrive sequentially, 

making the consideration of such temporal relationships 

even more critical. Therefore, AISC provisioning 

approach must efficiently capture and handle the time 

dependencies among VNFs to ensure optimal 

performance. 

Researchers have achieved fruitful results in terms of 

traditional service chain provisioning approaches, but i)

existing heuristic approaches  [14] -[20]  lacked trial -and -error 

learning, which results in only local optimal solutions, and 

they were designed for specific problems, making it difficult 

to dynamically deploy VNFs and adapt to new physical 

network topologies; ii ) existing single -agent deep 

reinforcement learning (DRL) -based approaches  [21] -[25]  had 

low learning efficiency, and they cannot process information 

from different domains simultaneously, making them 

inapplicable for service chain deployment in MDEIC; iii )

existing multi -agent DRL (MADRL) -based approaches  [26] -

[32]  fail to synergistically consider the impact of the 

environmental characteristics of MDEIC and the intrinsic 

properties of AISC on the AISC provisioning approach. As a 

result, existing studies are insufficient to support AISC 

provisioning in realistic MDEIC environments, especially 

when parallel VNFs, cross -domain coordination, and partial 

observability must be jointly considered. 

To address the challenges mentioned above, we propose a 

graph -and -time -based multi -agent AISC provisioning (GT -

MAAISCP) approach to achieve collaborative optimization of 

AISC provisioning cost, delay and availability. To the best of 

our knowledge, we are the first to address AISC provisioning 

problem in MDEIC, taking into account both the MDEIC 

environmental characteristics and the time -dependence of 

AISC. The contributions of this paper are summarized as 

follows: 

 We formulate the AISC provisioning problem as a

partially observable stochastic game (POSG) that 

addresses resource constraints and limited information 

visibility in MDEICs. In this formulation, multiple local 

agents (LAs) independently manage their respective local 

EICs (LEICs) under privacy and observability constraints, 

while a global agent (GA) coordinates cross -domain 

provisioning decision. Under four types of constraints 

(availability, delay, resource consumption and mapping 

constraints), each agent cooperates to complete AISC 

provisioning in MDEIC based on partial information. 

 We design a Graph -Time Dueling Network (GTDN) 

architecture to address heterogeneity and time -

dependence challenges. GTDN architecture enables 

agents to jointly capture graph and temporal 

dependencies in the provisioning process. The graph 

feature extractor effectively models heterogeneous 

network topologies and multi -dimensional link attributes, 

thereby addressing cross -domain heterogeneity. The 

temporal feature extractor captures interdependencies 

among VNFs and AISCs, allowing the system to handle 

both serial and parallel service chains. These components 

collectively enable adaptive decision -making in dynamic 

and time -dependent environments. 

 We conduct extensive experiments under four 

representative network topologies —Watts -Strogatz 

Small -World, Barabá si -Albert Scale -Free, Erdős -Ré nyi 

Random Graph, and Random Regular Graph. The results 

demonstrate that our approach achieves collaborative 

optimization of cost, delay, and availability under 

varying numbers of LEICs, significantly outperforming 

benchmarks on six performance metrics. These 

experiments confirm that the proposed approach 

maintains scalability, and multi -objective optimization 

capability in heterogeneous and dynamic MDEIC 

environments. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 

introduces the related work. In Section III, we propose the 

system model and problem description. In Section IV, the 

graph -and -time -based multi -agent AISC provisioning 

approach is presented in detail. Section V shows the 

experimental results of verifying the performance of the 

proposed approach. Section VI concludes the paper and 3

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

discusses future research directions. 

II. RELATED WORKS 

In this section, we review the studies on service chain 

provisioning problem. There are two main solutions: heuristic 

approaches and DRL -based approaches. The latter can be 

further divided into single -agent DRL -based approaches and 

MADRL -based approaches. We detail th ese studies as 

follows. 

A. Heuristic Approaches 

In the past few years, m any studies tried to use heuristic 

approaches for optimizing service chain provisioning .

Representative works have employed techniques such as 

column generation, mixed -integer linear programming, 

approximation algorithms, and metaheuristic optimization to 

improve deployment efficiency and resource utilization in 

NFV -enabled networks [14] –[18]. A detailed comparison of 

these approaches is summarized in Table I. In Table I, 

'Multiple Domains' indicates whether a multi -domain EIC 

environment is considered. 'Parallel VNF' indicates whether 

the parallel VNF structures are included in service chains. 

'Multiple Agents' indicates whether the MADRL algorithm is 

used for service chain provisioning. 'Topology Feature' 

indicates whether to use network topologies as a feature input 

to the MADRL algorithm. 'Temporal Feature' indicates 

whether the arrival order of service chains and the 

arrangement order of VNFs are utilized in the provisioning 

process. 

Overall, heuristic approaches are generally designed for 

specific problems and have poor generalization ability, 

making it difficult to dynamically deploy VNF and adapt to 

new physical network topologies . Compared with heuristic -

based approaches, when sufficient computational resources are 

available (e.g., CPU, memory, and GPU resources), the 

proposed approach achieves better generalization and 

adaptability to heterogeneous and dynamic environments. 

However, the RL -based nature of the proposed approach may 

introduce a certain degree of stochasticity during the training 

process, which can lead to variability in intermediate decision 

outcomes. To address this issue, our framework incorporates 

multiple constraints such as availability, delay, and resource 

consumption constraints. These constraints restrict the feasible 

action space and guide the agents to make stable and reliable 

provisioning decisions, thereby ensuring that the overall 

provisioning performance remains stable and suitable for real -

world deployment scenarios. 

B. DRL -based Approaches 

More and more studies use DRL algorithms for service 

chain provisioning. Representative works employed DRL 

techniques such as DQN, actor –critic architectures and graph -

based models to optimize VNF placement and resource 

allocation under dynamic network conditions [21] –[25]. These 

approaches aimed to improve metrics such as acceptance ratio, 

long -term revenue and resource utilization. A detailed 

comparison of these methods is summarized in Table I.

However, the single -agent DRL -based approaches face 

significant limitati ons. Its learning efficiency and convergence 

speed is slow in large -scale EIC  [33] –[35] . Additionally, it 

does not support cross -domain provisioning of service chains 

because it cannot process information from different domains 

simultaneously. 

To address the aforementioned shortcomings, some studies 

have turned to the MADRL -based approaches to achieve 

better performance and generality when solving the service 

chain provisioning problem in large -scale or multi -domain 

environments  [26] –[32] . In particular, Toumi et al . [27] 

proposed a MADRL framework based on DQN to address the 

challenge of deploying VNF in multi -domain environments .

However, their model did not consider parallel VNF 

deployment, nor how agents utilize topological and temporal 

features to assist placement. The proposed graph -and -time -

based multi -agent AISC provisioning (GT -MAAISCP) 

approach addresses these limitations. Wang et al . [32] 

proposed a GCN -based MADRL algorithm to solve the multi -

objective optimization problem of dynamic VNF deployment 

in Internet of Things (IoT) scenarios. However, their method 

neglects edge features (e.g., bandwidth) in the network graph, 

and each agent is assigned to a single optimization objective ,

failing to solve the multi -domain collaboration. In contrast, 

our approach employs a more advanced graph neural network 

that can utilize multi -dimensional edge features in the 

topological network, resulting in superior representation 

capability and better performance. 

Although studies on MADRL approaches for the service 

chain provisioning problem have made progress, there are still 

some limitations: i) Many studies  [21] -[26] [28] [30] -[32]  failed 

to address service chain provisioning problems in MDEIC and 

ignored the trustworthiness of the internal network, which 

affects approach scalability ; ii ) Some studies  [24] [26] -[30] 

ignored the impact of network topology on service chain 

provisioning, preventing these approaches from leveraging 

node location and link connectivity to optimize service chain 

provisioning ; iii ) Some studies  [21] -[32]  only focused on 

serial VNFs, and did not address the deployment of parallel 

VNFs ; iv ) Some studies  [21] -[32]  did not jointly optimize 

availability and other objectives, but the impact of availability 

on service chain provisioning cannot be ignored. 

C. AISC Provisioning 

There are fewer studies on the AISC provisioning approach. 

Qiu et al.  [19]  proposed an online security -aware and 

reliability -guaranteed provisioning scheme for AISCs in edge 

intelligence clouds. Their model integrates security constraints 

and reliability requirements into a stochastic optimization 

framework to improve service stability. However, this 

approach relies on heuristic algorithm, leading to its limited 

adaptability to dynamic network states and large -scale 

scenarios and lacks the learning capability to optimize 

decisions over time. Moreover, this approach does not 

consider AISC provisioning across multiple domains. In terms 

of optimization objectives, it focuses solely on minimizing 

cost and improving security levels without considering delay 4

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

performance. In contrast, our paper supports multi -domain 

AISC provisioning and jointly optimizes cost, delay, and 

availability through multi -agent reinforcement learning. Li et 

al . [8]  presented a slicing -based AISC provisioning approach 

that balances AI service performance and data management 

resource consumption. This study focuses on single -domain 

environments and static resource slicing strategies. However, 

it does not consider cross -domain coordination. In addition, it 

only considered AISCs composed of serial VNFs and ignored 

AISCs containing parallel VNFs, which are common in AI -

driven workloads. In contrast, our paper supports both serial 

and parallel VNF deployment in MDEIC through a graph -time 

dueling network architecture. 

III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 

In this section, we first introduce the system model in terms of the 

network model and the computation model. Then, we formulate 

the problem constraints and model the AISC provisioning 

problem in MDEIC as a partially observable stochastic game. 

Section A of the supplementary material introduces the notations 

used in this pape r, their v alue in practical environments and 

representative real -world application exam ples. 

A. Network Model 

As shown in Fig. 1, the MDEIC consists of multiple LEICs, 

each of which contain s dozens or hundreds SNs. The server 

nodes ( SNs ) in each LEIC are interconnected by physical links 

(PLs ), and the LEICs are also connected through inter -domain 

PLs. Each SN and PL is associated with specific attributes, such 

as bandwidth and availability. The network topology can be any 

type. An AISC comprises multiple VNFs that communicate 

with each other to deliver the intended service functions. These 

VNFs are deployed on SNs, and data are transmitted through 

the physical links between the SNs. 

Multi -Domain Edge Intelligence Cloud (MD EIC ). We 

model the MDEIC as a connected undirected graph  𝐺 =

{𝒱 , ℰ} , which can be divided into |𝐺 | subgraphs. Each 

subgraph denotes a local EIC (L EIC ) 𝒢 𝑖 = {𝒱 𝑖 , ℰ𝑖 } , where 

𝒱 𝑖 = {𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 } represents the set of service nodes (SNs) and  ℰ𝑖 =

{𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 } represents the set of physical links (PLs) between SNs 

(1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ |𝐺 |, 𝒱 𝑖 ∈ 𝒱 , ℰ𝑖 ∈ ℰ ). A PL between two LEIC s is 

re presented by  𝑒 0,𝒦 (𝑒 0,𝒦 ∈ ℰ̅ = ℰ\ ∑ ℰ𝑖  

> |𝐺 |
> 𝑖 =1

, 1 ≤ 𝒦 ≤

|ℰ\ ∑ ℰ𝑖  

> |𝐺 |
> 𝑖 =1

|, where  \ is set difference ). We set |𝒱 𝑖 | SNs and 

|ℰ𝑖 | PLs in a n LEIC  𝒢 𝑖  , where the SN  𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 ∈ 𝒱 𝑖  has resource 

capacity  𝐶 (𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 ) (i.e., computing resources, memory resources 

and storage resources) , and the PLs  𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘  and  𝑒 0,𝒦  have 

transmission bandwidth capacity, denoted as  𝐶 (𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 ) and 

𝐶 (𝑒 0,𝒦 ), respectively (1 ≤ 𝑗  ≤ |𝒱 𝑖 |, 1 ≤ 𝑘  ≤ |ℰ𝑖 |). Then, let 

𝑃 (𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 ), 𝑃 (𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 ) and  𝑃 (𝑒 0,𝒦 ) be the u nit resource costs for  𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 ,

𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘  and  𝑒 0,𝒦  , respectively. Furthermore,  𝑎 𝑖 ,𝑗  denotes the 

availability of  𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗  . 𝑑 𝑖 ,𝑘  and  𝑑 0,𝒦  denote the delay of  𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘  and 

𝑒 0,𝒦 , respectively . Note that  𝑖 , 𝑗  and  𝑘  are the L EIC index, SN 

index and PL index, respectively .

TABLE I 

COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING STUDIES DISCUSSED IN SECTION II                                                                                                                                               

> Reference
> Physical
> Environment DRL Algorithm
> Approach
> Performance Metrics Optimization Objective
> Multiple
> Domains
> Parallel
> VNF
> Multiple
> Agents
> Topology
> Feature
> Temporal
> Feature
> [12] ×××××Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs
> [13] ×××××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs, utilization,
> service interruption
> [14] ×××××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost,
> Reliability
> Minimize the total costs, ensuring
> reliability and delay constraint
> [15] ×××××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs and delay
> [16] ×××××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Optimize total costs and the
> acceptance ratio
> [17] ×××××Security level, Cost Optimize security, the total costs,
> request throughput
> [18], [20] ×××√×Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs
> [19] ×××√√Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Optimize total costs and the
> acceptance ratio
> [21] ×××××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Maximize the acceptance ratio
> [22] ×××√×Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs
> [23] ××√××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Maximize system utility
> [24] √×√××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize costs and delay
> [25] ××√×√Delay, Bandwidth Minimize the total delay
> [26] √×√××Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs, delay and
> energy consumption
> [27] ××√×√Delay, Cost Minimize the total costs
> [28] ××√√×Delay, Bandwidth, Cost Minimize the total costs and
> acceptance ratio
> [29] ××√√×Delay, Bandwidth Minimize the total delay and
> resource utilization
> This Paper √√√√√Bandwidth, Delay, Cost,
> Availability
> Optimize the total costs, delay and
> availability

1

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

Artificial Intelligence Service Chain (AISC). An AISC 

consists of a series of VNFs, which are orchestrated in a given 

order. We set  𝒢 𝑓  

> Χ

= {𝒱 𝑓 

> Χ

, ℰ𝑓 

> Χ

} to define the f-th AISC, where  𝒱 𝑓 

> Χ

denotes the set of VNFs and  ℰ𝑓  

> Χ

denotes the set of virtual links 

(VLs). The VNF  𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

∈ 𝒱 𝑓  

> Χ

has the resource requirement 

𝐶 Χ(𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

) and availability  𝑎 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

. Two successive VNFs,  𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

and 

𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛 ′ 

> Χ

are connected by a VL ( 1 ≤ 𝑛 , 𝑛 ′ ≤ |𝒱 𝑓 

> Χ

| and  𝑛  ≠ 𝑛 ′). 

Similarly, let  𝐶 Χ(𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ

) be the bandwidth requirement of a VL 

𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ

∈ ℰ𝑓  

> Χ

(1 ≤ 𝑚 ≤ |ℰ𝑓 

> Χ

|). We use  𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑖 ,𝑗  

> in

and  𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑖 ′,𝑗 ′ 

> out

to denote 

the access SN and destination SN of an AISC , respectively, 

wh ich are specified by the AISC itself rather than determined 

by the provisioning approach. The purpose of setting AISC 

access and destination SNs is to allow users requiring cross -

domain services to decide where to upload data and where to 

receive results. The provisioning approach is responsible for 

deploying AISC within the MDEIC under the given conditions 

of the specified access and destination SN s. In addition,  𝑑 𝒢 𝑓 

> Χ

denotes the maximum allowable li nk delay of an AISC and 

𝑎 𝒢 𝑓  

> Χ

denotes the minimum allowable availability of an AISC .

Note that  𝑓 , 𝑚 , and  𝑛  are the AISC index, VL index and VNF 

index, respectively. 

Remark . By m odeling an AISC as a directed graph , we can 

capture the behaviors of both se quential VNFs and parallel 

VNFs, which improv es the generality of the approach .

B. Computation Model 

To formulate delay, availability, cost and resource 

consumption, we use  𝜆  as a binary variable . 𝜆 𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛   

> Χ,𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗

is a 

boolean value where if  𝜆 𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛   

> Χ,𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗

= 1 then VNF  𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

is deployed 

in server node  𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 . 𝜆 𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚   

> Χ,𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘

is another boolean variable where 

if  𝜆 𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚   

> Χ,𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘

= 1 then virtual link  𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ

is deployed in physical 

link  𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 .

Fig. 2. The provisioning illustration of an AISC with two 

parallel paths 

Resource Consumption. AISC provisioning in MDEIC 

consumes the resources of SNs and PLs. The resource 

consumption of each SN and PL can be calculated as follows, 

Con s𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 = ∑ ∑ 𝐶 Χ(𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

) ∙ 𝜆 𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ,𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗
> |𝒱 𝑓
> Χ|
> 𝑛 =1𝑓

(1)

Con s𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 = ∑ ∑ 𝐶 Χ(𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ

) ∙ 𝜆 𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ,𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘
> |ℰ𝑓
> Χ|+1
> 𝑚 =0𝑓

(2)

Con s𝑒 0,𝓀 = ∑ ∑ 𝐶 Χ(𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ

) ∙ 𝜆 𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑚  

> Χ,𝑒 0,𝒦
> |ℰ𝑓
> Χ|+1
> 𝑚 =0𝑓

(3)

Availability . AISC availability refers to the probability that 

the AISC can operate without failure in the MDEIC. There are 

two scenarios for calculating availability: with backup and 

without backup. The former means that the AISC includes 

backup units for VNFs, while the latter does not. The AISC 

availability without backup can be calculated as follows, 

Avai l𝑓 = ∏ ∏ ∏ 𝐼 (𝜆 𝑣 𝑓 ,𝑛   

> Χ,𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗

∙ 𝑎 𝑖 ,𝑗 ∙ 𝑎 𝑓 ,𝑛  

> Χ

)

> |𝒱 𝑓
> Χ|
> 𝑛 =1
> |𝒱 𝑖 |
> 𝑗 =1
> |𝐺 |
> 𝑖 =1

(4)

where  𝐼 (∙) is an indicator function that satisfies, 

𝐼 (𝑒 ) = {𝑒 , if 𝑒 ≠ 0

1, if 𝑒 = 0 (5)

The availabiilty of the AISC with backup is discussed in the 

Section.D of the supplementary materials. 

C. Problem Constraints 

In this section, we analyze the constraints when 

provisioning AISC s. The de tails are as follows. 

Delay Constraint . AISC provisioning requires that 

transmission delay does not exceed the maximum allowable 

link delay to ensure the normal operation of the AISC. The 

delay constraint can be formulated as follows, 

∀𝒢 𝑓 

> Χ

: Dela y𝑓  ≤ 𝑑 𝒢 𝑓  

> Χ

(6)

Resource Consumption Constraint. Since the resources of 

SN are limited, the provisioning must ensure that it has 

sufficient capacity to run VNFs. The resource consumption 

constraint of SN can be formulated as follows, 

∀𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗  ∈ 𝒱 𝑖 ∶ Con s𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗  ≤ 𝐶 (𝑣 𝑖 ,𝑗 ) (7)

Similarly, since PL bandwidth is limited, AISC provisioning 

must ensure that there is adequate available bandwidth. The 

resource consumption constraint for PL can be formulated as 

follows, 

∀𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘  ∈ ℰ𝑖 : Con s𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘  ≤ 𝐶 (𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑘 ) (8)

∀𝑒 0,𝒦  ∈ |ℰ̅ |: Con s𝑒 0,𝒦  ≤ 𝐶 (𝑒 0,𝒦 ) (9)

Availability Constraints. All components must be 

available, meaning that each SN hosting VNFs and each VNF 

in an AISC should be available. Therefore, the AISC 

availability constraint can be formulated as follows ,

∀𝒢 𝑓 

> Χ

: Avai l𝑓  ≥ 𝑎 𝒢 𝑓  

> Χ

(10 )

D. Problem Formulation 

In this paper, we adopt a MADRL algorithm to deploy 

AISCs in MDEICs while ensuring privacy in each LEIC. The 

agent is the dispatcher who allocates resources to AISC. We 

classify agents into two types: local agent (LA) and global 

agent (GA). First, the GA decides to deploy VNF s to an LEIC. 

Then, the LA managing the LEIC deploys the VNF to an SN 

and PLs according to VLs. Considering privacy, the agent 

does not provide detailed information about its LEIC to other 

agents. Therefore, it is necessary to model the AISC 

provisioning process as a partially observable stochastic game 

(POSG)  [37] .

The POSG framework can capture both (1) the partially 

observable information of each agent’s local environment and 

(2) the interactive and cooperative relationships among 2

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

multiple agents in jointly optimizing global objectives such as 

cost, delay, and availability. By modeling AISC provisioning 

as a POSG, the proposed framework enables the agents to 

learn coordinated provisioning strategies that balance local 

optimization and global objectives in multi -domain 

environments. The following introduces how to formulate the 

AISC provisioning problem as a POSG, but the detailed 

design of POSG will be presented in Section IV -B and Section 

B in the supplementary materials .

In POSG , AISC provisioning starts at an initial state  𝑠 0 ∈ 𝑆 .

At each time  𝑡 , the MDEIC is in state  𝑠 𝑡 ∈ 𝑆  with the previous 

joint provisioning action  𝑎 𝑡 −1 ∈ 𝐴  (if  𝑡 = 0 , set  𝑎 𝑡 −1 = ∅ ). 

The total number of agents is  |𝒫 |.The GA  𝑝 𝑔  needs to take an 

action to choose an LEIC where a VNF is deployed. Next, the 

chosen LA  𝑝 𝑙  needs to take an action to choose an SN for the 

final deployment of the VNF. Each agent p has a policy 

𝜋 𝑝 (𝑎 𝑝  

> 𝑡

|𝑠 𝑝  

> 𝑡

) to take these actions. Given the provisioning action 

𝑎 𝑝  

> 𝑡

, the environment transitions to the next state  𝑠 𝑡 +1 ∈ 𝑆  .

Each agent participating in the provisioning receives a reward 

based on the reward function. These steps are repeated until 

completing a maximum number of T time steps. As illustrated 

in Fig. 2, SN1 –SN3 belong to LEIC 1, and SN4 –SN6 belong 

to LEIC 2. When VNF  𝑖  is to be deployed, the system state is 

denoted as  𝑠 t. The GA first decides to deploy VNF  𝑖  in LEIC 

1. After receiving this instruction, the LA responsible for 

LEIC 1 determines to place VNF  𝑖  on SN1. As a result, the 

MDEIC state changes from  𝑠 t to  𝑠 t+1 based on the actions of 

GA and LA. Then, the GA continues to select the placement 

of VNF  𝑖 + 1, and this process continues iteratively until the 

entire AISC is deployed. 

Fig. 3. The framework of GT -MAAISCP 

IV. GRAPH -AND -TIME -BASED MULTI -AGENT AISC 

PROVISIONING APPROACH 

In this section, we present an AISC provisioning approach 

using MA DRL from three aspects: an explanation of the 

POSG model, a description of the graph -time d ueling network 

(GTDN) architecture , and an elaboration on the learning 

process of this approach. 

A. Overview 

We propose a graph -and -time -based multi -agent AISC 

provisioning approach (GT -MAAISCP), which can provision 

sequential AISCs and parallel AISCs in MDEIC. Fig. 3

illustrates the framework of GT -MAAISCP, where four 

components collaborate to perform AISC provisioning. 

The MDEIC component is a large physical network 

composed of several LEICs. This component sends the states 

of the LEICs managed by the respective LAs to the local 

orchestrator and sends the states of the MDEIC to the global 

orchestrator. 

The AISCs component is responsible for receiving various 

AISC requests, including sequential AISCs and parallel AISCs. 

This component send s the state of the VNF being deployed 

and the state of the AISC where the VNF is located to the 

global orchestrator. 

The global orchestrator component includes the GA, which 

is responsible for assigning tasks to the local orchestrator, and 

the provisioning recorder, which tracks the actions of all 

agents. The GA takes an action based on the MDEIC state, 

VNF state and AISC state to determine on which LEIC the 

VNF should be deployed. It then sends the AISC state and 

VNF state to the LA managing the selected LEIC. 

The local orchestrator component consists of many LAs. 

The LA takes an action based on the state of the LEIC it 

manages, the AISC state and VNF state received from the GA, 

to determine on which SN the VNF should be deployed. The 

provisioning recorder in the global orchestrator records the 

deployment results at each step. It calculates the rewards 

received by the GA and LA based on these results and sends 

them accordingly. 

In the proposed approach, GA oversees multiple LAs in 

MDEIC , which is consistent with ETSI NFV architectural 

framework. That is, the GA corresponds to the NFVO in the 

ETSI NFV architectural framework, which serves as an 

orchestration platform responsible for coordinating VNFs, 

managing their life cycles, and handling multi -domain 

operations across heterogeneous infrastructures. Each LA 

corresponds to a VIM in the ETSI NFV architectural 

framework , which manages VNFs within its own LEIC 

[36] [38] .3

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

In each agent, we propose a GTDN architecture that 

integrates the graph feature extractor (GFE), the temporal 

feature extractor (TFE) and the policy generator. Graph 

features refer to the structured representations that describe the 

relationships among nodes and edges in a graph -structured 

network, rather than treating them as isolated entities. In the 

AISC provisioning, the graph features extractor capture both 

the node attributes (e.g., resource capacity, availability, cost) 

and the edge attributes (e.g., bandwidth, delay) as well as their 

topological relationships. Temporal features refer to the 

sequential dependencies and temporal correlations among 

VNFs in an AISC. These features describe how the state 

evolves over time and how previous deployment decisions 

influence subsequent decisions. In the AISC provisioning, the 

temporal features extractor capture information such as the 

deployment order of VNFs, dynamic changes in performance 

(e.g., delay accumulation) and historical placement 

relationships. For example, when deploying VNF  𝑖 + 2, the 

delay constraint may depend not only on the immediately 

preceding VNF  𝑖 + 1 but also on the earlier VNF  𝑖 , especially 

when parallel branches are involved. Residual gated graph 

convolutional network (RGGC) is used in the GFE to extract 

graph features from physical networks and AISCs. Gated 

recurrent units (GRU) are used in the TFE to extract temporal 

features of AISCs and VNFs in an AISC. We utilize a dueling 

network as a policy generator, which separates the policy 

generation network into a value network and an advantage 

network. 

Remark 1. Since the MDEIC, LEICs and AISCs are 

represented by different graphs, RGGC can effectively capture 

node attributes and edge attributes. Moreover, AISCs arrive 

sequentially, and the VNFs in each AISC are deployed in 

order, making GRU suitable for extracting temporal features 

of AISCs and their VNFs. Its memory capability further 

enhances its ability to handle sequential input effectively. The 

dueling network enables the MADRL algorithm to reduce 

redundant information in the learning process, improve 

learning efficiency and enhance policy stability. 

Remark 2. AISC provisioning is performed sequentially at the 

granularity of VNFs. To satisfy service delay constraints, 

adjacent VNFs should ideally be placed on nearby SNs. 

Therefore, during the sequential VNF deployment, the agent 

must remember the characteristics and placement of 

previously deployed VNFs to make optimal decisions for 

subsequent ones. Moreover, for an AISC containing parallel 

VNFs, the agent must capture longer -term dependencies 

between non -adjacent VNFs. For instance, as shown in Fig. 2, 

when the deployment order is VNF  𝑖 , VNF  𝑖 + 1 and VNF  𝑖 +

2 , the delay of VNF  𝑖 + 2 is primarily influenced by the 

placement of VNF  𝑖  rather than VNF  𝑖 + 1 . Therefore, 

employing GRU as the temporal feature extractor is essential 

for learning these temporal dependencies and improving delay 

performance. 

Remark 3. The 'divide and conquer' strategy of MADRL 

algorithm enables LEIC providers to protect network privacy 

and enhance provisioning capabilities in large -scale MDEIC 

environments. LAs can be trained independently, and LEIC 

provider s are not required to share internal information. The 

GA receives only aggregated data from each LEIC , which 

means that provider s only need to provide high -level 

summaries of their networks without disclosing detailed 

internal information. The GA is trained through the jointly 

learned policies submitted by all participating LAs, without 

relying on privileged access to any specific domain . Moreover, 

the network capacity can be expanded by increasing the 

number of LAs without affecting the existing LAs. 

Fig. 4. The state of the agents 

B. State, Action and Reward Representation 

Action . At each decision step, the GA selects one LEIC from 

the LEIC set to deploy the current VNF. Subsequently, the 

corresponding LA selects a specific SN within that LEIC to 

host the VNF. The action s of the GA and LA are shown as 

follows,         

> 𝐴 global ∈[1,|𝐺 |](11 )
> 𝐴 local ,𝑖 ∈[1,|𝒱 𝑖 |](12 )

The size of the action space of GA |𝐴 global | corresponds to the 

number of LEICs , while the size of the action space of the i-th 

LA |𝐴 local ,𝑖 | is equal to the number of SNs within its managed 

LEIC. 

C. Graph -Time Dueling Network Architecture 

The graph -time dueling network (GTDN) architecture is 

illustrated in Fig. 5 and consists of four components: i) Physical 

network state feature extraction; ii ) AISC state feature extraction; 

iii ) VNF state feature extraction; iv ) Policy generat or . Each 

component is explained in more detail as follows. 

Policy generat or . In our approach, we use dueling network 

architectures for DQN to generate the policy . For an agent 

following policy  𝜋 , the values of action  𝑎  and state  𝑠  are defined 

as follows ,               

> 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠 ,𝑎 )=𝔼 𝜋 [𝑅 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 =𝑠 ,𝑎 𝑡 =𝑎 ](13 )
> 𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠 )=𝔼 𝑎 ~𝜋 (𝑠 )[𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠 ,𝑎 )](14 )

The value function  𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠 ) quantifies the expected value of 

being in a given state  𝑠 , while  𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ) assesses the expected 

value of taking a specific action in state  𝑠 . To approximate the 

state -action value function  𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ) , we utilize a deep Q -

network:  𝑄 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ; 𝜃 ) with parameter  𝜃 . The loss function of the 

network at th e 𝒾 -th iteration is defined as follows ,                 

> 𝐿 𝒾 (𝜃 𝒾 )=𝔼 𝑠 ,𝑎 ,𝑟 ,𝑠 ′~𝒰 (𝒟 )[(𝑦 𝒾
> 𝐷𝑄𝑁 −𝑄 (𝑠 ,𝑎 ;𝜃 𝒾 ))2
> ](15 )
> 𝑦 𝒾
> 𝐷𝑄𝑁 =𝑟 +𝛾 max
> a′𝑄 (𝑠 ′,𝑎 ′;𝜃 −)(16 )

4

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

where  𝜃 − represents the parameters of the fixed target 

network. During training, the agent maintains a dataset  𝒟 𝑡 =

{𝐸 1, ⋯ , 𝐸 𝑡 } , where each experience  𝐸 𝑡 = (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1) is 

collected from multiple episodes. 

The dueling network architecture independently estimates 

the state -value function  𝑉 (𝑠 ) and the advantage function 

𝐴 (𝑠 , 𝑎 ) without additional supervision. The advantage 

function is defined as follows :          

> 𝐴 𝜋 (𝑠 ,𝑎 )=𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠 ,𝑎 )−𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠 )(17 )

To aggregate these functions, we use the following module:                     

> 𝑄 (𝑠 ,𝑎 ;𝜃 ,𝛼 ,𝛽 )=𝑉 (𝑠 ;𝜃 ,𝛽 )+
> (𝐴 (𝑠 ,𝑎 ′;𝜃 ,𝛼 )−1
> |𝒜 |∑𝐴 (𝑠 ,𝑎 ′;𝜃 ,𝛼 )
> 𝑎 ′
> )(18 )

where  𝛼  and  𝛽  are the parameters of two separate outputs of 

neural networks. The formula also stabilizes the optimization 

by requiring the advantages at a rate consistent with the mean 

value. The output of the state -action value is a vector, where 

each element represents a specific SN managed by an LA or 

an LEIC managed by the GA. 

D. Multi -agent Reinforcement Learning Approach 

In our approach, we use independent learning to train agents. 

Each LA  𝑝 𝑙  learns its own policy  𝜋 𝑝 𝑙  based solely on its own 

experiences, without considering other agents. The effects of 

other agents ’ actions are treated as part of the environment 

dynamics. In our state design, each LA ’s state is not affected 

by others, thus avoid ing the primary drawback of independent 

learning , namely, non -stationarity caused by concurrent 

learning among multiple agents . Additionally, independent 

learning often produce s results comparable to state -of -the -art 

MA DRL algorithms, as shown in  [39] .

The the AISC provisioning method as shown in Alg. 2,

respectively. If an agent selects an action that violates the 

defined constraints, a penalty reward is assigned. Otherwise, 

when the selected action satisfies the constraints, the agent 

continues the decision -making process until the entire AISC is 

successfully deployed. To calculate the delayed reward after 

AISC provisioning is complete, we temporarily store the 

experience tuple  (𝑠 , 𝑎 , 0, 𝑠 ′) from each VNF deployment in a 

buffer and use a reward value of 0 to each experience . Once 

the AISC provisioning is complete, we update this buffer with 

the actual reward values and integrate th ese experiences into 

the agent’s dataset. If early VNFs are placed improperly and 

cause subsequent deployment failures, the corresponding 

experiences receive lower or negative rewards, thereby 

guiding the agent to refine its strategy in future episodes. 

Fig. 5. The graph -time d ueling network architecture 

In addition, the GT -MAAISCP framework inherently 

addresses the problem of deploying neighboring VNFs on 

distant service nodes. As described in Alg . 1, when a new 

AISC arrives, the GA first decides which LA will handle the 

deployment of the first VNF. If the GA allocates two 

neighboring VNFs to distant LAs, it will cause excessive 

inter -node delay, eventually leading to deployment failure or 

significantly reduction in reward, as defined in Eq. ( 29 ) and 

Al g. 2. Through reinforcement learning, the GA gradually 

learns that this allocation is not optimal, so it adjusts its 

strategy to deploy neighboring VNFs closer together to 

minimize latency. The same principle applies to the LAs. That 

is, if the GA assigns multiple VNFs to the same LA 

consecutively, the LA can also learn from the reward 

mechanism to place neighboring VNFs on neighboring SNs to 

minimize intra -domain delay. In Alg. 2, we use Dijkstra 

algorithm to identify the shortest path between SN s decided by 

two successive actions. 

If the VNF or VL placement satisfies the constraints, it is 

successfully allocated to an SN or a PL . If a VNF fails to 

deploy, all previously allocated physical resources of the 

corresponding AISC are released, and the agent receives a 

penalty. This penalty feedback encourages the agent to avoid 

infeasible deployment decisions and gradually learn strategies 

that improve the success rate of AISC provisioning. 

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS 

This section presents simulation results to verify the 

performance of the proposed GT -MAAISCP approach. The 

experiments are implemented by using Pytorch  [40]  and 

Network X, conducted on a computer with an AMD Ryzen 9 

7945HX CPU, an RTX 4060 GPU and 64 GB RAM. 

A. Performance Evaluation 

Ablation Experiment: We adopt representative approaches 

from existing related studies to conduct the ablation 

experiments, rather than directly removing individual modules 

from our framework. In the first comparison experiment 

(labeled as Approach 1) , we implement the approach proposed 

by Wang et al . [22] , which replaces RGGCs in GFE with 

GCN, while preserving the TFE configuration. In the second 

comparison experiment (labeled as Approach 2) , we 

implement the approach proposed by Xu et al . [25] , which 

replaces both GFE and TFE with MLP layers. In the third 

comparison experiment (labeled as Approach 3) , we adopt the 

method of Wang et al .[32] , in which the TFE module is 

removed, and GCN is used as GFE. These three benchmark 

approaches are derived from existing published studies, 

allowing us to systematically evaluate the contribution of each 

architectural component (GFE and TFE) within our 

framework under consistent experimental conditions. 

Fig. 6 (a) illustrates the accumulated reward obtained by 

different methods as the number of training episodes increases. 

After convergence, the proposed approach achieves the 

highest reward value (exceeding 400), while the convergence 

range of baseline methods was approximately 200 to 400. In 

addition, Fig. 6 (b) presents the variation of the loss values 

with the number of training updates. Compared with Approach 

2 ( using MLP ), the propose d approach exhibits lower loss 

fluctuations and more stable convergence. Furthermore, 

compared with Approach 3 (without the TFE module) and 

Approach 1 (without RGGC), the proposed approach achieves 5

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

lower loss values, demonstrating the effectiveness of 

integrating both graph -based and temporal feature extraction 

modules. 

Fig. 7 illustrates the performance of different approaches in 

different metrics . All GFE -based approaches (Approach 1, 3 

and GTDN) outperform the non -GFE approach (Approach 2) 

on most metrics. Although MLP can handle unstructured data 

effectively, it cannot capture node relationships in graph -

structured data. However, in terms of AISC availability, 

Approach 1 is about 1% worse than Approach 2. Combining 

GCN with GRU does not fully exploit the advantages of both 

components, which results in inadequate temporal dependency 

modeling and inefficient information propagation. In contrast, 

our approach demonstrates the compatibility of combining 

RGGC with GRU, achieving approximately 1.6% higher 

AISC availability than the non -TFE approach (Approach 3). 

Fig. 6. The training performance of different approaches 

We also find that the number of PLs traversed by AISC is 

positively correlated with the PL bandwidth costs. These 

results indicate that our agent can reduce bandwidth costs by 

optimizing the physical position of VNFs. We can conclude 

that incorporating link attributes into our approach enhances 

its applicability for the AISC provisioning problem compared 

to GCN without using link attributes. For example, in our 

approach, an AISC initially spans about 10 -12 PLs, but it 

converges to 2-4 PLs after training, which means that 

transmission delay is reduced and some VNFs are deployed in 

the same SN to reduce bandwidth costs . Overall , the GTDN 

architectur e demonstrates more effective performance than 

other comparison approaches. 

Note that w hen conducting the ablation experiments, we 

select the DQN with a dueling network as the policy generator, 

merely as an example to validate the effectiveness of the 

proposed framework  [41] . Since the RL component in our 

framework is implemented in a modular manner, which allows 

various advanced RL algorithms (e.g., DQN, A3C, PPO) to be 

seamlessly integrated into the same architecture, we can also 

select other algorithms for experiments. Regardless of which 

RL algorithm is adopted, the experimental results will lead to 

the same conclusion that the proposed framework effectively 

enhances AISC provisioning performance through the 

integration of graph -based and temporal feature extraction. 

Fig. 7. The performance of different approaches in different 

metrics 

VII. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we investigate the AISC provisioning problem 

in MDEIC, considering both the MDEIC environmental 

characteristics and the time -dependence of AISC. First, we 

establish the network model and computation model of 

MD EIC, considering multiple factors such as bandwidth, 

delay, costs and availability. Then, based on POSG model, we 

transform the AISC provisioning problem into a multi -

objective optimization problem under multiple constraints. To 

solve this problem, we propose the GT-MAAISC P approach 

to achieve collaborative optimization of AISC provisioning 

cost, delay and availability. The experimental results 

demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach for 

provisioning AISCs in MDEIC. 

Nevertheless, several challenges remain, including 

scalability in large -scale MDEIC environments, the design of 

reliable backup strategies, and the adaptability of the 

framework to highly dynamic network conditions. In future 

work, we will further investigate robust backup mechanisms to 

enhance adaptability under highly dynamic and non -stationary 

conditions, and validate it in real -world MDEIC environments .6

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Hemmati, P. Raoufi, and A. M. Rahmani, “Edge artificial intelligence 

for big data: a systematic review,” Neural Comput & Applic , vol. 36, no. 

19, pp. 11461 –11494, 2024. 

[2]  X. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Ning, S. Guo, and F. R. Yu, “A Survey 

on Trustworthy Edge Intelligence: From Security and Reliability To 

Transparency and Sustainability,” IEEE Communications Surveys & 

Tutorials , vol.27, no. 3, pp. 1 729 –1757 , 202 5.

[3]  H. Cao, M. Alrashoud, T. Mohamed, and L. Yang, “An Intelligent 

Softwarized Resource Management and Allocation Framework for 

Services With Personalized Intentions in 6G -Enabled IoT Networks,” 

IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 8261 –8274, 2026. 

[4]  Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang, “Edge 

Intelligence: Paving the Last Mile of Artificial Intelligence With Edge 

Computing,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1738 –1762, 

2019 .

[5]  Google, “Google AI Edge,” [Online] . Available: 

https://ai.google.dev/edge , 2025. 

[6]  E. Mercado, R. Shira, and C. Samynathan, “Unlocking the Power of 

Edge Intelligence with AWS ,” [Online]. Available: 

https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/iot/unlocking -real -time -intelligence -at -

the -edge -with -awss -connected -edge -intelligence/ , 2024. 

[7]  V. Bahl, M. Chiang, U. Ramachandran, A. Samuel, L. Zhong, and K. 

Jameson, “Intelligent Edge,” [Online]. Available: 

https://www.microsoft.com/en -us/research/video/intelligent -edge/ ,

2018. 

[8]  M. Li, J. Gao, C. Zhou, X. S. Shen, and W. Zhuang, “Slicing -Based 

Artificial Intelligence Service Provisioning on the Network Edge: 

Balancing AI Service Performance and Resource Consumption of Data 

Management,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 

16 –26, 2021. 

[9]  W. Liu, N. Hua, X. Zheng, and B. Zhou, “Intelligent inter -domain 

connection provisioning for multi -domain multi -vendor optical 

networks,” Journal of Optical Communications and Networking , vol. 7, 

no. 3, pp. 176 –192, 2015. 

[10]  X. -Q. Xi and Y. Zhang, “A Construction Mechanism of Routing Service 

Chain Based on the Service Customization,” in 2015 International 

Conference on Computer Science and Applications (CSA), 2015, pp. 

318 –322. 

[11]  Q. He et al. , “A Game -Theoretical Approach for Mitigating Edge DDoS 

Attack,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , vol. 

19, no. 4, pp. 2333 –2348, 2022. 

[12]  Q. Wang, S. Zou, Y. Sun, M. Liwang, X. Wang, and W. Ni, “Toward 

Intelligent and Adaptive Task Scheduling for 6G: An Intent -Driven 

Framework,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and 

Networking , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1975 –1988, 2024. 

[13]  X. Yu et al. , “Priority -Aware Deployment of Autoscaling Service 

Function Chains Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE 

Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 10, 

no. 3, pp. 1050 –1062, 2024. 

[14]  J. Liu, W. Lu, F. Zhou, P. Lu, and Z. Zhu, “On Dynamic Service 

Function Chain Deployment and Readjustment,” IEEE Trans. Netw. 

Serv. Manage. , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 543 –553, 2017. 

[15]  R. Behravesh, D. Harutyunyan, E. Coronado, and R. Riggio, “Time -

Sensitive Mobile User Association and SFC Placement in MEC -Enabled 

5G Networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage. , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 

3006 –3020, 2021. 

[16]  V. R. Chintapalli, B. R. Killi, R. Partani, B. R. Tamma, and C. S. R. 

Murthy, “Energy - and Reliability -Aware Provisioning of Parallelized 

Service Function Chains With Delay Guarantees,” IEEE Trans. on 

Green Commun. Netw. , vol.8, no. 1, pp. 205 –223 , 2023. 

[17]  M. Asgarian, K. Jamshidi, and A. Bohlooli, “An Efficient 

Approximation Algorithm for Service Function Chaining Placement in 

Edge –Cloud Computing Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet 

Things J. , vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12815 –12822, 2024. 

[18]  S. R. Zahedi and S. Jamali, “A hybrid model for VNF deployment 

capable of responding to online requests at network edge,” Computer 

Networks , vol. 247, p. 110385, Jun. 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110385. 

[19]  Y. Qiu, J. Liang, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Chen, “Online Security -Aware 

and Reliability -Guaranteed AI Service Chains Provisioning in Edge 

Intelligence Cloud,” IEEE Trans. on Mobile Comput. , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 

5933 –5948 , 2024. 

[20]  X. Li, H. Zhou, L. Ma, J. Xin, and S. Huang, “Cost and Latency 

Customized SFC Deployment in Hybrid VNF and PNF Environment,” 

IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , vol. 21, no. 4, 

pp. 4312 –4331, 2024. 

[21]  J. Pei, P. Hong, M. Pan, J. Liu, and J. Zhou, “Optimal VNF Placement 

via Deep Reinforcement Learning in SDN/NFV -Enabled Networks,” 

IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun. , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 263 –278, Feb. 2020. 

[22]  T. Wang et al. , “DRL -SFCP: Adaptive Service Function Chains 

Placement with Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE 

International Conference on Communications , 2021, pp. 1 –6. 

[23]  H. Liu, S. Ding, S. Wang, G. Zhao, and C. Wang, “Multi -objective 

Optimization Service Function Chain Placement Algorithm Based on 

Reinforcement Learning,” J Netw Syst Manage , vol. 30, no. 4, p. 58, 

2022. 

[24]  L. Yang, J. Jia, H. Lin, and J. Cao, “Reliable Dynamic Service Chain 

Scheduling in 5G Networks,” IEEE Trans. on Mobile Comput. , vol. 22, 

no. 8, pp. 4898 –4911, 2023. 

[25]  J. Xu, X. Cao, Q. Duan, and S. Li, “Service Function Chain Deployment 

Using Deep Q Learning and Tidal Mechanism,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,

vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 5401 –5416, 2024. 

[26]  H. A. Shah and L. Zhao, “Multiagent Deep -Reinforcement -Learning -

Based Virtual Resource Allocation Through Network Function 

Virtualization in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 8, no. 

5, pp. 3410 –3421, 2021. 

[27]  N. Toumi, M. Bagaa, and A. Ksentini, “Hierarchical Multi -Agent Deep 

Reinforcement Learning for SFC Placement on Multiple Domains,” in 

2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN) , 2021, 

pp. 299 –304. 

[28]  A. Pentelas, D. De Vleeschauwer, C. -Y. Chang, K. De Schepper, and P. 

Papadimitriou, “Deep Multi -Agent Reinforcement Learning With 

Minimal Cross -Agent Communication for SFC Partitioning,” IEEE 

Access , vol. 11, pp. 40384 –40398, 2023. 

[29]  X. Wang, H. Xing, F. Song, S. Luo, P. Dai, and B. Zhao, “On Jointly 

Optimizing Partial Offloading and SFC Mapping: A Cooperative Dual -

Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel 

Distrib. Syst. , vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 2479 –2497, 2023. 

[30]  K. Doan, M. Avgeris, A. Leivadeas, I. Lambadaris, and W. Shin, 

“Service Function Chaining in LEO Satellite Networks via Multi -Agent 

Reinforcement Learning,” in GLOBECOM 2023 - 2023 IEEE Global 

Communications Conference , 2023, pp. 7145 –7150. 

[31]  D. Xiao, J. A. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Qu, W. Ni, and R. P. Liu, “A Two -

Stage GCN -Based Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for SFC 

Embedding in Multi -Datacenter Networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. 

Manage. , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4297 –4312, 2023. 

[32]  S. Wang, H. Cao, L. Yang, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, and M. Alrashoud, 

“GCN -Based Multi -Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic 

Service Function Chain Deployment in IoT,” IEEE Trans. Consumer 

Electron. , vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 6105 –6118 , 2024. 

[33]  P. Wei et al., “Reinforcement Learning -Empowered Mobile Edge 

Computing for 6G Edge Intelligence,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 65156 –

65192, 2022. 

[34]  J. Hao et al., “Exploration in Deep Reinforcement Learning: From 

Single -Agent to Multiagent Domain,” IEEE Transactions on Neural 

Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 8762 –8782, 2024. 

[35]  Z. Li, V. Chang, J. Ge, L. Pan, H. Hu, and B. Huang, “Energy -aware 

task offloading with deadline constraint in mobile edge computing,” 

EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking , vol. 

2021, no. 1, p. 56, 2021. 

[36]  H. Xia, W. Hao, K. Katsalis, Y. Kuno, D. Lee, J. Leung, M. Ju, F. Naim, 

J. Pieczerak, S. Schaller, T. Takahashi, I. Vancsa, and L. Willis, 

“Management and orchestration of the telco cloud: The role of nfv -mano 

and its added value, ” European Telecommunications Standards Institute 

(ETSI), ETSI White Paper No. 67, May 2025, 1st ed. 

[37]  E. A. Hansen, D. S. Bernstein, and S. Zilberstein, “Dynamic 

programming for partially observable stochastic games,” in Proceedings 

of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 4, 2004, pp. 709 –

715. 

[38]  W. Hao, M. Ju, A. Kumar, Y. Kuno, D. Lee, F. Naim, J. Triay, and H. 

Xia, “NFV evolution: Towards the Telco Cloud, ” European 

Telecommunications Strandards Institute (ETSI), Tech. Rep. No. 65, 

March 2025, 1st ed. 7

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

[39]  G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, and S. Albrecht, “Agent Modelling under 

Partial Observability for Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34 , pp. 19210 –19222 ,

2021 .

[40]  A. Paszk e, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. 

Killen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. 

Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthym, B. Steiner, L. 

Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala ., “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High -

Performance Deep Learning Library,” in Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019. 

[41]  M. Hessel J. Modayil, H. van Hasselt, T. Schaul, G. Ostrovski, W. 

Dabney, D. Horgan, B. Piot, M. G. Azar, and D. Silver, “Rainbow: 

Combining Improvements in Deep Reinforcement Learning,” 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 32, 

no. 1, 2018, pp. 3215 -3222 .

[42]  J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “MapReduce: simplified data processing on 

large clusters,” Commun. ACM , vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 107 –113, Jan. 2008 .

[43]  S. Maheshwari, D. Raychaudhuri, I. Seskar, and F. Bronzino, 

“Scalability and Performance Evaluation of Edge Cloud Systems for 

Latency Constrained Applications,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM Symposium on 

Edge Computing (SEC) , 2018, pp. 286 –299 .

[44]  B. Sonkoly , D. Haja, B. N émeth . M. Szalay, J. Czentye, R. Szab ó, R. 

Ullah, B. -S. Kim, and L. Toka , “Scalable edge cloud platforms for IoT 

services,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications , vol. 170, p. 

102785, 2020. 

Hanzhi Chang received his B.S. degree from the 

Department of Cyber Science and Engineering, 

University of International Relations, Beijing, China, in 

2023. He is currently pursuing for his M.S. degree in the 

Department of Cyber Science and Engineering, 

University of International Relations, Beijing, China. His 

research interests include network function virtualization, 

network resource orchestration and management, and 

reinforcement learning algorithms. 

Jing Bai received the PhD degree in cyberspace security 

from Beijing Jiaotong University in 2023. She is currently 

a Lecturer at School of Cyber Science and Engineering, 

University of International Relations. Her interests 

include software trustworthiness analysis and cloud 

security. 

Xin Tang received the PhD degree in computer science 

from Beijing University of Posts and 

Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2015. He worked 

as a post -doctoral fellow in Department of Electronic 

Engineering at Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, from 

2015 to 2017. He is currently an associate professor with 

the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, University 

of International Relations, Beijing, China. His current 

research interests are focused on secure cloud computing 

and reversible data hiding. 

Xiaomei Liu received the Master's degree in computer 

technology from University of Chinese Academy of 

Sciences in 2018. She is currently an Engineer at School 

of Cyber Science and Engineering, University of 

International Relations. Her interests include cloud -edge 

computing and network security. 

Yiming Chen is currently pursuing for his B.S. degree 

in the Department of Cyber Science and Engineering, 

University of International Relations, Beijing, China. 

His research interests include network function 

virtualization, network resource orchestration and 

management , and reinforcement learning algorithms.