Title: Reinforcement Learning-based Control via Y-wise Affine Neural Networks: Comparative Case Studies for Chemical Processes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.21211v1

Published Time: Thu, 21 May 2026 01:13:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Reinforcement Learning-based Control via Y-wise Affine Neural Networks: Comparative Case Studies for Chemical Processes 

Austin Braniff ∗ Yuhe Tian ∗∗ Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506 USA (e-mail: {austin.braniff, yuhe.tian }@ mail.wvu.edu). 

Abstract: In this work we present an efficient and practically implementable approach for the application of reinforcement learning (RL)-based control in chemical process systems. This is an area that has yet to widely adopt RL-based control largely due to inherent challenges in trusting RL algorithms and the time-consuming process of training reliable agents. To address these challenges, we leverage a class of RL algorithms termed Y-wise Affine Neural Network (YANN)-RL, which we have developed in our prior work (Braniff and Tian, 2025a). By strategically initializing actor and critic networks YANN-RL algorithms provide confident and interpretable starting points within control schemes. We apply this RL-based control approach to three different process engineering case studies publicly available on the PC-Gym library (Bloor et al., 2026): (i) a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR), (ii) a four-tank system, and (iii) a multistage extraction column. Our approach is compared to several popular RL algorithms (PPO, SAC, DDPG, and TD3) and is benchmarked against nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC). These case studies demonstrate that YANN-RL can greatly reduce the training time and data needed, can be deployed with confidence for chemical process systems, and can approach the performance of NMPC without the knowledge of a full nonlinear model. 

Keywords: Chemical Process Control, Reinforcement Learning, Learning-based Control, Machine Learning, Deep Neural Networks 1. INTRODUCTION Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained significant atten-tion in recent years, with early breakthroughs in game playing demonstrating the power of combining neural net-works with RL algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015). Although RL has been applied successfully across several fields such as robotics, autonomous decision-making, process design, etc., its relevance to the control of chemical process sys-tems has been distinctly lacking (Devarakonda et al., 2025). RL has been investigated for a few examples of pro-cess control applications including distillation, chemical reactors, and multi-tank systems (Spielberg et al., 2019; Faria et al., 2023; Dogru et al., 2021), where it has shown strong performance. Despite these successes, RL has not yet achieved prevalent adoption in chemical process control. The primary barri-ers are concerns over safety and interpretability, particu-larly in the early exploration phases (Dogru et al., 2024; Shin et al., 2019). During exploration, RL agents often test unproven or random actions to improve performance, which can lead to unsafe behavior. This is an unaccept-able risk in industrial settings (Nian et al., 2020). This inherent non-interpretability and random initializations of   

> 1©2026 the authors. This work has been accepted to IFAC for publication under a Creative Commons Licence CC-BY-NC-ND.

policies within well-established RL algorithms pose sev-eral challenges. Additionally, RL algorithms are known for being data-hungry and may require exceptionally long training times to achieve acceptable control for complex systems. These issues hinder the deployment of RL-based controllers in safety-critical process environments that demand reliability, safety, and clear operational insight (Faria et al., 2022). To address these challenges, significant efforts have been made in recent years to improve the trust and practi-cality of RL algorithms. One strategy is to pre-train an RL policy network using data generated by more trusted control methods, such as model predictive control (MPC). These strategies preserve a model-free RL framework, lin-ear MPC can be used, as linear system models are rela-tively easy to approximate through techniques like system identification (Hassanpour et al., 2025). Towards more al-gorithmic improvements on deploying RL with confidence, recent approaches have investigated the use of Lyapunov functions within an RL framework. Lyapunov functions, Lyapunov surrogates, or control Lyapunov barrier func-tions are used to guarantee certain mathematical prop-erties of the RL-based controller (Chang and Gao, 2021; Wang and Wu, 2024). Similarly, control invariant sets (CIS) can also be used to satisfy certain properties of the control actions if they are known a priori (Bo et al., 2023). 

> arXiv:2605.21211v1 [eess.SY] 20 May 2026

While these techniques do provide significantly more trust in RL, they rely on detailed system insight, accurate models, and can require significant computational power for systems with high degrees of nonlinearity. They also require an exploration phase during system modeling or RL agent training, which can pose significant safety risks in practical applications. This highlights the need for an RL-based control algorithm that enhances interpretability, confidence, and computational efficiency while eliminating unsafe exploration. To this end, we have developed Y-wise Affine Neural Network (YANN)-based RL in our prior work Braniff and Tian (2025a), however this work was limited to only one process control example and lacked convincing benchmarking against other RL algorithms. In this work, we present a series of comparative case studies that investigate the use of RL-based control on three nonlinear chemical process systems: a CSTR, a four-tank system, and a multistage extraction column. We show that YANN-RL is substantially more efficient than other common RL algorithms and can achieve superior perfor-mance with significantly fewer update steps. Additionally, this paper highlights how YANN-RL can be implemented with significantly more confidence and trust due to its initialization techniques rooted in optimal control theory. Furthermore, we show how these algorithms can approach the performance of nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) via comparison. The remaining sections of this work are organized as follows: Section 2 gives a brief introduction to actor-critic reinforcement learning. Section 3 covers the fundamentals of YANN-RL. Section 4 presents the comparative case studies on chemical process systems. Section 5 provides concluding remarks and discusses opportunities for future research. 2. ACTOR-CRITIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING This work focuses on a class of RL algorithms termed actor-critic algorithms, we will introduce the concepts of actor-critic RL and the nomenclature from a traditional control theoretic perspective. Typically, in RL there are three main components: (i) the environment, which exists in a state, xt, that takes an action, ut, and transitions to a new state st+1 , (ii) an agent that takes the current state of the environment and provides a control action by representing a control policy π(s), and (iii) a well-designed cost function, C(s, u ), which is representative of the desired system behavior (e.g., the cost is low when the system is performing desirably). RL algorithms iteratively update the actor to provide better control actions by minimizing the cost function. In actor-critic RL, the agent is instead termed an actor and maintains the functionality of being the control policy. A new component is added called the critic, which represents the state-action value function (or Q-function), Q(s, u ), of the environment. This is conceptualized in Fig. 1 below. The Q-function, given in Eq. 1, can be interpreted as an indicator of how desirable it is for the environment to exist in a particular state, x0, while taking a particular action, 

a0 and then follow a theoretically optimal control policy for all time after. The critic is updated iteratively to better approximate this function based on the Bellman recursive 

Fig. 1. Actor-critic reinforcement learning with nomencla-ture for this work. optimality principle, which is shown for the Q-function in Eq. 2. 

Q(x0, u 0) = C(x0, u 0) + 

> ∞

X

> t=t1

γtC(xt, u ∗ 

> t

) (1) 

Q∗(xt, u t) = C(xt, u t) + min 

> ut+1

γQ ∗(xt+1 , u t+1 ) (2) The actor is updated to minimize the Q-estimate given by the critic which in turn trains it to provide better control actions. If the actor is parameterized by a function with decision variables θπ and the critic is parameterized by a function with decision variables, θQ then their update steps can be expressed by Eq. 3 and Eq. 4. min 

> θπ

Q(xt, u t) (3) min 

> θQ

(Q(xt, u t) − (C(xt, u t) + Q(xt+1 , u t+1 )) 2 (4) 3. Y-WISE AFFINE NEURAL NETWORKS IN REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

3.1 Y-wise Affine Neural Networks 

Y-wise affine neural networks (YANNs) are a neural net-work architecture introduced in our earlier work (Braniff and Tian, 2025b). They can exactly represent piecewise-affine functions of arbitrary input and output dimensions, defined over any number of subdomains. Piecewise affine functions are the form of the explicit solutions to linear MPC or multi-parametric MPC (mp-MPC) problems. In this way, YANNs can encode the explicit control solu-tion produced by solving mp-MPC. When used this way, they act as NN-based controllers that retain mp-MPC’s guarantees of stability and recursive feasibility for linear systems. A formal proof of this behavior and a construction procedure for YANN’s weights and biases is provided in Braniff and Tian (2025b). The functionality of YANNs for a constrained regulation control problem is conceptualized by Eq. 5. 

Y AN N (xt) = argmin  

> uN−1

X

> t=0

 xTt Qwxt + uTt Ru t

 + xTN P x N

s.t. xt+1 = Ax t + Bu t, ∀t ∈ { 0, 1, 2, · · · , N − 1}

xt ∈ X , u t ∈ U , ∀t ∈ { 0, 1, 2, · · · , N − 1}

xN −1 ∈ X f (5) It is important to note that YANNs are an offline rep-resentation of the solution to this problem and do not require anything to be resolved online other than a neural network evaluation. YANNs offer a compelling tool for RL by enabling policy networks to be initialized with a control law that is theoretically reliable, at least with respect to a linear model. 3.2 YANN-based Actors 

The YANN-Actor (Fig. 2) follows the YANN framework to directly represent known optimal control laws. To create a YANN-initialized policy network, a linear MPC problem is first solved offline to obtain a piecewise-affine explicit controller, typically using a simplified linear model derived from process data or some other system identification technique. The YANN can then be constructed following the procedure in Braniff and Tian (2025b), with additional layers that are embedded into the structure of a YANN in a particular way such that it allows the YANN-Actor to be as expressive as any other neural network without sacrificing its initial control policy. In this way, the YANN-actor can be trained similarly to an actor network from any RL algorithm, but it is guaranteed to initially be functionally equivalent to a linear optimal control policy. 

Fig. 2. Conceptualization of YANN-Actor 

3.3 YANN-based Critics 

The YANN-Critic (Fig. 3 stems from a separate concept than the YANN since the critic within an RL algorithm needs to represent a separate function altogether. The nomenclature is maintained for simplicity. To develop the YANN-critic, the explicit Q-function for the linear system needs to be solved for. This function is not widely used in traditional control, but as discussed previously, it is necessary in actor-critic RL. In general for an uncon-strained linear system, the state-action value function can be derived as follows: 

Q⋆(st, u t) = C(st, u t) + min 

> ut+1

γQ ⋆(st+1 , u t+1 )min 

> ut+1

γQ ⋆(st+1 , u t+1 ) = γV ⋆(st+1 ) = sTt+1 P s t+1 

Q⋆(st, u t) = sTt Qwst + uTt Ru t + γs Tt+1 P s t+1 

st+1 = As t + Bu t

Q⋆(st, u t) = sTt Qwst + uTt Ru t

+ γ(As t + Bu t)T P (As t + Bu t)Similarly to how the YANN embeds control laws, the resulting Q-function for the linear system approximation can be exactly represented within a neural network. The resulting neural network only has the capability to rep-resent functions of similar forms if trained. To address this issue, additional network layers can be embedded into this structure in order to provide general nonlinear expressibility. In this way, the YANN-Critic, initially, is functionally equivalent to the explicit state-action value function for a linear surrogate while being as trainable as any other critic network. Further details on building YANN-Critics can be found in Braniff and Tian (2025a). 

Fig. 3. Conceptualization of YANN-Critic 4. CASE STUDIES All case studies for evaluating YANN-RL utilize the YANN-DDPG algorithm, which is summarized in Algo-rithm 1. In all figures, Oracle refers to well-tuned NMPC which assumes perfect and noiseless nonlinear models as an ideal benchmark. Control performance metrics such as in-tegral squared error (ISE), integral time-weighted absolute error (ITAE), steady-state error ( eSS ), and cumulative cost are reported within each study. 

Algorithm 1 YANN-DDPG Summary  

> 1:

Obtain a linearized model for the environment (e.g., Jacobian linearization, system identification, etc.)  

> 2:

Use the linear model to create an MPC problem  

> 3:

Reformulate the MPC problem into an mp-MPC prob-lem and solve to obtain the piecewise-affine control law  

> 4:

Use the piecewise affine control law to initialize a YANN-actor, πθ (st) 

> 5:

Use the system model and MPC problem weighting matrices to initialize a YANN-critic, Qϕ(st, u t) 

> 6:

Initialize target networks πθtarget (st) and 

Qϕtarget (st, u t) with θtarget ← θ, ϕtarget ← ϕ 

> 7:

Follow line 3 and onward from DDPG Algorithm excluding random exploration 

4.1 CSTR 

Continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) are the stan-dard benchmarking system in process control applications. The CSTR in this study is from Seborg et al. (2016). It has two chemical species, A and B and considers a single exothermic reaction, A −→ B. There are two state variables for this model, the concentration of species A, CA, and the temperature of the reactor, T . It has one manipulated variable which is the temperature of the cooling water used to combat the exothermic nature of the reactor, TC . The ODEs describing this system are given in Eq. 6. Detailed modeling information can be found in Table 1 of Bloor et al. (2026). dCA

dt = qV (CAf − CA) − kC Ae −EART (6) dT

dt = qV (Tf − T ) − ∆HR

ρC p

kC Ae −EART + U A ρC pV (Tc − T )The objective for the operation of the CSTR is to maintain a species A concentration of CA = 0 .877 by manipulating the cooling water temperature. An initial operating point is randomly generated, and training episodes are simu-lated for four minutes of process time. The YANN-DDPG algorithm is trained for a total of twenty-five episodes, while all other RL algorithms are trained for an equivalent of one hundred episodes each. This gives each other RL algorithm a four times advantage in the number of training steps performed. The results of the RL training for all five RL algorithms are highlighted in Fig. 4. Performance metrics for this study are given in Table 1 which shows that the YANN-RL controller attained near-perfect track-ing performance by closely mimicking NMPC behavior. YANN-RL performed significantly better than all of the RL baselines despite being trained for four times fewer episodes. TD3 was the strongest RL baseline however, its tracking and steady-state errors as well as cumulative cost remained notably higher than YANN-RL. 

Fig. 4. Control studies of RL algorithms on a CSTR. 

4.2 Four-tank System 

The four-tank system is a common benchmark in process control, it features four connected tanks that exhibit Table 1. Performance metrics for control of a CSTR.                 

> Controller ISE ITAE eSS Cumulative Cost NMPC 0.0007 0.0338 0.0000 1.772 YANN-DDPG 0.0007 0.0378 0.0001 1.788 Best RL (TD3) 0.0015 0.1562 0.0350 4.396

strong nonlinear behavior (Johansson, 2000). The four-tank model consists of four states, hi, corresponding to the height of the water in tank i and two manipulated variables, v1 and v2, corresponding to the voltages applied to the pumps in the system. The equations governing this system can be found in Eq. 7. Detailed information regarding modeling can be found in Table 4 of Bloor et al. (2026). 

dh 1

dt = − a1

A1

p2gah1 + a3

A1

p2gah3 + γ1k1

A1

v1 (7) 

dh 2

dt = − a2

A2

p2gah2 + a4

A2

p2gah4 + γ2k2

A2

v2

dh 3

dt = − a3

A3

p2gah3 + (1 − γ2)k2

A3

v2

dh 4

dt = − a4

A4

p2gah4 + (1 − γ1)k1

A4

v1

For this study, the control objective is to operate around a steady state defined by h = [0 .219 , 0.247 , 0.457 , 0.212]. A random operating point is used for the initial state while training episodes are simulated for four-hundred minutes of process time. In this study all algorithms are trained for twenty episodes worth of updates. Due to the significantly longer simulation time, each episode corresponds to many more updates being performed per training episode. It is important to note that for some randomly generated initial states the classic RL algorithms may fail to train by driving the system to infeasible operating points. This is prevalent across all classic RL algorithms and is the reason why the PPO algorithm does not appear in the results for this system. The YANN-RL algorithm never experienced this issue. The results for the four-tank system are provided in Fig. 5. Control comparison metrics are provided in Table 2 which shows that the YANN-based RL algorithm exhibits tracking and cumulative cost performance comparable to the best RL baseline (DDPG) while maintaining a signif-icantly better steady-state error, demonstrating superior regulation control. DDPG showed a slight advantage in ISE, but the YANN-RL approach proved to be safer and more reliable by consistently avoiding infeasible operating conditions. Table 2. Performance metrics for control of a four-tank system.                 

> Controller ISE ITAE eSS Cumulative Cost NMPC 3.775 2,957 0.0005 587.8 YANN-DDPG 6.824 7,925 0.0037 1,075 Best RL (DDPG) 6.507 13,440 0.0428 1,025

4.3 Multistage Extraction Column 

The multistage extraction column is a highly complex non-linear system with several variables governing its dynamics (Ingham et al., 2008). It features ten state variables, CXnFig. 5. Control studies of RL algorithms on a four-tank system. and CYn which represent solute liquid and gas phase con-centration in each of the five stages. The column has two control inputs, the liquid flowrate, L, and the gas flowrate, 

G. The dynamics of this system are given in Eq. 8 and detailed modeling information can be found in Table. 2 of Bloor et al. (2026). 

dC Xn

dt = 1

Vl

(L(CXn−1 − CXn ) − Fn) (8) 

dC Yn

dt = 1

Vg

(G(CYn+1 − CYn ) + Fn)where: CXn,eq = CYn,eq 

m

> e

Fn = Kla (CXn − CXn,eq )Vl

The control objective for the multistage extraction column is to regulate all ten system states to a fixed operating point. This is a particularly challenging problem since all ten nonlinearly related objectives must be considered with only two manipulatable variables available. The initial operating point is randomly generated, and time profiles are simulated for 0.25 minutes. The YANN-DDPG al-gorithm is trained for fifty episodes, while all other RL algorithms are trained for two hundred episodes, which provides the classic RL algorithms with four times as many update steps. Trajectory tracking results for this study are given in Fig. A.1. Performance metrics for this study are given in Table 3 which shows that the YANN-based controller achieves performance comparable to the NMPC benchmark while substantially outperforming traditional RL methods in all control metrics. Although SAC was the best-performing RL algorithm, its error metrics and cu-mulative cost remained significantly higher despite being trained for four times as many episodes as YANN-RL. Table 3. Performance metrics for control of a multistage extraction column.                 

> Controller ISE ITAE eSS Cumulative Cost NMPC 0.0014 0.0005 0.0000 43.11 YANN-DDPG 0.0015 0.0007 0.0006 57.05 Best RL (SAC) 0.0169 0.0181 0.0637 2,148

4.4 Conclusion 

In this study, we demonstrated that YANN-RL offers an effective and practical pathway for bringing reinforcement learning–based control into chemical process applications, an area where RL has traditionally faced barriers related to trust and training efficiency. Across three benchmark problems: (i) a CSTR, (ii) a four-tank system, and (iii) a multistage extraction column, YANN-RL consistently outperformed several widely used RL algorithms (PPO, SAC, DDPG, and TD3) in training speed and control performance. Moreover, its performance approached that of nonlinear MPC without requiring a full nonlinear model. Overall, the results illustrate that YANN-RL provides a trustworthy, data-efficient, and high-performing RL frame-work suitable for real-world chemical process control. On-going work will be improving YANN-based RL to satisfy desirable control properties such as stability as well as introducing filtering techniques into the framework to ad-dress uncertainties. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors acknowledge financial support from NSF RETRO Project CBET-2312457, NSF GRFP 2024370240, and the Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engi-neering at West Virginia University. REFERENCES Bloor, M., Torraca, J., Sandoval, I.O., Ahmed, A., White, M., Mercang¨ oz, M., Tsay, C., Chanona, E.A.D.R., and Mowbray, M. (2026). PC-Gym: Benchmark environ-ments for process control problems. Computers &Chemical Engineering , 204, 109363. Bo, S., Agyeman, B.T., Yin, X., and Liu, J. (2023). Con-trol invariant set enhanced safe reinforcement learning: Improved sampling efficiency, guaranteed stability and robustness. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 179, 108413. Braniff, A. and Tian, Y. (2025a). Reinforcement Learning-based Control via Y-wise Affine Neural Networks (YANNs). Braniff, A. and Tian, Y. (2025b). YANNs: Y-wise Affine Neural Networks for Exact and Efficient Representa-tions of Piecewise Linear Functions. Chang, Y.C. and Gao, S. (2021). Stabilizing Neural Control Using Self-Learned Almost Lyapunov Critics. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 1803–1809. IEEE, Xi’an, China. Devarakonda, V.S., Sun, W., Tang, X., and Tian, Y. (2025). Recent Advances in Reinforcement Learning for Chemical Process Control. Processes , 13(6), 1791. Dogru, O., Wieczorek, N., Velswamy, K., Ibrahim, F., and Huang, B. (2021). Online reinforcement learning for a continuous space system with experimental validation. 

Journal of Process Control , 104, 86–100. Dogru, O., Xie, J., Prakash, O., Chiplunkar, R., Soesanto, J., Chen, H., Velswamy, K., Ibrahim, F., and Huang, B. (2024). Reinforcement Learning in Process Industries: Review and Perspective. IEEE/CAA Journal of Auto-matica Sinica , 11(2), 283–300. Faria, R.d.R., Capron, B.D.O., de Souza Jr., M.B., and Secchi, A.R. (2023). One-Layer Real-Time Optimization Using Reinforcement Learning: A Review with Guide-lines. Processes , 11(1), 123. Faria, R.d.R., Capron, B.D.O., Secchi, A.R., and de Souza, M.B. (2022). Where Reinforcement Learning Meets Process Control: Review and Guidelines. Processes ,10(11), 2311. Hassanpour, H., Corbett, B., and Mhaskar, P. (2025). A practical reinforcement learning control design for nonlinear systems with input and output constraints. 

Computers & Chemical Engineering , 201, 109248. Ingham, J., Dunn, I.J., Heinzle, E., Pˇ renosil, J.E., and Snape, J.B. (2008). Chemical engineering dynamics: an introduction to modelling and computer simulation ,volume 3. John Wiley & Sons. Johansson, K. (2000). The quadruple-tank process: a multivariable laboratory process with an adjustable zero. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technol-ogy , 8(3), 456–465. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Ve-ness, J., Bellemare, M.G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wier-stra, D., Legg, S., and Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature ,518(7540), 529–533. Nian, R., Liu, J., and Huang, B. (2020). A review on reinforcement learning: Introduction and applications in industrial process control. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 139, 106886. Seborg, D.E., Edgar, T.F., Mellichamp, D.A., and Doyle III, F.J. (2016). Process dynamics and control .John Wiley & Sons. Shin, J., Badgwell, T.A., Liu, K.H., and Lee, J.H. (2019). Reinforcement Learning – Overview of recent progress and implications for process control. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 127, 282–294. Spielberg, S., Tulsyan, A., Lawrence, N.P., Loewen, P.D., and Bhushan Gopaluni, R. (2019). Toward self-driving processes: A deep reinforcement learning approach to control. AIChE Journal , 65(10), e16689. Wang, Y. and Wu, Z. (2024). Control Lyapunov-barrier function-based safe reinforcement learning for nonlinear optimal control. AIChE Journal , 70(3), e18306. Appendix A. MULTISTAGE EXTRACTION COLUMN RESULTS 

Fig. A.1. Control studies of RL algorithms on a multistage extraction column.