Title: SciDER: Scientific Data-centric End-to-end Researcher

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01421v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 02:55:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# SciDER: Scientific Data-centric End-to-end Researcher 

Ke Lin 1, Yilin Lu 2, Shreyas Bhat 3, Xuehang Guo 1, Junier Oliva 3, Qingyun Wang 1

> 1

William & Mary, 2University of Minnesota, 3University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

¹ Project Page Û Demo i Video  Code {klin07, xguo15, qwang16}@wm.edu, lu000661@umn.edu, {shbhat, joliva}@cs.unc.edu 

Abstract 

Automated scientific discovery with large lan-guage models is transforming the research life-cycle from ideation to experimentation, yet existing agents struggle to autonomously pro-cess raw data collected from scientific exper-iments. We introduce SciDER, a data-centric end-to-end system that automates the research lifecycle. Unlike traditional frameworks, our specialized agents collaboratively parse and analyze raw scientific data, generate hypothe-ses and experimental designs grounded in spe-cific data characteristics, and write and exe-cute corresponding code. Evaluation on three benchmarks shows SciDER excels in special-ized data-driven scientific discovery and outper-forms general-purpose agents and state-of-the-art models through its self-evolving memory and critic-led feedback loop. Distributed as a modular Python package, we also provide easy-to-use PyPI packages with a lightweight web interface to accelerate autonomous, data-driven research and aim to be accessible to all researchers and developers. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs)-based agents are catalyzing scientific discovery (Wang et al., 2024b; Garikaparthi et al., 2025; Gottweis et al., 2025). They can automate many research steps, from generating hypotheses to designing experiments, thereby speeding innovation and reducing barriers in scientific research (Fig. 1). For example, AI Sci-entist v2 (Yamada et al., 2025) can autonomously write workshop-level papers. Despite this, creat-ing a fully independent AI research partner still faces two unique barriers. The first challenge is the limited adaptability . Most current systems are designed mainly for public machine learning datasets (Chan et al., 2025; Starace et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2025). Therefore, they struggle to independently analyze and process di-verse real-world experimental data (Zhang et al., Literatures & Data   

> (a) Traditional Workflow
> Static
> Draft
> User Query Dataset
> Ideation
> Agent
> Analysis
> Agent
> Experiement
> Agent
> Discovery
> Report Codebase Draft &
> Patents
> Manual Ideation
> & Hypothesizing
> Human Analysis &
> Writing
> Manual Experiment
> Script-based
> Data Cleaning
> Slow Feedback
> Loop
> (b) SciDER Workflow
> Critic
> Agent
> Self-
> Evolving
> Memory

Figure 1: Flowchart of expert-based and LLM-based research lifecycle. 

2025; Luo et al., 2026). The second challenge is the domain gap . General-purpose assistants often fail in specialized domains where abstract ideas must be translated into precise, and sometimes pro-prietary, experimental data formats (White et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2026). To address these issues, we present SciDER , a 

Sci entific Data-centric End-to-end Research sys-tem designed to flexibly automate the scientific research lifecycle. Distributed as a modular Python package leveraging LangGraph (LangChain, Inc., 2026) and litellm (BerriAI, 2026), SciDER inte-grates ideation, data analysis, and experimentation into a cohesive workflow. The system comprises four sub-agents: the ideation agent generates hy-potheses and experimental plans; the data analysis agent cleans and structures data into an organized data format and corresponding analysis reports; the 

experimentation agent develops and executes ex-periment code; and the critic agent reviews all out-puts to propose improvements. A defining feature of our system is its self-evolving memory mech-anism (Ouyang et al., 2026), which categorizes knowledge into short-term and long-term (task-

> arXiv:2603.01421v1 [cs.AI] 2 Mar 2026

specific and project-specific) types. By retriev-ing relevant reasoning chunks through retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), SciDER enables test-time learning and allows the system to enhance its proficiency in general and domain-specific exploration as it accumulates task-and project-specific experience. SciDER’s data-centric design for scientific dis-covery is one of its fundamental principles. Unlike static script-based processing from previous works, SciDER enables independent parsing and analysis of raw experimental data uploaded by users across diverse scientific domains. This data-grounded ap-proach guarantees that knowledge of data struc-tures, quality, and semantics informs code gen-eration. In multidisciplinary fields like physics, chemistry, biology, and mathematics, where gen-eral coding assistants usually fall short in bridg-ing the gap between abstract reasoning and exe-cutable synthesis, SciDER is therefore exceptional at solving complex research-level coding problems. Benchmarked on AI-Idea-Bench (Qiu et al., 2025), MLEBench (Chan et al., 2025), and SciCode (Tian et al., 2024), SciDER outperforms previous meth-ods in generating ideas and conducting experiments across general and specialized domains. Human evaluation and case studies also demonstrate that SciDER effectively handles complex research tasks and enhances research capabilities. The contribu-tions are threefold: • We introduce SciDER, a modular system that automates the full research lifecycle through spe-cialized agents and an innovative self-evolving memory mechanism that supports continuous test-time memorizing and learning. • We propose a data-centric approach that grounds code generation of experiments in autonomous experimental analysis, enabling superior perfor-mance on interdisciplinary research problems. • Extensive empirical analyses that SciDER greatly outperforms current baselines on AI-Idea-Bench, MLEBench, and SciCode bench-marks, demonstrating its efficacy in manag-ing challenging scientific reasoning and coding tasks at the research level. 

2 Related Work 

Early end-to-end automated pipelines, such as The AI Scientist (Lu et al., 2024) and its follow-up, AI Scientist-v2 (Yamada et al., 2025), demon-strate that LLM-based agentic pipelines can gen-erate hypotheses and run experiments with lim-ited human intervention. Despite this progress, existing approaches do not provide full support for the full scientific pipeline (Tab. 1). In particu-lar, AI researcher (Tang et al., 2025), Agent Lab-oratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025) ,and TinyScien-tist (Yu et al., 2025) focus primarily on idea gener-ation and experiment execution without any mem-ory mechanism. AI researcher introduces a fully autonomous pipeline with Scientist-Bench for eval-uating open-ended task exploration over diverse domains. TinyScientist targets usability through an interactive and controllable framework; therefore is not fully autonomous as it requires continuous user involvement. Agent Laboratory integrates lit-erature review, experimentation, and reporting with user feedback, yet lacks an autonomous data anal-ysis phase before experimental design. Table 1 compares SciDER with other works. 

3 System Architecture and Workflow 

SciDER is designed as a data-centric end-to-end system that flexibly automates the scientific re-search lifecycle. The system integrates a research framework comprising ideation, data analysis, ex-perimentation, and iterative improvement. It sup-ports flexible inputs such as text, raw data, code, and prior papers and codebases. SciDER also of-fers a lightweight web interface where researchers can upload their data and research topics, allowing the system to automatically create a closed-loop re-search cycle to propose and verify new ideas. The automated research task can be formalized as fol-lows: given datasets D and a research query Q,the system generates ideas I (i.e., hypothesis and experiment outlines), an analysis report R of data, an experiment codebase C, and results T .

3.1 LLM-based Agents Ideation: I ← Ideation( D, Q). SciDER inte-grated an ideation agent for automatic literature re-view, idea generation, and novelty assessment. The system allows users to propose an initial thought 

Q as a programmable task given D. The ideation agent automatically synthesizes insights from the scientific literature and retrieves related online datasets to generate proposals tailored to the spe-cific experimental context. Each idea proposed by the ideation agent contains (1) a hypothesis about the dataset, (2) an experiment outline, and (3) a Framework Functionality Extensibility Deployment Ideation Data Analysis Experiment Modular Memory Web UI Package                                                  

> AI Scientist (Lu et al., 2024) ✔✘✔✔✘✘✘
> AI Scientist v2 (Yamada et al., 2025) ✔✘✔✔✘✘✘
> AI Researcher (Tang et al., 2025) ✔✘✔✔✘✔✘
> Agent Laboratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025) ✔✓✗✔✔✘✔✘
> TinyScientist (Yu et al., 2025) ✔✘✔✔✘✔✔
> DeepAnalyze (Zhang et al., 2025) ✘✔✔✔✘✔✘
> SciDER (Ours) ✔✔✔✔✔✔✔

Table 1: Comparison of research agent frameworks. We evaluate existing frameworks across three dimensions: functionality, extensibility, and deployment readiness. SciDER provides a research pipeline that integrates ideation, data analysis, and experimentation with test-time memory, accessible via a Web UI and Python package. 

comparative analysis with existing work. Specifically, the ideation agent generates key-words from the input, retrieves and analyzes rel-evant literature from arXiv (Cornell University, 2024), Semantic Scholar (Allen Institute for AI, 2024), and PubMed (National Center for Biotech-nology Information, 2024), and generates an initial hypothesis. An LLM-as-Judge evaluates these pro-posals for novelty across four categories: Unique-ness , Innovation , Gap Addresses , and Impact with a total score of 10 (App. A.2). A revision report will be generated for self-refinement (Madaan et al., 2023) to determine whether the idea proposal I will be forwarded to the next agent. 

Data Analysis: R ← Data( D, Q, I). SciDER allows researchers to upload experimental data from various scientific domains for automated anal-ysis and the generation of well-organized data re-ports, serving as input to the experiment agent . Al-though the pipeline may automatically preprocess and clean the data as D′, we refer to the dataset as 

D for simplicity. This stage is the core of SciDER’s data-centric paradigm, in which raw data is trans-formed into structured knowledge that guides sub-sequent research. The interface also accepts an optional user instruction to provide additional in-formation or guide data reading and parsing. The agent iterates over the dataset’s folder structure, then uses tools to read and parse various file for-mats. Textual data is organized in formats like Parquet, JSON, and CSV, while custom readers are developed for non-standard image formats. The final data report R assesses data from multiple perspectives: structure, quality, semantics, and de-pendency (App. A.3). 

Experimentation. The experimentation stage in-cludes code generation and execution. Given the idea proposal I, the coding agent generates exe-cutable scripts C tailored to the data structures and dependencies identified in the data-centric analysis report R, thereby ensuring high success rates for domain-specific tasks. The entire codebase is then transferred to the execution agent for full execution. • Coding Phase: C ← Coding( D, Q, I, R). The coding agent leverages external frameworks (i.e., OpenHands from Wang et al. and Claude Code from Anthropic) to iteratively generate ex-ecutable experiment code. Coding failures (e.g., syntax and type errors) initiate a reflection to rectify errors until the workspace is ready. • Execution Phase: T ← Exec( D, C). Once the coding workspace is provided with executable scripts and properly configured, the execution agent begins execution and periodically moni-tors progress. Typically, agents wait for execu-tions to complete. However, if errors occur or the execution output indicates a potential failure (e.g., a timeout, consistently high loss, failed unit tests, or a frozen screen), the execution agent terminates the running process and pro-vides feedback to the coding agent. 

Critics & Feedback. After each stage of the data analysis and experimentation, a critic agent will judge the performance of each stage and provide feedback for iterative reflection and self-refinement. The critic agent assesses the accuracy, complete-ness, and potential biases of the preceding process, identifying information gaps and logical inconsis-tencies (App. A.4). The agent then proposes im-provements or alternative solutions to achieve a balanced and comprehensive final revision. Given the n-th feedback Fn, the next revision output is: 

In+1 ← Ideation( Fn, D, Q)

... ...

Fn+1 ← Critic( Fn, In+1 , Rn+1 , Cn+1 )Project-specific  

> Memory Bank
> Short Term
> Memory Long Term Memory
> Task-specific
> RAG Retrieval
> User Query
> Semantic
> Vector Search
> Keyword
> Search
> Agent Context
> Task Description
> Retrieved Knowledge
> Current Problem
> LLM Reasoning
> & Generation
> Response /
> New Reasoning
> Chunk
> Reasoning Chunks
> . . .
> Retrieved Chunks
> Self-Evolving Loop

Figure 2: Self-evolving memory mechanism of SciDER. Memories are categorized as short- or long-term chunks within agent contexts, while new responses are summarized and integrated back into the memory bank. 

For simplicity, we omit the corresponding formu-las for Data( ·), Coding( ·), and Exec( ·).

3.2 Self-evolving Memory 

To improve test-time performance, SciDER inte-grates a self-evolving memory mechanism adapted from ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2026) for continuous test-time learning and memorization. Unlike ReasoningBank, SciDER further organizes memory into short-term and long-term categories and categorizes long-term memory as task- and project-specific (Fig. 2). Project-specific memory dynamically captures ideation and experimental re-sults, while task-specific memory stores general guidance for similar tasks within a domain. As the system runs, the memory module stores reasoning in a local memory bank. For new chat sessions, relevant memory chunks are retrieved (e.g., via a semantic vector or keyword search) and inserted into the context as background knowledge. 

Method Idea2Idea Novelty Feas. 

Motiv. Exp. Motiv. Exp. SCIPIP 2.44 - 25.06 - -VIRSC 2.94 2.12 24.87 24.65 13.3 AI-Researcher 2.81 2.02 24.92 24.69 16.8 AI-Scientist 3.59 2.73 25.03 26.08 12.1 SciDER 3.78 3.50 47.06 44.52 24.0 

Table 2: Results of AI-Idea-Bench . Scores for Idea-to-Idea Matching, Novelty, and Feasibility Assessment are reported. Higher values indicate a better method. The feasibility score is measured at 10 −2 magnitude. 

4 Evaluation 

4.1 Evaluation Setup Model settings. We use gemini-2.5-flash 

(Comanici et al., 2025) for idea generation in ideation assessment and as the main model for the entire experimentation evaluation pipeline. For all general and domain-specific codebase genera-tion of experiments, we employ the Claude Code 

framework (Anthropic, 2025) with the Claude 4 Sonnet model. To ensure a fair comparison, bench-marks for different methods use base models with similar capabilities on the same tasks. 

Evaluation settings. Our evaluation uses auto-mated methods from existing benchmarks, supple-mented by human feedback. To meet benchmark requirements, we evaluate agents separately(e.g., the ideation agent for ideation tasks, the coding and critic agents for general and domain-specific tasks). The self-evolving memory mechanism is disabled during benchmarking to prevent data leak-age across test samples. For human evaluation, we follow the rubrics in App. A.1 and use annotators with adequate knowledge of the research lifecycle. 

4.2 Assessment of Generated Ideas 

To rigorously evaluate the ideation phase of SciDER, we use the AI-Idea-Bench 2025 (Qiu et al., 2025) framework, which provides a compre-hensive and quantitative methodology for assess-ing AI-generated research ideas. This benchmark evaluates generated ideas using 3,495 top-tier AI papers, assessing ground-truth alignment and objec-tive, and reference-based judgment. It establishes a robust standard for measuring innovation and feasibility in automated discovery across diverse real-world scenarios with following scores: • Idea-to-Idea Matching: This metric assesses conceptual similarity between generated ideas and the target paper, scoring motivation (core is-sue and context) and experimental design (theo-retical and structural consistency) on a 0–5 scale. • Novelty Assessment: This score quantifies orig-inality by measuring the distance between the 

overall idea and experiment outlines and ex-isting literature, weighted by citation influence to yield an open-ended total. • Feasibility Assessment: It evaluates the methodological grounding of an idea’s motiva-tion and experimental plan by averaging the citation influence of reference papers. Baseline results of SCIPIP (Wang et al., 2024a), VIRSC (Su et al., 2025), AI-Researcher (Tang et al., 2025), and AI-Scientist (Lu et al., 2024) are also reported from the benchmark leaderboard. Table 2 shows SciDER outperforms existing baselines in generating high-quality research ideas. Specifi-cally, SciDER achieves a breakthrough in Nov-elty Assessment, nearly doubling the performance of current state-of-the-art frameworks such as AI-Scientist and AI-Researcher, with scores of 47.06 

for motivation and 44.52 for experiment matching. Furthermore, our system demonstrates improved feasibility ( 24.0 ) and stronger experiment-centric alignment ( 3.78 & 3.50 for Idea-to-Idea Matching). These results show that SciDER generates more in-novative and executable research proposals, while staying aligned with top-tier scientific literature. 

4.3 Performance of Experimentation 

MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2025) is an offline bench-mark based on 75 real Kaggle machine learning competitions with diverse training data sizes mir-roring real-world tasks. It objectively evaluates SciDER’s general capability to independently de-sign entire experiment workflows. We compareit against three recent works: • AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025) w/ o1-preview ,• AIRA (Toledo et al., 2025) w/ o3-preview ,• ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) w/ Deepseek-R1 .Table 3 compares SciDER’s results against others, reporting the percentage of any medals ( % Any )and gold medal ( % Gold ) in a single pass (i.e., pass@1). SciDER achieves a 7.76% higher gold medal rate than AIRA while maintaining compara-ble total medal rates. SciDER demonstrates compa-rable performance to specialized Machine Learning agents. Its research-centric design further improves scalability through iterative trial-critic-revision cy-cles, resulting in higher gold medal rates. 

4.4 Capabilities of Domain-specific Tasks 

We evaluate our system on the SciCode (Tian et al., 2024) benchmark to assess its proficiency in solv-ing complex research-level coding problems across 16 diverse subfields, including physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, material science, and oth-ers. SciCode features 80 main problems, compris-ing 338 hierarchical sub-problems, which demand             

> Method MLE-Bench (Lite) %Any ↑%Gold ↑
> AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025) 16.90 9.40 ML-Master (Liu et al., 2025) 48.50 18.10 AIRA (Toledo et al., 2025) 47.73 28.64 SciDER (Ours) 45.45 36.40

Table 3: Results of MLE-Bench . For all methods tested on the Lite split of MLE-Bench, overall and gold medal rates are reported. 

models utilize deep scientific background knowl-edge, recall, and multi-step reasoning. Its mul-tidisciplinary scope comprehensively evaluates a system’s generalization to realistic, less familiar research contexts where general-purpose coding assistants typically fall short. On the SciCode benchmark, SciDER performs noticeably better than the state-of-the-art models, as shown in Fig. 3. SciDER outperforms highly ca-pable models such as GPT-5 (13.85% & 38.26%), achieving 15.38% & 42.71% success rate on both main problems and sub-problems. These find-ings demonstrate that our iterative feedback mech-anisms and agentic architecture effectively execute code synthesis guided by scientific reasoning. Claude 3.5 Sonnet     

> Deepseek-R1
> Claude 4.5 Sonnet
> o3-mini (High)
> GPT-5 (High)
> SciDER (Ours)
> Method / Model
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Solve Rate (%)
> 4.60 4.60
> 9.23 10.80
> 13.85 15.38
> 25.30
> 28.50
> 34.63 33.30
> 38.26
> 42.71
> SciCode Benchmark
> Problem Type
> Main (%)
> Sub (%)

Figure 3: Results of SciCode . Solve rates for main and sub-problems are reported, with higher rates indicating greater capability for domain-specific problems. 

4.5 Case Study 

We present a case study demonstrating the useful-ness and effectiveness of SciDER and its potential to automate the traditional data science workflow in the natural sciences domain. In this case study, an astrophysicist with little machine learning expe-rience can use SciDER to develop a fully functional Figure 4: A screenshot of the web interface of SciDER. 

ML pipeline for astrophysics tasks. The astrophysi-cist aims to use the Kepler Exoplanet Dataset (Ake-son et al., 2013) to determine whether a candidate signal is an exoplanet from noisy time-series data. The astrophysicist first selects the “Full Workflow” and inputs a query (Fig. 4): 

> “Use the Kepler Exoplanet Dataset to train and iteratively refine a set of machine learning models that detect exoplanet transit signals from stellar light curves, autonomously generating and test-ing feature hypotheses (e.g., periodic dips, depth, duration, signal-to-noise ratio) to maximize clas-sification performance. ”

After finishing the configuration, the astrophysi-cist clicks on “Run the full workflow” to launch the workflow. After SciDER completed the final steps, it generated a report. SciDER conducted a comparative experiment among three distinct mod-els with feature engineering and achieved an 98% 

F1 score, demonstrating that SciDER can engineer machine learning pipelines that achieve substantial performance. The system also generates a detailed report and allows users to review each agent’s ac-tions through the UI in Fig. 5. Through the case study, we demonstrate how domain experts can use SciDER to build high-performance machine learn-ing pipelines for domain-specific tasks with mini-mal interventions and auditing the working process SciDER with minimal effort. The presented case study can be viewed in the demo’s Browser mode. 

> Figure 5: A screenshot of the Accordion UI to check the output of each sub-agent’s output step-by-step.

4.6 Human Evaluation 

To evaluate the practical utility of SciDER as an autonomous research assistant, we conducted a hu-man evaluation study involving 13 participants with domain expertise (including Ph.D. students, pro-fessors, and industrial researchers) in the scientific research lifecycle, finalized at the time of submis-sion. Annotators were asked to rate their experi-ence based on the "helpfulness" rubric detailed in App. A.1, which assesses dimensions such as work-flow reduction, data-grounded accuracy, and code executability. The system achieved a mean score of 4.846/5.000 with a low variance of 0.376 .

5 Conclusion 

In this work, we present SciDER, a useful end-to-end system that automates the scientific research lifecycle. By combining ideation, data analysis, and iterative experimentation with a self-evolving memory mechanism, SciDER bridges the gap be-tween abstract scientific reasoning, data-centric in-sights, and executable code synthesis. SciDER outperforms earlier efforts on idea-generation judg-ment, general machine-learning benchmarks, and multidisciplinary scientific coding tasks. We pro-vide a lightweight web interface and distribute SciDER as a modular Python package to ensure accessibility, helping researchers to initiate a com-plete, closed-loop research cycle with a single click. We believe that SciDER will reduce the techni-cal barriers for researchers, ultimately improving research effectiveness and promoting the broader adoption of autonomous research agents. Ethical Considerations 

Although SciDER is intended to automate and ex-pedite the scientific research lifecycle, its imple-mentation entails ethical obligations. The system is prone to hallucinations or logical inconsistencies because it depends on LLMs for core reasoning and code synthesis. This could lead to incorrect hypotheses, biased experiments, and hallucinated results. Data privacy is also at risk when process-ing tasks rely on external LLM APIs; misconfig-urations or operations may inadvertently upload private or sensitive experimental data to unaffili-ated platforms. In addition to preventing potential copyright violations, automated collection of lit-erature and data from online repositories must be conducted carefully. Instead of completely replac-ing human expertise, SciDER should be used as a collaborative assistant to reduce these risks. To ensure scientific integrity and legal compliance, it is recommended that researchers manually validate all AI-generated reports, code, and findings. 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge the support of Google Cloud and Lambda through their respective re-search grants, which provided the computational resources essential to this work. 

References 

R. L. Akeson, X. Chen, D. Ciardi, M. Crane, J. Good, M. Harbut, E. Jackson, S. R. Kane, A. C. Laity, S. Leifer, M. Lynn, D. L. McElroy, M. Papin, P. Plavchan, S. V. Ramírez, R. Rey, K. von Braun, M. Wittman, M. Abajian, and 16 others. 2013. The nasa exoplanet archive: Data and tools for exoplanet research. Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific , 125(930):989–999. Allen Institute for AI. 2024. Semantic scholar. https: //www.semanticscholar.org . Accessed 2026. Anthropic. 2025. Claude code overview — claude code docs. https://code.claude.com/docs/en/ overview . Accessed: 2026-02-27. BerriAI. 2026. Litellm. https://github.com/ BerriAI/litellm . Version 1.79.0, accessed 2026-02-26. Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, and 1 others. 2025. Mle-bench: Evaluating machine learn-ing agents on machine learning engineering. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.06261. Cornell University. 2024. arxiv.org e-print archive. 

https://arxiv.org . Accessed 2026. Aniketh Garikaparthi, Manasi Patwardhan, Lovekesh Vig, and Arman Cohan. 2025. IRIS: Interactive re-search ideation system for accelerating scientific dis-covery. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) , pages 592–603, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, and 1 others. 2025. Towards an ai co-scientist. Artificial Intelligence Repository ,arXiv:2502.18864. Zhengyao Jiang, Dominik Schmidt, Dhruv Srikanth, Dixing Xu, Ian Kaplan, Deniss Jacenko, and Yuxiang Wu. 2025. Aide: Ai-driven exploration in the space of code. Preprint , arXiv:2502.13138. LangChain, Inc. 2026. Langgraph. https://github. com/langchain-ai/langgraph .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Zexi Liu, Yuzhu Cai, Xinyu Zhu, Yujie Zheng, Runkun Chen, Ying Wen, Yanfeng Wang, Weinan E, and Siheng Chen. 2025. Ml-master: Towards ai-for-ai via integration of exploration and reasoning. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.16499. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foer-ster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2024. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific dis-covery. Preprint , arXiv:2408.06292. Erpai Luo, Jinmeng Jia, Yifan Xiong, Xiangyu Li, Xi-aobo Guo, Baoqi Yu, Minsheng Hao, Lei Wei, and Xuegong Zhang. 2026. Benchmarking ai scientists for omics data driven biological discovery. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.08341. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Itera-tive refinement with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems .National Center for Biotechnology Information. 2024. Pubmed. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov .Accessed 2026. Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T Le, Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, and 1 others. 2026. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning mem-ory. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yansheng Qiu, Haoquan Zhang, Zhaopan Xu, Ming Li, Diping Song, Zheng Wang, and Kaipeng Zhang. 2025. Ai idea bench 2025: Ai research idea genera-tion benchmark. Preprint , arXiv:2504.14191. Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Michael Moor, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research assis-tants. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 5977–6043. Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes Heidecke, Amelia Glaese, and Tejal Pat-wardhan. 2025. Paperbench: Evaluating ai’s ability to replicate ai research. Preprint , arXiv:2504.01848. Haoyang Su, Renqi Chen, Shixiang Tang, Zhenfei Yin, Xinzhe Zheng, Jinzhe Li, Biqing Qi, Qi Wu, Hui Li, Wanli Ouyang, and 1 others. 2025. Many heads are better than one: Improved scientific idea generation by a llm-based multi-agent system. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 28201–28240. Jiabin Tang, Lianghao Xia, Zhonghang Li, and Chao Huang. 2025. Ai-researcher: Autonomous scientific innovation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Minyang Tian, Luyu Gao, Shizhuo D Zhang, Xinan Chen, Cunwei Fan, Xuefei Guo, Roland Haas, Pan Ji, Kittithat Krongchon, Yao Li, and 1 others. 2024. Scicode: A research coding benchmark curated by scientists. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 37:30624–30650. Edan Toledo, Karen Hambardzumyan, Martin Josifoski, RISHI HAZRA, Nicolas Baldwin, Alexis Audran-Reiss, Michael Kuchnik, Despoina Magka, Minqi Jiang, Alisia Maria Lupidi, and 1 others. 2025. Ai research agents for machine learning: Search, ex-ploration, and generalization in mle-bench. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .Wenxiao Wang, Lihui Ribbon Gu, Liye Zhang, Yunx-iang Luo, Yi Dai, Chen Shen, Liang Xie, Binbin Lin, Xiaofei He, and Jieping Ye. 2024a. Scipip: An llm-based scientific paper idea proposer. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.23166. Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xi-angru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, and 1 others. 2025. Open-hands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhizheng Wang, Qiao Jin, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Shubo Tian, Po-Ting Lai, Qingqing Zhu, Chi-Ping Day, Christina Ross, and Zhiyong Lu. 2024b. Geneagent: Self-verification language agent for gene set knowledge discovery using domain databases. ArXiv .Andrew D White, Glen M Hocky, Heta A Gandhi, Mehrad Ansari, Sam Cox, Geemi P Wellawatte, Sub-arna Sasmal, Ziyue Yang, Kangxin Liu, Yuvraj Singh, and 1 others. 2022. Do large language models know chemistry. ChemRxiv preprint .Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shen-gran Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2025. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.08066. Haofei Yu, Keyang Xuan, Fenghai Li, Kunlun Zhu, Zi-jie Lei, Jiaxun Zhang, Ziheng Qi, Kyle Richardson, and Jiaxuan You. 2025. Tinyscientist: An interactive, extensible, and controllable framework for building research agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 558–590. Shaolei Zhang, Ju Fan, Meihao Fan, Guoliang Li, and Xiaoyong Du. 2025. Deepanalyze: Agentic large lan-guage models for autonomous data science. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.16872. A Appendix 

A.1 Human Evaluation 

To evaluate the practical utility of SciDER as an autonomous research assistant, we define a spe-cialized “helpfulness” rubric. This metric assesses how effectively the system reduces the human re-searcher’s workload across the research lifecycle, from data parsing to experimental execution. • Score 1 — Very Poor (Obstacle): The system fails to provide any useful output. It either gener-ates incoherent research ideas, fails to parse the provided raw data, or produces non-executable code. Human intervention is required to restart the entire process from scratch. • Score 2 — Poor (Low Utility): The system provides generic or shallow insights that do not reflect the specific characteristics of the exper-imental data. Despite generating some output, the design or code requires significant manual correction to function. • Score 3 — Average (Moderate Assistance): 

The system successfully automates routine tasks, such as basic data profiling and literature key-word searching. The experimental plan is feasi-ble but lacks depth or novelty. It functions as a baseline assistant but requires moderate human guidance and revision. • Score 4 — Good (Significant Assistance): The system demonstrates a clear understanding of the data-centric paradigm. It generates well-structured data reports and executable scripts with only minor gaps. The critic agent pro-vides relevant feedback that noticeably improves the research quality. It effectively saves the re-searcher time in the exploration phase. • Score 5 — Excellent (Autonomous Collab-orator): The system acts as a high-level re-search collaborator. It provides deep scien-tific insights grounded in the raw data, identi-fies non-obvious patterns, and generates high-fidelity code/reports that are ready for immedi-ate use. The self-evolving memory effectively utilizes project-specific context to refine subse-quent steps without human input. 

A.2 Ideation Criteria 

The ideation evaluates the idea proposals based on the following criteria: • Uniqueness : This criterion measures the degree of differentiation from existing work, assigned a score of 0–3 points, ranging from simple replica-tion to the introduction of entirely new concepts. • Innovation : This assesses the originality of the methodology or theoretical framework, with a score of 0–3 reflecting the transition from standard methods to the proposal of novel ap-proaches. • Gap Addressing : This evaluates how effec-tively the proposal tackles identified research gaps or limitations, with a score of 0–2 based on the significance of the gap being filled. • Impact : This quantifies the potential contribu-tion of the research to the field, ranging from 0–2 points from minimal expected contribution to high-impact potential. 

A.3 Data Analysis Criteria 

The data analysis agent assesses the data by: • Structure : Evaluates file formats, data types, and organizational patterns like schemas and en-codings to define the data’s technical framework. • Quality : Analyzes data integrity by identify-ing missing values, outliers, and inconsistencies through sample inspection and summaries. • Semantics : Interprets the domain-specific mean-ing and logical significance of data fields to en-sure the information is correctly understood. • Dependency : Maps relationships between data entities, such as foreign keys and file links, to establish cross-references and the required pro-cessing sequence. 

A.4 Critic Criteria 

We present the rules for the critic agent to evaluate and provide feedback for each sub-agent: • Accuracy: Verify that all factual claims, data points, and references are precise and verified against reliable sources. • Completeness: Ensure the response addresses every component of the prompt and satisfies all user requirements without omission. • Bias: Identify and eliminate any subjective lean-ings, cultural prejudices, or non-neutral view-points in the content. • Information Gap: Specify any missing con-text, depth, or technical details required for a comprehensive understanding. • Misinformation: Detect any logical hallucina-tions, fabricated facts, or misleading statements. • Suggested Improvement: Provide clear, action-able instructions to correct the identified flaws and enhance the output quality. Figure 6: Left : The research proposal for this iteration, with the green highlights indicating the core experimental topic. Right : The experimental outputs, including the evaluation report (red highlight) and the corresponding implementation code (lower right). 

A.5 User Interface 

To further enhance the usability of the SciDER package, we develop a lightweight and easy-to-use web interface that enables users to interact directly with SciDER (Fig. 4). The interface comprises three panels: a workflow selection panel, a work-flow launch panel, and a chat panel. Users can select a workflow (ideation, data analysis, exper-iment, or full), input queries and datasets in the launch panel, and review or modify results via the chat panel. Custom datasets can be uploaded to the workspace filesystem for analysis by SciDER to enable a data-driven pipeline. An example out-put of SciDER is shown in Fig. 6, which includes a research proposal, an experimental report, and the corresponding code implementation. Users can track the workflow in a step-by-step manner via an Accordion interface (Fig. 5), composed of multiple collapsible panels that improve the transparency of SciDER ’s execution process. 

B SciDER Python Package 

SciDER is distributed as a Python package under the Apache 2.0 License, leveraging LangGraph and 

litellm for easy and modular use. As Algorithm 1 illustrates, the package can execute the full research workflow in just a few lines of code. The full work-flow can also be divided into sub-workflows, which are included in the “scider.workflows” package. 

C Limitations 

While SciDER demonstrates capabilities in au-tomating the research lifecycle, there are several 

Algorithm 1 SciDER Python example usage  

> from scider.default.models import
> register_gemini_medium_high_models ,→
> from scider.workflows import run_full_workflow # 1. Register the models you want to use register_gemini_medium_high_models() # 2. Run the full workflow wf = run_full_workflow( data_path="/path/to/data/", workspace_path="/path/to/workspace/", user_query="Discover insights about RAG", )# 3. The final state after the workflow print(wf.final_summary)

limitations that we aim to address in future work. First, the current system lacks a module for the automated generation of scientific papers. This de-sign choice stems from our primary focus on the more critical challenges of data-centric research: autonomous data analysis, experimental planning, and the synthesis of executable code. Given that prior work has established the feasibility of auto-mated manuscript writing, we consider the perfec-tion of the experimental lifecycle to be of higher priority for a data-centric agent. We intend to in-clude paper-writing functionality in subsequent it-erations of the system. Second, SciDER is currently dependent on ex-ternal LLM APIs for its core reasoning and experi-mentation tasks. This reliance introduces potential constraints regarding operational costs, API avail-ability, and data privacy when processing sensitive or proprietary experimental datasets.