HaWMPO: Hallucination-Aware World Model-based
Policy Optimization for Generalist Robot Policy
Zengjue Chen1,2
Peidong Liu1,†
Jiawei Li1
Qi Wang2,†
1Joy Future Academy, JD
2School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
zengjue24@mails.jlu.edu.cn, qiwang@jlu.edu.cn, lpd19@tsinghua.org.cn
†Corresponding authors.
Abstract: Generalist robot policies have demonstrated strong generalization
across robotic manipulation tasks, yet their success rates remain limited in com-
plex long-horizon scenarios. Recent methods improve Visual-Language-Action
(VLA) policies through online reinforcement learning on real robots, but such
training relies on costly physical interactions, suffers from low sample efficiency,
and may introduce hardware and safety risks. World models offer a promising
alternative by enabling policy optimization with imagined rollouts.
However,
long-horizon rollouts generated by world models often suffer from prediction hal-
lucinations, producing biased state transitions that can mislead policy learning.
To address this issue, we propose Hallucination-aware World Model-based Pol-
icy Optimization (HaWMPO), a closed-loop reinforcement learning pipeline for
VLA policy post-training with world models. Specifically, HaWMPO introduces
an action-conditioned hallucination-aware model to estimate the reliability of gen-
erated image sequences, and incorporates hallucination scores into group relative
policy optimization through a Reward-Soft mechanism, suppressing unreliable ac-
tion chunks during training. On the LIBERO benchmark, HaWMPO achieves the
best average success rate, with gains of 15.0% over the base model and 2.8%
over the strongest baseline; real-world experiments on a G1 robot further validate
its effectiveness, raising the average success rate on two manipulation tasks from
67.5% to 80.0%.
Keywords: Reinforcement Training, World Model, Generalist Robot Policy
1
Introduction
In recent years, generalist robot policies[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] have demonstrated
strong multi-task generalization capabilities in robotic manipulation tasks. However, their further
improvement is still constrained by the high cost of interaction in real-world environments. This
limitation is particularly evident in embodied manipulation tasks, where directly performing online
reinforcement learning on physical robots often requires extensive physical trial and error. Such a
process is not only sample-inefficient, but also introduces potential risks of hardware damage and
safety issues. Therefore, a key challenge for improving general-purpose robotic policies is how to
provide closed-loop feedback for reinforcement learning while reducing the reliance on real-world
robot interactions. With the rapid development of world models[15, 16, 17, 18], transferring rein-
forcement learning from the real environment to an imagination space constructed by world models
has gradually emerged as a promising paradigm for policy optimization. In this work, a world model
can serve as an interactive virtual simulator, providing low-cost and efficient synthetic experience
for policy learning. However, generative world models are not strict physical simulators. Their
predictions are inherently based on generative modeling, which makes them prone to accumulated
prediction errors and hallucinations during long-horizon rollouts. Directly using hallucinated vir-
arXiv:2609.09941v1  [cs.RO]  9 Sep 2026


World Model
VLA Model
Action
Image
Hallucinated Trajectory Rollout
(a) World Model-Based RL
(b) Hallucination-Aware World Model
World Model-Generated
Hallucination-Aware Model
Hallucination Score
(c) Self-Improving via Hallucination-Aware RL
Trajectory 
Rollout
"#
"%
…
##
#%
…
Multiplication
$"&
$"%
…
$"#
$"'
…
Group Computation
%&
%%
…
%#
%'
…
!(
Buffer
Update max !(")  
World Model
t
t + k
…
Standard world model-based RL may suffer from 
hallucinated rollouts
…
VLA Model
Action
&!"#
'&$
VLA Model
!!
…
Hallucination-Aware 
Model
Reward Model
!!
VLA Model
Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed hallucination-aware VLA reinforcement learning pipeline. (a)
In standard world model-based RL, the VLA policy interacts with a learned world model to generate
imagined trajectory rollouts, while hallucinated visual predictions may introduce biased reward sig-
nals and lead to unstable policy updates. (b) Conditioned on VLA actions, the hallucination-aware
model assesses the reliability of imagined trajectory rollouts from the world model and assigns a
hallucination score to each rollout. (c) Our closed-loop pipeline incorporates hallucination scores
into GRPO with the Reward-Soft mechanism to stabilize policy optimization.
tual trajectories for reinforcement learning may mislead policy updates, causing the VLA policy to
exploit world-model biases rather than learn actions effective in real environments. For example,
WoVR[19] shows that hallucinated imagined rollouts can mislead policy optimization by turning
world-model errors into false learning signals. Such hallucinations introduce biased state transi-
tions, causing the policy optimization process to deviate from real-world dynamics and ultimately
weakening the stability of reinforcement learning and the performance of the learned policy.
We propose a hallucination-aware world model-based reinforcement learning pipeline for VLA pol-
icy optimization. Instead of treating all world-model-generated rollouts equally, our method explic-
itly estimates their reliability and weights their contributions according to the predicted hallucination
level. The pipeline consists of three core components: an action-conditioned world model that gen-
erates future image sequences from the current visual context and VLA-predicted action chunks, a
hallucination-aware model that evaluates rollout reliability under the given action condition, and a
reward model that predicts task completion from generated images. Building on this world model-
based RL pipeline, we introduce a Reward-Soft mechanism to reduce the negative influence of
highly hallucinated action chunks during reward shaping and policy updates, thereby improving
training stability and policy performance. We validate our method in the LIBERO[20] simulation
benchmark and real-world robotic settings, focusing on task success rates, training stability, and
deployment performance. Overall, the main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We establish a closed-loop VLA reinforcement learning pipeline integrating a world model, a
hallucination-aware model, and a reward model. This architecture supports online-style policy
optimization without frequent real-world robot interactions.
• We design an action-conditioned hallucination-aware model to quantify the reliability of image
sequences predicted by the world model under specified action inputs. This model produces a
continuous hallucination score that can be directly leveraged for reinforcement learning.
2


• We integrate the derived hallucination score into the GRPO optimization pipeline, and propose a
Reward-Soft mechanism to penalize severely hallucinated action segments during rollouts. This
mitigates the adverse bias of the world model on policy updates in reinforcement learning.
2
Related Work
2.1
Reinforcement Learning for VLA Models
As VLA models advance toward universal robotic policies, research increasingly adopts reinforce-
ment learning[21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] to break limits of supervised imitation learning. Traditional
imitation learning depends heavily on offline demonstrations, with poor performance on out-of-
distribution cases, long-horizon tasks and sparse rewards. VLA-RL[27] adopts a robotic process
reward model to mitigate sparse reward issues and optimizes policies via online PPO[28] reinforce-
ment learning. Targeting flow-matching VLA models, the πRL[29] framework devises Flow-Noise
and Flow-SDE to resolve intractable action log-likelihood calculation, enabling direct RL optimiza-
tion and boosting flow-based policy capacity. LWD[30] constructs an offline-online RL framework
for robot clusters. With distributional implicit value learning and Q-function adjoint matching, it
addresses several limitations of pre-trained VLA models, including over-dependence on imitation
learning, real-world distribution drift, sparse rewards in long-horizon tasks, underutilized failure
data, and limited cross-task generalization across diverse robotic manipulation scenarios.
2.2
World Models for VLA Reinforcement Training
With the development of VLA models, world models have become an important tool for VLA train-
ing due to their ability to simulate environment distributions and capture physical dynamics. Re-
cent works have incorporated world models into VLA pre-training, post-training, and reinforcement
learning to reduce real-world interaction costs and provide virtual experience. For example, World-
Env[16] enables RL post-training without real-world interaction by combining a geometry-aware
world simulator with a VLM-guided instant reflector. WMPO[31] integrates a pixel-level video
world model with online GRPO[32], improving VLA policies through policy-behavior alignment
and frame-level action control. However, long-horizon autoregressive generation in world mod-
els can accumulate errors and lead to hallucinations. To mitigate this issue, WoVR[19] introduces
Keyframe Initialization and Refinement (KIR) and PACE-based policy-world model co-evolution to
reduce hallucinations, error accumulation, and distorted RL signals caused by policy drift.
3
Methodology
3.1
Hallucination-Aware Model for World Model
World-model prediction errors can accumulate during imagined rollouts and introduce misleading
signals into VLA policy optimization. We introduce an action-conditioned Hallucination-Aware
Model (HAM) to estimate the reliability of each generated video chunk. HAM takes an eight-frame
predicted chunk ˆVc, its conditioning actions ac, the current observation Ic, and an anchor image I0
as inputs. Here, I0 is the initial observation of the rollout, providing a fixed visual reference.
To construct supervision, we generate video chunks from recorded actions in successful and failed
trajectories and compare them with the corresponding observed sequences. We use four quality-
oriented metrics: DINOv3 similarity, depth consistency, optical-flow-based trajectory consistency,
and MUSIQ image quality. Each metric s(m)
c
is min–max normalized, and the hallucination target
is defined as
q(m)
c
= clip[0,1]
 
s(m)
c
−ℓm
max(um −ℓm, ε)
!
,
h⋆
c = 1 −1
4
4
X
m=1
q(m)
c
,
(1)
where ℓm and um are the normalization bounds and ε > 0 ensures numerical stability. All met-
rics are oriented so that higher values indicate better quality; thus, larger h⋆
c indicates more severe
3


Predicted Video Chunk
Current Image
Anchor Image
…
DINOv3
Encoder
…
Visual Encoding
DINOv3
Encoder
…
Context
Projector
…
Frame Embedding
Context Token
Action Chunk
Action Projector
Image Embedding
MLP
Fusion Transformer
1) Cross-Attention
2) Self-Attention
3) FFN
Layer Norm
Layer Norm
Layer Norm
Fusion Block x 4
…
Learnable Token
Hallucination Head
Learnable Query
Cross-Attention
FFN
MLP
Layer Norm
Sigmoid
Hallucination Score 
Figure 2: Architecture of HAM. Predicted video frames, the current observation, the initial anchor
image, and conditioning actions are encoded and fused to predict a chunk-level hallucination score.
Higher scores indicate less reliable predictions.
hallucination. Depth and trajectory consistency capture geometric and motion discrepancies beyond
visual appearance, although this composite target remains a proxy rather than a guarantee of physical
validity. Task failure alone does not imply hallucination.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, a frozen DINOv3 encoder extracts visual features, while the Context and
Action Projectors map contextual images and actions into a shared feature space. A four-layer
Fusion Transformer combines these inputs through action-to-visual cross-attention, self-attention,
and feed-forward layers. A learnable query aggregates the fused representations, followed by an
MLP and sigmoid activation to produce a continuous chunk-level score. We train HAM using mean
squared error:
ˆhc = fψ( ˆVc, ac, Ic, I0),
LHAM =
1
|DHAM|
X
c∈DHAM
(ˆhc −h⋆
c)2,
(2)
where DHAM is the labeled training set. Observed future sequences are required only for target con-
struction. During imagined rollouts, HAM predicts ˆhc from the generated chunk and its conditioning
inputs for subsequent reward modulation.
3.2
Reward-Soft Mechanism for Hallucination-Aware RL
After training the aforementioned hallucination-aware model, we introduce the quantitative halluci-
nation metric into the reinforcement learning pipeline and further propose the Reward-soft mecha-
nism accordingly. Specifically, this mechanism imposes hallucination-driven penalties on seemingly
successful RL steps. We first average the hallucination scores within each action chunk sampled in
the current rollout, then transform the raw reward via Equation (1) to achieve dynamic reward mod-
ulation conditioned on hallucination severity.
ˆR = (1 −α · H) · R
(3)
where ˆR denotes the reward modulated by the Reward-soft mechanism, H represents the average
hallucination score of the current action chunk predicted by the hallucination-aware model, R is
the average raw reward provided by the reward model for the corresponding chunk, and α is a tun-
able hyperparameter that governs the impact of overall hallucination level on the reward. We verify
that the Reward-soft mechanism significantly mitigates the negative effects of high-hallucination RL
4


Algorithm 1 Hallucination-Aware World Model-Based Policy Optimization (HaWMPO)
Require: Pretrained VLA policy πθ; action-conditioned world model Mϕ;hallucination-aware
model H; reward model R; synthetic rollout budget N;parallel env number G = 8; iterations Kiter;
hallucination penalty hyperparameter α
Output: Post-trained policy πθ
1: Initialize synthetic imaginative environments from Mϕ
2: for i = 1 to Kiter do
3:
(1) Parallel Synthetic Rollouts in World Model
4:
Roll out πθ in G parallel imaginative environments of Mϕ
5:
Collect action-chunk-level trajectories τ1, . . . , τN
6:
(2) Hallucination Score Estimation
7:
Compute average hallucination score Hc for each action chunk via H
8:
(3) Reward-Soft Modulated Reward Calculation
9:
Compute raw reward Rc for each chunk via reward model R
10:
Modulate reward by ˆRc = (1 −α · Hc) · Rc (Eq. 1)
11:
(4) GRPO-based VLA Policy Post-training
12:
Calculate group-wise normalized advantages from modulated rewards ˆRc
13:
Update πθ by minimizing GRPO loss with hallucination-aware rewards
14: end for
15: return πθ
steps on the optimization of the Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model. In the subsequent exper-
imental section, we further analyze the influence of hyperparameter α on the performance of the
Reward-soft mechanism.
3.3
Hallucination-Aware World Model-Based Policy Optimization
Subsequently, we formally propose the Hallucination-Aware World Model Policy Optimization
method.
By integrating the Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model, action-conditioned world
model, hallucination-aware model and reward model, we adopt the GRPO algorithm improved by
the Reward-Soft mechanism to conduct online reinforcement learning training for VLA agents.
Ai,t =
ˆRi,t −1
N
PN
i=1 ˆRi,t
q
1
N−1
PN
i=1( ˆRi,t −1
N
PN
i=1 ˆRi,t)2)
.
(4)
As illustrated in Figure 1, the world model serves as a simulator, enabling the VLA agent to per-
form online RL within the imaginative space constructed by the world model. Specifically, the
action-conditioned world model takes the current frame, initial reference frame, and action chunk
output by the VLA model as inputs to generate the subsequent 8 future frames.
ρi,t = πθ(ai,t | si,t)
πθold(ai,t | si,t).
(5)
The VLA model then conducts rollout for the next action chunk based on these generated frames.
Meanwhile, the reward model produces raw rewards for each action chunk from the synthe-
sized visual observations, while the hallucination-aware model outputs the average hallucina-
tion score of the corresponding chunk. The Reward-Soft mechanism is further applied to derive
hallucination-modulated optimized rewards. Built upon the GRPO framework, our overall training
pipeline leverages 8 parallel imaginative environments constructed by the world model, where the
VLA agent executes rollouts concurrently across all environments.
JHaWMPO(θ) = E

q ∼P(Q), {oi}N
i=1 ∼πθold(O | q)

· 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
|oi|
|oi|
X
t=1
·
(
min
"
ρi,tAdvi,t, clip(ρi,t, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) Advi,t
#
−βDKL

πθ ∥πref

)
.
(6)
5


Using the optimized rewards obtained via Reward-Soft adjustment, we compute relative advantages
through group-wise reward normalization, and finally formulate the GRPO loss to update the VLA
model end-to-end.
DKL[πθ ∥πref] = πref(ai,t | si,t)
πθ(ai,t | si,t) −log πref(ai,t | si,t)
πθ(ai,t | si,t) −1.
(7)
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Settings
In this experiment, we follow the experimental setup of prior work and adopt OpenVLA-OFT as the
base model. Before reinforcement learning, the base model is first supervised fine-tuned using a one-
shot SFT setting, where only one expert trajectory is used for each task to obtain an initial policy.
To ensure a fair comparison with existing methods, we continue to use the LIBERO simulation
benchmark as the primary evaluation environment. In our pipeline, the world model serves as a
simulator for the LIBERO environment, while the VLA policy is optimized through reinforcement
learning within the virtual interaction environment constructed by the world model. Training and
evaluation are mainly conducted on three LIBERO task suites: Object, Spatial, and Goal. We train
the model using the Adam optimizer. The learning rate of the backbone network is set to 2.0×10−5,
while the learning rate of the value network is set to 3.0 × 10−3. The weight decay coefficient is set
to 0.01. Gradient clipping is applied during training, with the maximum gradient norm constrained
to 1.0. All experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA H200 GPUs.
4.2
Simulation Experiments
We first conduct simulation experiments on the LIBERO benchmark to evaluate the effectiveness
of the proposed hallucination-aware reinforcement learning pipeline. We compare HaWMPO with
three representative baselines: the vanilla OpenVLA-OFT policy, WMPO, and WoVR*. All meth-
ods are evaluated on three LIBERO task suites (Spatial, Goal, and Object), and we report the success
rate on each suite together with the average.
It is worth noting that our reproduced WoVR* baseline does not adopt the original PACE strategy
used in the WoVR paper. Instead, for a fair comparison under the same experimental protocol,
all world-model-based methods in our experiments train the world model only once and then use
it as a fixed simulator for VLA policy optimization. Moreover, all VLA policies are trained with
reinforcement learning for 200 steps before evaluation. Therefore, the results of WoVR* reported in
this paper may differ from those in the original WoVR paper, as they correspond to our reproduced
setting rather than the full original training pipeline.
Table 1: Comparison of success rates across Spatial, Goal, and Object task categories. Our method
achieves the highest average performance against baseline approaches.
Method
Spatial
Goal
Object
Avg
OpenVLA-OFT-base
61.5
48.2
36.3
48.7
WMPO
67.8
54.6
48.0
56.8
WoVR*
69.2
64.0
49.6
60.9
HaWMPO (Ours)
77.2
61.6
52.2
63.7
As shown in Table 1, HaWMPO achieves the best average success rate of 63.7%, improving over
the vanilla OpenVLA-OFT policy by 15.0 points, over WMPO by 6.9 points, and over the strongest
baseline WoVR* by 2.8 points. On individual suites, HaWMPO achieves the best results on Spa-
tial (77.2%) and Object (52.2%), surpassing WoVR* by 8.0 and 2.6 points respectively, and remains
comparable to WoVR* on Goal. These results demonstrate that reinforcement learning in the world-
model-based imagination space can substantially improve the task execution capability of the VLA
6


0
80
120
160
200
Training Steps
35
40
45
50
55
Success Rate (%)
36.3
50.8
47.6
49.4
47.6
36.3
52.8
52.8
52.4
52.2
36.3
48.0
48.4
49.0
48.6
Object
0
80
120
160
200
Training Steps
50
55
60
65
70
48.2
61.6
62.4
64.2
66.2
48.2
60.2
60.6
61.6
61.6
48.2
56.4
58.0
59.2
59.8
Goal
0
80
120
160
200
Training Steps
60
65
70
75
80
61.5
65.8
68.4
68.4
70.0
61.5
73.2
74.4
78.2
77.2
61.5
64.2
66.0
66.8
67.4
Spatial
= 1
= 0.3
= 0.1
Figure 4: Ablation study on α across three LIBERO task suites. A moderate penalty (α = 0.3) is
preferred on Object and Spatial, while Goal benefits from a stronger penalty (α = 1).
policy, and that hallucinated world-model rollouts can bias VLA policy learning. By explicitly mod-
eling rollout hallucination and integrating it via the Reward-Soft mechanism, our method reduces
the impact of unreliable synthetic trajectories, enabling more robust policy optimization and stronger
LIBERO performance.
4.3
Real-World Experiments
We evaluate HaWMPO on the G1 robot using
two tasks (Fig. 3): Tissue-to-Box, placing a tissue
inside a white storage box, and Headphone-on-
Stand, placing headphones onto a stand. Success
requires the tissue to remain inside the box or the
headphones to remain supported by the stand af-
ter release.
We compare against the SFT-trained OpenVLA-
OFT base policy and WoVR, with 20 trials per
method per task under the same evaluation pro-
tocol.
Table 2 shows that HaWMPO achieves
the highest observed success rates on both tasks:
85% and 75%. Its average success rate of 80.0%
exceeds the base policy and WoVR by 12.5 and
7.5 percentage points, respectively. These results
provide preliminary evidence of benefits in phys-
ical manipulation; broader evaluation remains
necessary.
(a) Tissue-to-Box
(b) Headphone
Figure 3: Real-world task setups on the G1
robot.
Table 2: Success rates (%); successes out of 20
trials in parentheses.
Method
Tissue-to-Box
Headphone
Base VLA
75% (15/20)
60% (12/20)
WoVR
80% (16/20)
65% (13/20)
HaWMPO
85% (17/20)
75% (15/20)
4.4
Analysis of the Reward-Soft Mechanism
We further investigate the effect of the Reward-Soft mechanism, focusing on the hyperparameter α
in Eq. (1), which controls how strongly the hallucination score modulates the final reward.
Intuitively, an overly large α suppresses the reward of high-hallucination rollouts too aggressively,
discarding virtual experience that remains useful despite visual imperfections; an overly small α
instead lets unreliable trajectories bias policy updates. As shown in Fig. 4, the optimal penalty
strength is task-dependent: α = 0.3 achieves the best and most stable results on Object and Spatial
(52.0% and 77.2% at 200 steps), whereas Goal, whose rollouts suffer more severe hallucination
accumulation, benefits from a stronger penalty (α = 1, 66.2%). In all cases, α = 0.1 improves the
slowest, confirming that hallucination-aware reward modulation is essential. We therefore select α
per task suite and report the corresponding results in Table 1.
7


4.5
Analysis of the Hallucination-Aware Model
We evaluate HAM independently of downstream policy performance to assess its reliability signal
for Reward-Soft. The evaluation uses 50 video chunks from 50 trajectories in LIBERO , covering 10
tasks with five chunks per task. Human annotations identify 18 hallucinated and 32 non-hallucinated
chunks.
We compare HAM with four single-metric baselines: MUSIQ image quality, DINO feature sim-
ilarity, optical-flow trajectory consistency, and depth discrepancy. All scores are oriented so that
higher values indicate greater predicted hallucination. Each method is evaluated on the same anno-
tated chunks using AUROC and average precision (AP), with 95% confidence intervals estimated
from 2,000 trajectory-level bootstrap resamples. DINO, trajectory, and depth baselines require cor-
responding observed future frames as references; HAM and MUSIQ do not.
Table 3: Hallucination detection against human annotations on 50 LIBERO chunks. Brackets show
trajectory-bootstrap 95% confidence intervals. †Requires observed future frames.
Method
AUROC ↑
AP ↑
MUSIQ-only
0.3056 [0.1410, 0.4798]
0.3750 [0.2079, 0.5561]
DINO-only†
0.9062 [0.8182, 0.9733]
0.8299 [0.6638, 0.9563]
Trajectory-only†
0.8872 [0.7883, 0.9610]
0.8069 [0.6276, 0.9388]
Depth-only†
0.8941 [0.7912, 0.9745]
0.8644 [0.7258, 0.9649]
HAM
0.9375 [0.8648, 0.9911]
0.8952 [0.7660, 0.9885]
As shown in Table 3, HAM achieves the highest AUROC (0.9375) and AP (0.8952). The reference-
based metrics also provide informative signals, whereas MUSIQ-only performs substantially worse,
suggesting that image quality alone is insufficient for detecting hallucinations in this evaluation set.
HAM provides this reliability signal without requiring observed future frames, making it applicable
during imagined rollouts. These comparisons are descriptive; statistical significance of the differ-
ences has not been established. Separately, HAM achieves an MAE of 0.0174, an RMSE of 0.0250,
and a Spearman correlation of 0.9310 against the composite proxy targets. These regression metrics
measure agreement with the constructed supervision, whereas the human-label evaluation indepen-
dently assesses hallucination detection. Fig. 8 provides complementary qualitative examples: higher
HAM scores correspond to more evident discrepancies from the observed frames. Together, these
findings support using HAM as a reliability signal for downweighting unreliable imagined chunks
through Reward-Soft, complementing the downstream policy ablation.
Figure 5: World-model predictions with higher and lower HAM scores. Higher-scored examples
exhibit more evident discrepancies from the corresponding observed frames, whereas lower-scored
examples more closely match the observations.
8


4.6
Ablation Study
We further conduct an ablation study on the hallucination-aware model (HAM). Note that removing
HAM not only eliminates the explicit estimation of hallucination levels in world-model-generated
rollouts, but also disables the hallucination-score-based Reward-Soft mechanism during training.
Therefore, HAM and Reward-Soft are treated as an integrated module and ablated together.
Table 4: Ablation study of the hallucination-aware model on Spatial, Object, and Goal task suites.
∆denotes the improvement of our method over the variant without the hallucination-aware model.
Task Suite
Steps
w/o HAM
Ours
∆
Spatial
80
61.6
73.2
+11.6
120
64.6
74.4
+9.8
200
69.2
77.2
+8.0
Object
80
50.4
52.8
+2.4
120
54.2
52.8
-1.4
200
49.6
52.2
+2.6
Goal
80
60.4
60.2
-0.2
120
62.4
60.6
-1.8
200
64.0
61.6
-2.4
As shown in Table 4, removing HAM leads to a clear performance drop on Spatial and Object. The
degradation is most pronounced on Spatial, where our full model improves the success rate by 8.0–
11.6 points at all evaluated steps, and the gain remains as large as 8.0 points at 200 training steps,
indicating that the benefit of hallucination-aware training persists rather than vanishing as the policy
converges. On Object, our method also achieves higher success rates at most training steps.
On Goal, the full model under the unified α = 0.3 setting falls slightly behind the ablated variant,
though the gap stays within 2.4 points at all evaluated steps. We emphasize that this stems from the
choice of penalty strength rather than the ineffectiveness of HAM: as shown in Fig. 4, Goal benefits
from a stronger hallucination penalty, and with α = 1 our method reaches 66.2% on Goal, surpassing
the ablated variant (64.0%). For fairness, we fix α = 0.3 across all task suites instead of tuning
it per task. Overall, these results indicate that explicitly modeling world-model hallucinations and
incorporating them into policy optimization via the Reward-Soft mechanism improves the reliability
of virtual rollouts and reduces the negative impact of low-quality generated trajectories on policy
updates.
5
Conclusion
In this work, we propose a hallucination-aware world model-based reinforcement learning pipeline
for Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policy optimization.
Specifically, we design an action-
conditioned hallucination-aware model to explicitly estimate the reliability of world-model-
generated rollouts, and further incorporate the predicted hallucination scores into GRPO through
the proposed Reward-Soft mechanism. By reducing the influence of unreliable synthetic trajectories
during policy optimization, our method improves the stability and effectiveness of world-model-
based reinforcement learning. Experimental results on LIBERO benchmarks demonstrate that the
proposed framework consistently outperforms existing baselines across multiple task suites, verify-
ing the importance of explicitly modeling rollout hallucinations for VLA policy learning.
6
Limitations
Despite the promising results, this work still has several limitations. First, the hallucination-aware
model relies on manually designed supervision signals, including feature discrepancy, depth incon-
sistency, and trajectory deviation, which may not fully capture all types of world-model hallucina-
tions. Second, the current framework is mainly evaluated on relatively short-horizon manipulation
9


tasks in the LIBERO benchmark, and its scalability to more complex long-horizon real-world sce-
narios remains underexplored. In addition, the hallucination-aware model and world model are
trained separately, which may limit the overall adaptability of the system during online reinforce-
ment learning. Future work will investigate end-to-end joint optimization and more generalizable
hallucination estimation strategies for large-scale embodied learning.
References
[1] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster,
G. Lam, P. Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[2] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman,
B. Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
[3] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess,
A. Dubey, C. Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to
robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
[4] M. J. Kim, C. Finn, and P. Liang. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing
speed and success. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645, 2025.
[5] W. Wu, F. Lu, Y. Wang, S. Yang, S. Liu, F. Wang, Q. Zhu, H. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Ma, et al. A
pragmatic vla foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18692, 2026.
[6] H. Shi, B. Xie, Y. Liu, L. Sun, F. Liu, T. Wang, E. Zhou, H. Fan, X. Zhang, and G. Huang.
Memoryvla: Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-action models for robotic ma-
nipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19236, 2025.
[7] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Haus-
man, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
[8] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma, A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi,
C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti, et al. Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for afford-
able and efficient robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.
[9] Nvidia, J. Bjorck, F. Casta˜neda, N. Cherniadev, X. Da, R. Ding, LinxiJimFan, Y. Fang, D. Fox,
F. Hu, S. Huang, J. Jang, Z. Jiang, J. Kautz, K. Kundalia, L. Lao, Z. Li, Z. Lin, K. Lin, G. Liu,
E. Llontop, L. Magne, A. Mandlekar, A. Narayan, S. Nasiriany, S. Reed, Y. L. Tan, G. Wang,
Z. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Xiang, Y. Xie, Y. Xu, Z.-T. Xu, S. Ye, Z. Yu, A. Zhang,
H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Zheng, and Y. Zhu. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist
humanoid robots. ArXiv, abs/2503.14734, 2025. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:277113335.
[10] H. Luo, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Zheng, Z. Xi, C. Xu, H. Xu, H. Yuan, C. Zhang, Y. Wang,
Y. Feng, and Z. Lu. Being-h0.5: Scaling human-centric robot learning for cross-embodiment
generalization. ArXiv, abs/2601.12993, 2026. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:284909770.
[11] S. Xu, R. Jin, H. Zhou, B. Yue, G. Qiao, Y. Tai, Y. Deng, K. Jia, and G. Liu. From reaction
to anticipation: Proactive failure recovery through agentic task graph for robotic manipulation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.11951, 2026.
[12] J. F. Academy. Joyai-ra 0.1: A foundation model for robotic autonomy. ArXiv, abs/2604.20100,
2026. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:287668520.
10


[13] J.-R. Team. Joyai-ra 0.5: Scaling robot manipulation learning via dual action alignment. 2026.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:290852585.
[14] P.-D. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Guo, F.-Y. Ma, Z. Yuan, A. Li, Z. K. Chen, W. Li, T. Zhang, M. Li,
J. Zhang, J. Xiong, Z. Xiang, D. Chi, Y.-H. Zhuang, R. Li, L. qiong Luo, W. Tan, D. Li, Y. Li,
Q. He, J. Liang, M. Luo, C. Cai, H. Zhang, P. Hao, S. Wang, N. Qiao, Y. Gao, L. Kang,
J. Xiong, J. Li, H. Shen, Y. Gong, N. Duan, and L. Lin. Joyai-sim: A simulation-enabled
interconversion toolchain for the embodied data pyramid. ArXiv, abs/2606.16776, 2026. URL
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:289300675.
[15] T. Wan, A. Wang, B. Ai, B. Wen, C. Mao, C.-W. Xie, D. Chen, F. Yu, H. Zhao, J. Yang,
et al.
Wan:
Open and advanced large-scale video generative models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.20314, 2025.
[16] A. Ali, J. Bai, M. Bala, Y. Balaji, A. Blakeman, T. Cai, J. Cao, T. Cao, E. Cha, Y.-W.
Chao, et al. World simulation with video foundation models for physical ai. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.00062, 2025.
[17] Z. Zhu, X. Wang, W. Zhao, C. Min, B. Li, N. Deng, M. Dou, Y. Wang, B. Shi, K. Wang, et al.
Is sora a world simulator? a comprehensive survey on general world models and beyond. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.03520, 2024.
[18] M. J. Kim, Y. Gao, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, Y. Ge, G. Lam, P. Liang, S. Song, M.-Y. Liu, C. Finn,
and J. Gu. Cosmos policy: Fine-tuning video models for visuomotor control and planning.
ArXiv, abs/2601.16163, 2026.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
284935587.
[19] Z. Jiang, S. Zhou, Y. Jiang, Z. Huang, M. Wei, Y. Chen, T. Zhou, Z. Guo, H. Lin, Q. Zhang,
et al. Wovr: World models as reliable simulators for post-training vla policies with rl. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.13977, 2026.
[20] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowl-
edge transfer for lifelong robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310, 2023.
[21] H. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Yan, N. Han, R. Zhang, C. Gu, J. Gao, Z. Guo, S. Qian, Y. Wang, et al. Last-
r1: Reinforcing action via adaptive physical latent reasoning for vla models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.28192, 2026.
[22] Y. Chen, S. Tian, S. Liu, Y. Zhou, H. Li, and D. Zhao. Conrft: A reinforced fine-tuning method
for vla models via consistency policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05450, 2025.
[23] Y. Guo, J. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Ji, Y.-J. Wang, Y. Hu, and J. Chen. Improving vision-language-
action model with online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16664, 2025.
[24] Z. Zhang, K. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. Jang, Y. Li, S. Han, C. Wang, M. Ding, D. Fox, and H. Yao.
Grape: Generalizing robot policy via preference alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19309,
2024.
[25] C. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Guo, H. Lin, S. Xu, H. Zang, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Zhu, J. Hu, Z. Huang,
M. Wei, Y. Xie, K. Yang, B. Dai, Z. Xu, X.-Y. Wang, X. Fu, Z. Liu, K. Chen, W. Liu, G. Liu,
B. Li, J. Yang, Z. Yang, G. Dai, and Y. Wang. Rlinf: Flexible and efficient large-scale re-
inforcement learning via macro-to-micro flow transformation. ArXiv, abs/2509.15965, 2025.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:281410732.
[26] Z. Yuan, S. Jiang, C.-M. Feng, Y. Zhang, S. Cui, Z. Li, and N. Zhao. Scene-r1: Video-grounded
large language models for 3d scene reasoning without 3d annotations. ArXiv, abs/2506.17545,
2025. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:279999995.
11


[27] G. Lu, W. Guo, C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Jiang, Z. Gao, Y. Tang, and Z. Wang. Vla-rl: To-
wards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.18719, 2025.
[28] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[29] K. Chen, Z. Liu, T. Zhang, Z. Guo, S. Xu, H. Lin, H. Zang, Q. Zhang, Z. Yu, G. Fan,
et al. πrl: Online rl fine-tuning for flow-based vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.25889, 2025.
[30] Y. Wang, X. Li, P. Xie, P. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Cai, Q. Zhang, C. Qu, J. Wu, J. Song, et al.
Learning while deploying: Fleet-scale reinforcement learning for generalist robot policies.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.00416, 2026.
[31] F. Zhu, Z. Yan, Z. Hong, Q. Shou, X. Ma, and S. Guo. Wmpo: World model-based policy
optimization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09515, 2025.
[32] Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song, X. Bi, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Wu, et al.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
12


Appendix
A
Implementation Details
A.1
Data Collection
When training the hallucination-aware model, we first adopt the world model to perform chunk-
wise inference and generation on the collected real dataset, so as to construct the predicted dataset.
Next, we revise several metrics in WorldArena. Leveraging models including DINOv3 and Depth-
Anything-v3 together with trajectory optical flow methods, we extract features from both real and
predicted datasets. Four hallucination metrics corresponding to each chunk are calculated, namely
depth information, DINO feature similarity, image quality and trajectory optical flow similarity. The
resulting data is finally used as the training set for our hallucination-aware model.
A.2
Training Data Analysis
In robotic settings, world model hallucinations consist of intertwined failures in geometry, visual
appearance, motion coherence and semantic alignment. We adopt four complementary metrics:
Depth Accuracy for geometric consistency against ground truth, Image Quality scored by MUSIQ,
Trajectory Accuracy for optical flow motion consistency via NDTW, and DINO Similarity for frame-
level semantic and appearance matching using DINOv3. All metrics are min-max normalized and
Figure 6: Score distributions of world-model prediction chunks across four normalized metrics and
the composite score, grouped by Pos (top 10%), Unlabelled (middle 40%), and Neg (bottom 50%).
Trajectory accuracy shows the clearest separation between positive and negative samples; depth
accuracy and DINO similarity are generally high but Neg exhibits a longer left tail; image quality
distributions overlap heavily across groups; composite scores form three nearly non-overlapping
bands, consistent with percentile-based labeling.
equally weighted to compute the Composite score. We split samples by scores: the top 10% as high-
quality anchors, the bottom 50% as typical hallucination cases, and the remaining 40% as unlabeled
transitions. Statistics show Composite is strongly correlated with Trajectory Accuracy (0.72) and
DINO Similarity (0.80), while Depth Accuracy provides auxiliary geometric constraints. Image
Quality has nearly no correlation and even weak negative correlation with other metrics, proving
good visual quality does not indicate the absence of hallucinations. PCA results further verify that
motion and semantics dominate the data distribution with clear separability between positive and
negative samples.
13


Instead of binary labels, we use continuous Composite scores as supervision. Taking 8-frame predic-
tions, action sequences and contexts as input, the model regresses the deviation from real scenarios.
It effectively detects critical failures in RL rollout such as abnormal motion, object drift and se-
mantic inconsistency, without being affected by superficial visual features like sharpness. Given the
Figure 7: Median and interquartile ranges of each metric across the three label groups. Trajectory
accuracy, DINO similarity, depth accuracy, and composite score increase monotonically from Neg
to Pos, with composite showing near-complete separation of IQRs; image quality differs little across
groups and is a poor standalone discriminator between faithful predictions and hallucinations.
heavily left-skewed Trajectory distribution, limited positive samples and score saturation of Depth
and DINO metrics, we use Composite as a multi-metric proxy label for training to align hallucina-
tion detection with robot decision-making. Motion-related hallucinations should be prioritized, and
image quality should not be used to judge hallucinations.
Figure 8: Two-dimensional PCA manifold of the four metrics: left, composite score contours; right,
label scatter overlaid on faded contours. PC1 (53.2% variance) is driven mainly by trajectory accu-
racy and DINO similarity; PC2 (26.9%) by image quality and depth accuracy. Composite increases
diagonally, with Pos samples concentrated in the upper-right and Neg in the lower-left, showing that
overall quality is geometrically separable in metric space and suitable as continuous supervision for
the hallucination-aware model.
A.3
Baseline
Our method is an extension of WoVR, which serves as our baseline. Rather than altering the world
model’s structure, our goal is to unlock its existing potential with minimal overhead, improving
training efficiency through our novel components. We inherit the Action-Conditioned World Model
from WoVR, using Wan2.2 as the backbone and injecting an action MLP to generate future image
chunks. We do not include WoVR’s PACE strategy in our setup, as its improvements are orthogonal
to our method: any performance boost from PACE would apply equally to our pipeline.
14


A.4
Real-World Experiments
We evaluate HaWMPO on the G1 robot using two physical manipulation tasks: Tissue-to-Box, in
which the robot places a tissue into a white storage box, and Headphone-on-Stand, in which it
places headphones onto a stand. Fig. 9 shows actual robot executions recorded during physical
testing, rather than world-model-generated predictions.
We compare HaWMPO with the SFT-trained OpenVLA-OFT base policy and WoVR under the
same evaluation protocol, with 20 trials per method per task. A trial is successful if the tissue
remains inside the box or the headphones remain supported by the stand after release. On Tissue-
to-Box, the base policy, WoVR, and HaWMPO achieve success rates of 75% (15/20), 80% (16/20),
and 85% (17/20), respectively. On Headphone-on-Stand, the corresponding success rates are 60%
(12/20), 65% (13/20), and 75% (15/20).
Across the two tasks, HaWMPO achieves an average success rate of 80.0%, compared with 67.5%
for the SFT baseline and 72.5% for WoVR, yielding improvements of 12.5 and 7.5 percentage
points, respectively. These results provide preliminary evidence of benefits in physical manipulation,
although evaluation on additional tasks and trials is needed to establish broader generalization.
Figure 9: Real-world robot executions recorded during physical testing on the G1 robot. The upper
row shows the Tissue-to-Box task, and the lower row shows the Headphone-on-Stand task. These
images depict actual robot executions, not world-model-generated rollouts; aggregate success rates
are reported in Table 2.
A.5
World Model as Simulator
Model architecture.
We use an action-conditioned adaptation of Wan2.2-TI2V-5B as the world-
model simulator. The model consists of a video variational autoencoder (VAE) and a latent-space
diffusion Transformer (DiT). The VAE encodes visual observations into spatiotemporal latents and
decodes predicted latents into RGB frames. The DiT contains 30 Transformer blocks with a hidden
dimension of 3072 and 24 attention heads. Each block combines self-attention over video tokens,
cross-attention to conditioning tokens, and a feed-forward network.
Robot actions are incorporated through two conditioning paths. First, an MLP projects individual
actions into tokens that serve as keys and values for cross-attention. Second, temporally grouped
actions are projected into embeddings that are added to the diffusion-timestep embeddings, thereby
conditioning the modulation of the Transformer blocks. This design conditions visual predictions
on the commanded motion rather than relying on visual context alone.
Inputs and outputs.
Each simulator step receives five conditioning RGB frames: a fixed refer-
ence frame and the four most recent frames. It additionally receives an eight-step action chunk,
together with the action context associated with the conditioning frames. In LIBERO, each action
is seven-dimensional, comprising three translational components, three rotational components, and
one gripper command. All frames have a resolution of 256 × 256.
15


Let Ct denote the five-frame visual context, Ut the associated action context, and At
=
(at, . . . , at+K−1) the proposed action chunk. The world model predicts
bOt+1:t+K ∼pϕ( · | Ct, Ut, At) ,
K = 8,
(8)
where ϕ denotes the world-model parameters and bOt+1:t+K contains eight predicted RGB frames.
The generation pipeline decodes a 13-frame sequence, including the five conditioning frames; only
the eight future frames are returned as the simulated transition. The conditioning latents are held
fixed during iterative denoising. The simulator is conditioned on images and actions; task instruc-
tions are supplied to the VLA policy rather than directly to the video-generation model in this im-
plementation.
Closed-loop imagined rollouts.
A rollout is initialized from recorded visual context. The VLA
policy predicts an action chunk from the current observation and task instruction, and the world
model generates the corresponding future observations. The last four generated frames then update
the visual context, while the reference frame remains fixed. Repeating this process produces a
closed-loop imagined trajectory. Thus, generation is autoregressive across chunks, whereas each
future chunk is generated jointly through latent-space denoising.
The world model is trained before policy optimization and remains frozen during reinforcement
learning. It predicts visual transitions, not rewards or hallucination scores: a separate reward model
evaluates the generated observations, and HAM estimates their reliability. Reward-Soft uses the
HAM scores to modulate the rewards used for policy optimization.
Figure 10: Selected world-model rollout frames for Tissue-to-Box (top), placing a tissue into a
white storage box, and Headphone-on-Stand (bottom), placing headphones onto a stand. Frames
are ordered chronologically from left to right. These examples illustrate action-conditioned visual
predictions in physical manipulation scenes.
Fig. 10 presents qualitative examples of the generated rollouts. Although the predictions depict
task-relevant changes in the scene, visual plausibility alone does not guarantee accurate contact
dynamics or successful physical execution. Errors can accumulate as generated observations are
reused as context, motivating the hallucination-aware reward modulation in HaWMPO.
16
