Knowledge-Guided Hierarchical Policy Learning for High-Precision Cylindrical
Assembly under Tight Tolerances
Binbin Lian, Xinyu Liu, Tao Sun∗
Key Laboratory of Mechanism Theory and Equipment Design of Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, China
Abstract
A hybrid hierarchical learning framework is proposed to achieve high-precision assembly of Φ170mm cylindrical
components with tolerance of 0.1mm. The lower-level network integrates expert experience through Behavior Cloning
(BC), giving the robot human-like intuition, and incorporates the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(TD3) algorithm to enhance training stability and robustness. The upper-level network dynamically adjusts the lower-
level decisions based on heuristic rules, ensuring flexibility in operations. A simulated model is constructed to learn
before transferring to real world. An efficient and safe training is allowed. Comparisons show that the reward curve
converges within 500 episodes, indicating high learning efficiency. It also demonstrates better adaptability to initial
conditions and pose errors, achieving satisfactory success rates even under extreme conditions. Moreover, the method
exhibits good stability under Gaussian noise interference. In the real world, the assembly trajectory of the cylindrical
segment shows smoother motion and less fluctuation.
Keywords: Parallel robot; Peg-in-hole assembly; Imitation learning; Reinforcement learning
1. Introduction
Assembly of large size and heavy components in areas like automobiles and aircraft still largely relies on manual
labor [1]. Thanks to the flexibility and adaptivity, workers could conduct assembling task with high quality after skill
training. But it is labor intensive. Especially for large and heavy components with tight tolerance, consistency and
accuracy of manual assembling cannot be assured [2, 3]. Owing to high precision and efficient execution capability,
robotic assembly has become a trend [4, 5, 6]. But for assembly in unstructured environment with uncertain variations,
complex models are demanded for the robot to improve robustness to environmental noise and disturbances [7].
Traditional modeling and control methods sometimes cannot effectively address this problem due to the lack of pre-
knowledge and potential uncertainties. To address the shortcomings in traditional robotic assembly systems, Zeng et
al. introduced a method for large component assembly using iGPS and laser ranging [8]. This method is efficient,
but it has limited accuracy in specific directions. Li et al. developed a force-controlled mobile handling system for
aircraft assembly [9]. This system enhances flexibility and efficiency, but it lacks adaptability to complex assembly
features and high-precision tasks. Zheng et al. proposed a method for measuring the pose of large cylinders using
binocular vision and prior data [10]. It achieves precise positioning but is insufficiently adaptable to dynamic and
complex environments.
In recent years, machine learning, particularly reinforcement learning (RL), has significantly progressed in robotic
control. RL, through interaction with environment, can autonomously learn optimal strategies without explicit models,
demonstrating strong adaptability and efficient exploration capabilities [11, 12, 13]. For example, Wu et al. proposed
a prioritized dueling deep Q network (DQN). They combined it with long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to
achieve millimeter-level precision in automated assembly tasks [14]. Hwangbo et al. introduced an off-policy, model-
free deep RL method applicable to unstructured environments, enabling robot to perform compliant assembly tasks
∗Corresponding author
Email address: stao@tju.edu.cn (Tao Sun)
arXiv:2609.06522v1  [cs.RO]  6 Sep 2026


without manual tuning [15]. Kozlovsky et al. employed model-free RL to learn asymmetric impedance policies for
small-scale peg-in-hole assembly, reducing the need to learn full reference trajectories [16]. Although RL exhibits
great potential, most existing studies focus on small-scale peg-in-hole assembly with robotic manipulators. However,
large-size components with tight tolerances pose significant challenges for RL-based assembly, and related research
remains scarce. In particular, the target components in this work typically exceed Φ150mm in diameter with an as-
sembly tolerance of only 0.1mm. In the meantime, there are multiple connecting holes on each part requiring to be
aligned. Lutz et al. proposed a model-free RL approach for adaptive shape control in aircraft fuselage assembly,
building a reinforcement learning environment via finite element simulation and modifying the PPO algorithm to
optimize actuator layout and force for shape adjustment [17]. This method enables high-precision fuselage shape
control and excellent assembly gap reduction, yet it relies on complex finite element simulation modeling with high
implementation complexity and time costs. Liang et al. proposed a visual-haptic fusion framework for large-diameter
peg-in-hole assembly, integrating an improved U-Net–FPN for peg localization and DDPG-based force-aware control
for compliant insertion [18]. This approach achieves stable assembly with good deviation tolerance, but its visual
recognition relies on a small dataset with limited environmental variability, and fixed camera configuration plus low
control efficiency restrict dynamic large-component assembly applications. Liu et al. proposed a DRL-based assembly
path planning method for the lateral thrust device of pulse solid rocket motors [19]. This method leverages finite ele-
ment simulation to obtain O-ring damage data and adopts dueling DDQN to generate high-precision assembly paths,
effectively reducing O-ring damage, yet it is only validated in a single plane with limited degrees of freedom. For
the assembly of large-size components with tight tolerances and multi-hole alignment requirements, RL algorithms
face significant inefficiency in exploring assembly features and determining appropriate actions, and the probability
of assembly failure remains high. In addition, RL requires large amount of training data. Each action and decision
indicate one round of robot execution. Assembling learning is inefficient because of frequent robot manipulation
[20, 21]. Moreover, improper decision may lead to collision or unnecessary damage to the component in real world
due to large inertia.
Since applying RL alone has slow convergence and low exploration efficiency [22, 23, 24], combining RL and
other learning algorithms has become a promising solution. For instance, imitation learning allows robot to quickly
learn useful information from human demonstrations and convert it into knowledge models, thereby obtaining high-
level control strategies and accelerating RL process. Triantafyllidis et al. proposed a Robot Operation Network
(ROMAN). Behavior cloning, imitation learning, and RL are integrated to enable robotic systems to perform a variety
of sequential tasks with operational skills and strong fault recovery capabilities [25]. Cho et al. proposed a framework
based on imitation learning and teaching to make robot learn, improve, and generalize motor skills. The robot learns
initial motor skills from human demonstrations. It improves the skills through RL and further applies to motors
with other shapes [26]. Li et al. proposed a goal-conditioned self-imitation RL method (GCDI) for 3C industry
flexible flat cable assembly, integrating hindsight experience replay and self-imitation learning to tackle sparse rewards
and limited learning conditions [27]. To further address complex execution procedures in RL-based skill learning,
a hierarchical RL approach where high-level networks output action bounds to guide low-level actions, reducing
low-level network learning difficulty and enhancing real-world adaptability and control accuracy. Macpherson et al.
applied high-level policy to adjust low-level amplitude parameters for prediction and control of complex behaviors
[28]. Wang et al. proposed a two-layer RL learning scheme to generate gait patterns for modular robots. A high-level
network is utilized to modulate low-level actions, achieving smooth motion in gait control efficiently [29]. Huang
et al. proposed a three-layer hierarchical RL architecture for hexapod robots, where the high-level PPO controller
optimizes mid-level CPG parameters and low-level mapping function parameters, enabling the robot to adapt stably
to complex terrains [30]. As for efficiency and safety issues in early-stage RL exploration, implementing learning
process firstly in virtual environment before transferring to physical system ensures safety and improves efficiency.
Ju et al. proposed a deep RL method, where control strategies are trained in a simulated environment and then
transferred to real world improving robot performance [31]. Peng et al. trained the robot control strategy by domain
randomization in simulation. Control strategies are more robust in real-world tasks [32]. Yan et al. constructed a
multi-category peg-in-hole assembly virtual environment set with mathematical and physical force contact models,
training the adaptive meta policy learning algorithm in it to obtain a generalized assembly skill model that performs
excellently in real-world single, dual, and triple peg-in-hole assembly without additional training [33].
Based on the above ideas, a hybrid hierarchical learning (HL) framework is proposed for docking and assembling
cylindrical components over Φ150mm with tolerance 0.1 mm. The HL framework combines LSTM, Behavior Cloning
2


(BC) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3). Robot actions follow assembling procedure that
first adjust posture and then translate to align holes. In addition, a simulated environment is developed for robot
learning instead of implementing it directly in real world. Contributions are summarized as follows.
1. Lower-level network of the learning framework is composed of BC and TD3. BC embeds knowledge-guided
heuristics from expert demos to give the robot human-like intuition. An initial policy is then offered to TD3,
which learns docking skills more stable and efficiently. Constraints are set in the penalty terms of reward
function to avoid potential risks and improve learning efficiency.
2. Upper-level network is designed to select the lower-level network and control the step size of robot execution
for fast approaching and fine adjustment. The LSTM dynamically guides the lower-level network based on
heuristic rules obtained from an expert dataset.
3. A near-real simulation model is constructed. Relative postures between two parts are obtained by initial setting
and robot kinematics. The learning outcome is directly transferred to the real world where system state is
captured by binocular camera. Efficient and safe learning is allowed in the simulated environment.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews related works on cylindrical segment assembly.
Section 3 presents the hybrid hierarchical learning framework and algorithm. Section 4 describes the simulation
environment and evaluates the proposed framework. Section 5 discusses the transfer method from simulation to
reality and presents experimental results in real world. Section 6 provides a discussion on the findings and their
implications. Finally, Section 7 concludes the study and discusses future work.
2. Preliminary
2.1. Cylinder segment assembly
The setup for cylinder segment assembly is shown in Fig. 1. Segment I is installed on a six-degree-of-freedom
parallel robot while Segment II is mounted on a fixture. Assembling features include peg-in-hole and connecting holes.
Diameter of shaft on Segment I is Φ169.90 mm and that of the hole on Segment II is Φ170.00 mm. The eight Φ6.00
mm connecting holes are along the radius directions of shaft in Segment I and symmetrically distributed. Similarly,
eight Φ6.00 mm connecting holes are on the hole in Segment II. The parallel robot carries Segment I to assemble with
Segment II. Shaft and hole are expected to be assembled and the connecting holes are aligned. Perception is realized
by binocular camera. The gap between cylinder segments is only 0.1 mm, making the system very sensitive to errors
and uncertainties.
Figure 1: Cylindrical segment assembly system and docking features.
3


2.2. Process parameter optimization
2.2.1. Assembly system coordinate system definition
This study establishes a coordinate system for the assembly system by employing a binocular camera system
and encoded fiducial points, effectively parameterizing the tight tolerance assembly problem. The binocular camera
system uses the MetroMPS-D12 vision measurement camera, with a measurement range of 2-10 m and a measurement
accuracy of 12 µm + 12 µm/m. The camera system is calibrated with a calibration board prior to each use. This
approach not only facilitates the subsequent modeling and analysis but also provides a structured framework for the
spatial relationships within the assembly process. The coordinate systems are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Frame {W} serves as the base coordinate system, established based on the left camera of the binocular camera
system. All other frames are measured relative to frame {W}. Frame {C1} and frame {C2} located on the fixtures of
Segment I and II. They are defined by three non-collinear encoded points captured directly by the binocular camera.
These frames are used to determine the positions of other frames during assembly. Frame {M} and frame {F} are the
coordinate systems of Segment I and II. Frame {P} is the coordinate system on the moving platform of the parallel
robot. During the assembly, the spatial relations between frame {C1} and frame {M}, frame {C1} and frame {P}, as
well as frame {C2} and frame {F}, remain constant. The following transformation matrices are applied:

M = TC1_M · C1
F = TC2_F · C2
P = TC1_P · C1
(1)
where TC1_M, TC1_P and TC2_P denote the transformation matrices measured by camera.
Frame {O} is on the fixed base of parallel robot. It is derived through frame {P} using forward kinematics of parallel
robot. The required joint actuation values for the parallel robot are calculated using inverse kinematics. By recording
position and orientation of frames during the human-robot collaborative assembling, expert data is collected.
Figure 2: Assembly system coordinate system.
2.2.2. Parallel robot system
We deploy a 6-DoF parallel robot for the precision assembly task. The 6-DoF parallel robot is as shown in
Fig. 3, whose topological layout is 6-SPS. Herein, S and P are spherical joint and actuated prismatic joint. Point
Ai, Bi(i = 1, 2, ..., 6) are centers of S joints.
In the context of any given kinematic chain, the construction of a closed-loop vector quadrilateral is feasible,
yielding the subsequent relationship:
4


Figure 3: Robot mechanism diagram.
qi = r + Rbi −ai(i = 1, 2, ..., 6)
(2)
where r is the vector directed from point O to point P. ai is the vector from point O to point Ai within frame {O}. bi is
the vector from point P to point Bi within frame {P}. qi is the positional vector of the moving link. R is the rotational
transformation that aligns frame {P} with frame {O}.
2.2.3. Kinematic model
The integration of a robotic system into a hybrid hierarchical learning framework necessitates an accurate kine-
matic model. It translates the robot’s physical capabilities into a format that the learning framework can use to control
movements effectively. This integration ensures precise robot operations. For inverse kinematics, the method outlined
in [34] is employed. In this section, we present an exhaustive exposition on forward kinematics.
The forward kinematics of the parallel robot is a set of highly nonlinear equations with six unknown parameters,
solved using the Newton-Raphson numerical method, as described in [35].
Transformation of Eq. (2) yields the following:
Fi(X) = −q2
i +
h
r + Rbi −ai
i T h
r + Rbi −ai
i
= 0
(3)
where X = [x y z α β γ]T, is the end-effector pose of the platform.
F(X) = [F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6]T
(4)
where F(X) is the structure obtained by integrating all the branches.
The Newton-Raphson method is employed to solve F(X) = 0, with the robot’s initial pose serving as the initial
solution X(0) and the iteration tolerance denoted by ε. The solution is obtained by:
F(0) = F(X(0))
(5)
In accordance with the Newton iteration method, the solution is updated at the k-th iteration as:
X(k+1) = X(k) −(J(X(k)))−1F(X(k))
(6)
where J(X) = ∂F
∂X =
" ∂F1
∂x
∂F1
∂y
∂F1
∂z
∂F1
∂α
∂F1
∂β
∂F1
∂γ
....
#
is the Jacobian matrix.
5


The iteration continues until the condition
X(k+1) −X(k) ≤ε is satisfied, at which point X(k+1) is considered an
approximate solution to F(X) = 0.
2.2.4. Knowledge-guided expert acquisition
Expert experience is acquired during human–robot collaborative assembly, as shown in Fig. 4. We employ the
sensorless admittance-control framework proposed in [36]. A parallel robot is modelled with finite and instantaneous
screw theory. Motor currents are filtered by a Kalman estimator. Joint friction is identified offline with a LuGre
model. External wrench applied by the operator is reconstructed without extra sensors. The operator grips Segment I
and applies a guiding wrench to dock it into Segment II. A binocular camera captures the process at 4 Hz to provide
expert data for BC learning.
Figure 4: Acquisition of expert experience.
2.2.5. Collision detection mechanism
To avoid component collisions and hardware damage risks during the assembly of cylindrical segments, a dedi-
cated collision detection mechanism based on Oriented Bounding Box (OBB) is designed to judge whether subsequent
states generated by actions will result in collisions, ensuring assembly safety and reliability.
For the geometric characteristics of cylindrical segments, minimal enclosing OBBs are constructed for Segment I
and Segment II respectively. The central axis of the segment is taken as the z-axis of the OBB, and the x, y axes are
parallel to the radial direction of the segment’s cross-section. OBB parameters include center coordinates OI and OII,
unit axis vectors xI, yI, zI for Segment I and xII, yII, zII for Segment II. The edge lengths along each axis are WI, HI, DI
for Segment I, and WII, HII, DII for Segment II.
The core of collision detection adopts the separating plane criterion, as shown in Fig. 5. A plane can completely
separate the two OBBs, no collision is determined. Qtherwise, a collision risk exists. Its mathematical equivalent
condition is as follows:
|L · (OII −OI)| > 1
2(WI|L · xI| + HI|L · yI| + DI|L · zI| + WII|L · xII| + HII|L · yII| + DII|L · zII|)
(7)
6


Figure 5: Bounding box collision detection diagram.
where L · (OII −OI) is the projection length of the line connecting the center points in the direction of the normal
vector L.
There are fifteen candidate normal vectors, traversed by collision risk priority. First detect the axial directions
aligned with the segment central axes zI, zII, two directions in total. Then detect the radial directions aligned with the
radial axes xI, yI, xII, yII, four directions in total. Finally detect the composite directions from the cross-products of
the coordinate axes of the two segments, nine directions in total.
The detection process runs synchronously with the assembly motion. It samples the segment pose and calculates
OBB parameters at each step. If the action execution state does not meet the required condition, a collision warning
is issued. The current assembly action is canceled, the current state is read again, and the policy network generates a
new action. If warnings occur more than 20 consecutive times, the current episode fails. The parallel robot is equipped
with a self-protection system that triggers an emergency motor stop if a collision occurs.
3. Method
3.1. Hybrid hierarchical learning framework
The assembly process is divided into two network layers: a high-level network and a low-level network, as shown
in Fig. 6. This structure combines the advantages of supervised learning, imitation learning, and reinforcement learn-
ing. By using a hierarchical approach, the framework optimizes assembly control, enabling efficient and precise task
execution.
The high-level network uses LSTM to learn from expert decision-making experiences. This helps in selecting
the low-level network and adjusting the step size dynamically during the assembly process. Through its gating
mechanisms, LSTM retains important information while discarding irrelevant data, effectively capturing long-term
dependencies. In the context of segment assembly, LSTM improves decision accuracy and dynamic adaptability,
optimizing the overall process. Its key functions include position and orientation weight selection, dynamic step
adjustment weight.
Assembly actions are three degrees of freedom for position and three for orientation. High-level LSTM network
generates position selection weight ω1 and orientation selection weight ω2. These weights are normalized by softmax
to select between the position and orientation sub-networks. The sub-network with the higher probability is activated
for adjustment. Typically, the assembly starts with orientation adjustments to achieve the correct docking angle,
followed by precise positioning.
High-level LSTM network also generates step-size weights ω3. The step size is used to dynamically adjust the
maximum step limits during assembling. It aims for coarse tuning in the initial stage and fine-tuning in the final stage,
ensuring the system maintains efficient and flexible operations under various initial conditions.
The core of LSTM lies in three gate structures: the forget gate, the input gate, and the output gate. When sample
data is input into the forget gate, it screens out important information from past memories. Subsequently, the output
gate determines how much new information is contained in the current network input. The output value is then
calculated using the sigmoid function within the output gate. Finally, the output portion is determined by the tanh
function.
Forget Gate: This gate determines what information to discard from the cell state.
ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, si] + b f )
(8)
7


Figure 6: Framework of the hierarchical hybrid algorithm.
where ft is the forget gate. σ is the sigmoid function. W f and b f are the weights and biases. ht−1 is the previous
hidden state. The hidden state conveys past information to subsequent steps and serves as the current output, offering
essential context for sequence modeling.
Input Gate: This gate decides what new information to add to the cell state.
it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, si] + bi)
˜ct = tanh(Wc · [ht−1, si] + bc)
(9)
where it is the input gate. ˜ct is the candidate cell state. Wi, bi, Wc, bc are the respective weights and biases.
Output Gate: This gate determines what information to output from the cell state.
ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1, si] + bo)
(10)
where ot is the output gate. Wo, bo are the weights and biases.
The LSTM is summarized in Algorithm 1 as follows:
Algorithm 1 LSTM algorithm
1: Input: Expert trajectories {(si, ai)}N
i=1
2: Randomly initial LSTM parameters ϕLS T M
3: for i = 0, 1, 2, ... do
4:
Process trajectory (si, ai) through the LSTM cell
5:
Compute LSTM gates: (W: weight matrices, b: bias term)
Forget Gate: ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, si] + b f )
8


Input Gate: it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, si] + bi)
Candidate Cell State: ˜ct = tanh(Wc · [ht−1, si] + bc)
Output Gate: ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1, si] + bo)
6:
Update cell state: ct = ft · ct−1 + it · ˜ct
7:
Update hidden state: ht = ot · tanh(ct)
8:
Update parameters ϕLS T M based on loss between predicted actions and expert actions ai:
ϕLS T M ←ϕLS T M −β · ∇ϕLS T MLoss(ϕLS T M)
Loss(ϕLS T M) = (2N)−1 PN
i=1(ht −ai)2
9: end for
The low-level network, BC-TD3, controls specific pose-adjusting actions. BC initially learns expert demonstration
data to provide a high-quality policy for the actor network. TD3 then optimizes the policy, with BC supplying the
initial strategy.
The high-level LSTM and low-level BC-TD3 networks form the hierarchical learning framework. The high-
level LSTM generates position, orientation, and step-size adjustment weights. It guides the low-level network. The
low-level network uses BC to learn expert strategies and TD3 to further optimize execution, ensuring precise task
performance.
3.2. Imitation learning
3.2.1. Behavior cloning
Imitation learning is a method designed to mimic expert decision-making, with the most straightforward knowledge-
guided approach being Behavior Cloning (BC). BC treats expert’s actions as labels and developed the policy by agent,
guided by distilled domain knowledge.
Construct an expert training set D consisting of N (state, action) pairs. It is expressed as:
D = {(s1, ae
1), (s2, ae
2), ..., (sN, ae
N)}
(11)
where ae
i denotes expert’s decision at the i-th state si.
Under the supervised learning paradigm, difference between agent’s decisions and expert’s decisions at N states
is defined as the Behavior Cloning loss:
Loss(ϕBC) = 1
2N
PN
i=1(ai −ae
i )2
(12)
where ϕBC represents parameters of the agent’s policy network. ai denotes the agent’s decision.
The gradient descent of Loss(ϕBC) is used to optimize the policy network parameters ϕBC, enabling the agent to
achieve decision-making capabilities close to the expert level.
3.2.2. Imitation learning parameter design
We distill human expertise to design compact state and action spaces. These spaces preserve spatial cues and
retain incremental corrections.
State Space: The coordinate systems obtained from the camera serve as the basis for assembly decision-making
and provide spatial relationships between different frames. The state space is defined using real-time visual measure-
ments and transformation matrices to ensure an accurate representation of the system configuration. Specifically, the
state describes the relative pose between Segment I and Segment II, determined from encoded points captured by the
binocular camera and the transformation matrices in Eq. (1). The encoded points establish the coordinate frames of
Segment I and Segment II, while the transformation matrices define their relative spatial relationships. Accordingly,
the state space is formulated as follows:
st = [A1t, A2t, A3t, A4t, A5t, A6t, Ptx, Pty, Ptz, Otx, Oty, Otz]
(13)
where A1t, A2t, A3t, A4t, A5t, A6t are the coordinates of the encoded points in the frame {W}. Ptx, Pty, Ptz are the relative
position between frame {C1} and frame {C2}. Otx, Oty, Otz are the relative orientation between them.
9


Action Space: Assembly actions are divided into position and orientation adjustments. The action space consists
of position a△t and orientation aθt, described as follows:
a△t = [△tx, △ty, △tz], aθt = [θtx, θty, θtz]
(14)
where [△tx, △ty, △tz] are the translational motion of frame {M} in st. [θtx, θty, θtz] are the rotational motion of frame
{M}.
The BC is summarized in Algorithm 2 as follows:
Algorithm 2 BC algorithm
1: Input: Expert trajectories {(si, ai)}N
i=1
2: Randomly initial policy ϕBC
3:
4: for i = 1 to T do
5:
Select action with exploration noise a ∼
6:
Update actor by minimizing the loss: Loss(ϕBC) =
1
2N
PN
i=1(ai −ae
i )2
7:
Update the policy: ϕBC ←ϕBC −β · ∇ϕBCLoss(ϕBC)
8: end for
3.3. Reinforcement learning
3.3.1. Twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradient
Reinforcement learning allows assembling policies to be learned through trial-and-error interactions with the
environment. The Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm is the most widely used algorithm for
solving continuous control problems. It provides deterministic actions and has better sample efficiency. However,
Q-value is usually overestimated and the algorithm is sensitive to noise, affecting robustness in dynamic tasks. TD3
uses dual critic networks, delayed updates, and target policy smoothing to improve stability and performance of high-
dimensional continuous control tasks [37]. It has been adapted to various real-world tasks, increasing robustness and
success rates in areas such as robotic manipulation and autonomous navigation.
TD3 is a reinforcement learning algorithm based on the Actor-Critic architecture. It consists of two value net-
works (Critics) and one policy network (Actor). Critic networks update their parameters θ1 and θ2 in the direction of
minimizing the loss function, thereby maximizing the expected total return. Actor network updates its parameters ϕ
by following the policy gradient toward the direction of maximum reward, selecting the optimal action to execute.
Loss functions of the Critic networks are described as follows:
Loss(θk) = 1
N
PN
i=1(yi −Qk(si, ai | θk))2
(15)
where N represents the number of learning samples selected from experience replay buffer. The target value yi is
defined as:
yi = ri + γ min
k=1,2 Q′
k(si+1, ˜a | θ′
k)
(16)
where Qk, θk, (Q′
k, θ′
k) are the parameters of the current (target) Critic network. ˜a denotes action with added Gaussian
noise.
This method ensures a stable target during learning, which improves convergence performance. However, if the
error of the Critic network is large, the policy may be discontinuous. To avoid divergence, the Actor network’s
parameters are updated at a slower rate than those of the Critic network. This slower update process reduces the
variance in value function updates, leading to a more robust policy.
Parameters of the Actor network are updated using the backpropagation algorithm. The gradient of loss function
expressed as follows:
∇ϕJ(ϕ) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
[∇aQ1(si, a | θQ) |a=µ(si) ·∇ϕµ(si)]
(17)
where ∇represents gradient, µ and θ are parameters of the current Actor network.
10


To avoid overfitting, Q-value is smoothed by adding noise that follows a truncated normal distribution to each
action. The target update is modified as:
˜a ←a′ + ε, ε ∼clip(N(0, σ), −c, c), c > 0
(18)
where a′ = µ′(si+1). ε represents the noise following a truncated normal distribution. σ is the variance. c is the
clipping threshold. “clip” is a method to limit the range of noise added to actions between −c and c, ensuring stability
during training.
3.3.2. Reinforcement learning parameter design
Execution of assembly task is modeled as a Markov Decision Process. At each time step t, a state st is obtained,
an assembly action at is chosen, and a reward rt is received to evaluate the action-state pair. The learned policy is
improved by maximizing the return Rt.
Rt = rt + γrt+1 + γ2rt+2 + ...γT−trT = rt + γRt+1
(19)
where rt depends on the performance of action at in state st. T is the final time step. γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor,
which decreases the value of rewards received later.
Global Reward Function Design: At time t, the agent performs an action at, and the binocular camara provides the
state st. Relative position and orientation deviations between Segment I and II are calculated. If assembly accuracy is
not met, the process moves to the next step. Upon successful assembly or failure within the specified steps, the system
receives reward feedback, and the cycle ends. The reward function is as:
Rg =

rsu, if success
rfa, if failure
0, otherwise
(20)
where rsu is the reward value obtained upon successful assembly. r fa is the penalty value for failure to complete the
assembly within the specified number of steps, for exceeding motion limits or causing collisions between components.
In other cases, the feedback for the agent is 0. In each training round, the target reward Rg is awarded only once and
concludes the training round. Set rsu = 50 and rfa = −50.
To enhance the exploration efficiency of the agent and encourage the robot to complete assembly with shortest
possible path, a penalty term of -0.01 is added at each step.
Local Reward Function Design: For the two agents controlling position and orientation separately, independent
reward functions are set according to their task characteristics.
Position-Based Reward Function:
rP =
(1 −[(P2
tx + P2
ty + P2
tz)1/2/Pinit]
1 −[
Ptz
 /
Pinit
z
]
(21)
where Pinit is the distance between the Segment I and II.
Pinit
z
 is the axial distance.
Orientation-Based Reward Function:
rO = 1 −[(O2
tx + O2
ty + O2
tz)1/2/Oinit]
(22)
where Oinit is the dot product of the angles between two segments.
3.3.3. Reward function constraints
The reward function incorporates position and orientation penalty terms to accelerate training convergence and
constrain robot’s behavior. Incorrect positions and orientations during training can be avoided.
rerr = −5, if countP > 20 or countO > 20
(23)
where countP is the count accumulated when
Pt
 >
Pt−1
. countO is the count accumulated when
Ot
 >
Ot−1
.
11


The final reward function is a weighted sum of global and local rewards:
R = λgRg +
T
X
t=1
(λPrP,t + λOrO,t + λerrrerr,t)
(24)
where Rg is the global reward for the entire episode. rP,t, rO,t, rerr,t are local rewards at each time step. λg, λP, λO, λerr
determine the relative importance of each reward component and balance their contributions. Local rewards are
summed over all time steps within the episode, whereas the global reward is assigned once per episode. The global
reward evaluates the overall success of the task. The local rewards refine position and orientation accuracy. These
penalty constraints ensure stable training and precise assembly.
The TD3 is summarized in Algorithm 3 as follows:
Algorithm 3 TD3 algorithm
1: Initialize critic networks Q1, Q2 with random parameters, and initialize actor network µ with the result of BC ϕBC
2: Initialize target networks θ′
1 ←θ1, θ′
2 ←θ2, ϕ′ ←ϕ
3: Initialize replay buffer
4: for t = 1 to T do
5:
Select action with exploration noise a ∼µ(si) + ε, ε ∼N(0, σ)
6:
Execute action a, and observe reward r and next state s′
7:
Store transition tuple (s, a, r, s′) in replay buffer
8:
Sample mini-batch of N transitions (s, a, r, s′) from replay buffer
9:
Compute target action ˜a ←µ′(s′) + ε′, ε′ ∼clip(N(0, σ), −c, c), c > 0
10:
Compute target Q-value y = r + γ mink=1,2 Q′
k(s′, ˜a | θ′
k)
11:
Update critics by minimizing the loss: 1
N
P(y −Qk(s, a | θk))2, k = 1, 2
12:
if t mod d then
13:
Update the actor by the deterministic policy gradient: ∇ϕJ(ϕ) ≈1
N
P[∇aQ1(s, a | θQ) |a=µ(s) ·∇ϕµ(s)]
14:
Update target networks: θ′
k ←ωθk + (1 −ω)θ′
k, k = 1, 2, ϕ′ ←ωϕ + (1 −ω)ϕ′
15: end for
4. Simulation
4.1. Simulation Model Setup
The key to building the simulation model is accurately simulating the effects of actions on the system state to
ensure alignment with real-world behavior. The model should prioritize functional integration for future expansion
and applications, as shown in Fig. 7.
Figure 7: Components of the simulation.
12


Initialization: Set transformation matrices for segment I, segment II, and the moving platform. Initialize positions
of six encoded points and define the rod lengths of the parallel robot.
Pose Determination: Construct frame {C1} and frame {C2} using encoded points. Establish frame {M}, {F} and
{P} for each segment through transformation matrices. Determine the robot’s coordinate frame {O} using forward
kinematics of the parallel robot, based on frame {P} and rod lengths.
Control Strategy and Execution: Obtain the current state from the pose, generate action commands using the
policy network, calculate new positions of encoded points with control actions, update the state, determine rod lengths
through inverse kinematics, and send them to actuators.
Reward Acquisition: Calculate the reward for the current round, providing feedback to the control network to
optimize control strategies during iterations.
To ensure stable training and optimal performance, the networks are trained with appropriately chosen hyperpa-
rameters. The LSTM model is trained for 10000 epochs using the Adam optimizer, while the BC model is trained
for 10000 epochs with the SGD optimizer. Both the Actor and Critic networks in TD3 use the Adam optimizer. The
primary training hyperparameters are determined through testing and are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Training hyperparameters
Parameters
Value
Mini batch size
32
LSTM learning rate
1e-3
BC learning rate
1e-3
TD3 Actor/Critic learning rate
3e-4/3e-3
TD3 exploration noise clip ε
0.1
TD3 delayed policy updates d
2
Target network update rate (τ)
5e-3
Experience replay buffer size
1e6
Reward discount factor γ
0.98
Reward weight λg, λP, λO, λerr
1,0.3,0.3,0.4
4.2. Algorithms training with simulation model
4.2.1. Learning efficiency
To verify the advantages of the hybrid layered algorithm, we compared our algorithm with TD3, Normalized
Advantage Functions (NAF) and DDPG. As shown in Fig. 8a, reward values of different algorithms vary with the
number of training steps. Our algorithm demonstrates significantly higher learning efficiency at the early stages, with
the reward curve rising rapidly and achieving successful assembly within 500 episodes. In contrast, traditional single-
agent reinforcement learning algorithms require over 1000 episodes to reach a similar reward level and exhibit larger
fluctuations during training.
Fig. 8b shows the reward curves under different learning strategies. Our algorithm adopts a 3-DoF rotational model
and then a 3-DoF translational model. For comparison, the 6-DoF model is applied without separating rotations and
translations. It is found that our learning strategy leads to higher learning efficiency. The 6-DoF model struggles to
achieve successful assembly within maximum number of episodes, which is due to the highly non-linear nature of the
learning problem.
Fig. 8c illustrates the reward curves with different initial conditions. A closer initial distance results in higher
rewards earlier in training, while a farther initial distance yields the opposite effect. This is because high-precision
assembly depends primarily on the final docking phase, and with a closer initial distance, the agent can quickly
explore various docking scenarios and identify effective assembly routes. Fig. 8d shows the number of steps required
for different initial distances, further confirming this observation.
4.2.2. Assembly efficiency
Fig. 9a shows an inverse exponential relationship between the initial distance and the number of steps required for
assembly. Fig. 9b highlights that step length decreases as the number of steps increases. The model with a dynamic
step adaptation strategy allows larger steps for faster movement when the segment is far from the target, and smaller
13


Figure 8: Results of our method and comparative methods in the training stage. (a) Reward curves of comparative simulations. (b) Reward curves
for different learning strategies. (c) Reward curves for different initial distances. (d) Steps curves for different initial distances.
steps for precise adaptation as it approaches. This leads to high efficiency while maintaining high accuracy in the long-
distance assembly. In fact, such assembling strategy matches the manual docking process, which has been proven to
be effective.
Figure 9: Assembly efficiency with initial distance variation: (a) Effect of initial distance on the number of steps. (b) Relationship between steps
and movement distance (initial distance: 50mm).
Fig. 10 visualizes assembly simulation actions, showing how adjustments change at different stages during leaning.
It indicates that hieratical learning strategy for dynamic step adjustment is more effective and efficient compared to
the RL learning algorithm alone.
4.2.3. Model adaptability
We evaluated the algorithm’s adaptability to initial errors by different starting conditions. Random errors were
introduced at each training step, with position errors of 1, 3, and 5 mm and orientation errors of 1, 2, and 3 degree.
Testing conditions included initial poses set with positions of 10, 30, and 50 mm and orientations of 3, 6, and 9 degree.
14


Figure 10: Actions in the segment assembly simulation (initial distance: 100mm).
Table 2: Assembly success rate for pure position and orientation error
Success Rate
Initial Position and Orientation
10 mm
30 mm
50 mm
Position
1 mm
1.0
1.0
0.983
3 mm
1.0
0.956
0.869
5 mm
0.946
0.682
0.606
3 deg
6 deg
9 deg
Orientation
1 deg
0.759
0.624
0.487
2 deg
1.0
0.854
0.784
3 deg
0.928
0.822
0.573
Table 2 shows success rates for pure position and orientation errors. For position errors, training with a 1 mm error
yielded the highest success rate (above 0.9). As the error increased to 3 mm and 5 mm, the success rate decreased to
below 0.7 at 5 mm. The alignment challenge is the final assembly. Smaller position errors allowed more alignment
attempts, creating an optimized strategy. In testing, the success rate further declined as the initial position error
increased from 10 mm to 50 mm, showing reduced adaptability with larger distances. For orientation errors, a lower
success rate of around 0.6 was observed with a 1 degree error. Increasing to 2 degrees raised the success rate above
0.7, but 3 degrees caused a decline, suggesting that 2 degrees is optimal. Larger angles made it more difficult to
develop an effective strategy within the fixed episodes. Similar trends were seen with decreasing success rates as the
initial orientation angle increased from 3 to 9 degrees.
Table 3: Assembly success rate for combined errors
Success Rate
Initial Position and Orientation
3 deg
6 deg
9 deg
Position(1mm),Orientation(2deg)
10 mm
0.989
0.851
0.769
30 mm
0.928
0.795
0.613
50 mm
0.916
0.651
0.598
Table 3 shows success rates when both position and orientation errors were present. For training, we selected
optimal conditions, fixing the position error at 1 mm and the orientation error at 2 degrees. Under these dual-error
conditions, the overall success rate decreased. The highest success rate of 0.989 was achieved with a 10 mm position
and a 3 degree orientation. As the initial position and orientation increased, the success rate gradually decreased,
reaching the lowest value of 0.598 for a 50 mm position and a 9 degree orientation.
Data from Table 2 and Table 3 clearly indicate that the algorithm’s success rate is influenced by training error
levels under pure position or orientation errors. As testing errors increase, the success rate decreases. Under combined
15


position and orientation errors, the algorithm demonstrates slightly weaker adaptability but maintains a high level of
stability.
4.2.4. Model robustnes
In the simulation environment, the robot’s state st is [A1t, A2t, A3t, A4t, A5t, A6t, Ptx, Pty, Ptz, Otx, Oty, Otz]. To sim-
ulate the uncertainties in the real environment, Gaussian noise is added to the state observations, and the state st
becomes:
s′
t = st + N(0, σ2)
(25)
where N(0, σ2) represents a Gaussian distribution with a mean of 0 and a variance of σ2.
Table 4: Results of the success rate with different noise levels [σ]
Episodes range
0-400
400-800
800-1200
1200-1600
1600-2000
0
0.698
0.977
0.983
0.991
0.987
0.02
0.385
0.706
0.814
0.918
0.974
0.05
0.197
0.433
0.767
0.875
0.867
0.1
0.156
0.379
0.405
0.574
0.620
0.2
0.099
0.216
0.261
0.315
0.328
We added Gaussian noise with a mean of zero and a standard deviation that gradually increased while keeping
the initial position and orientation unchanged. Results in Table 4 show the assembly success rate decreases as noise
level increases. When the number of training episodes is sufficient, the success rate remains relatively high. This
shows our model has good robustness and works well transferring from simulation to real-world applications. The
assembly gap is 0.1mm. Successful assembly is difficult if the measurement error exceeds the assembly gap in the
traditional assembly methods based on general trajectory planning. Comparatively, our method still reaches a good
success rate when the noise level is 0.1 or even 0.2. The fact that our model maintains a reasonable success rate under
such conditions further proves its robustness.
5. Experiments and analysis
Simulation environment is precisely built according to the robotic system, leading to high accuracy of simulation
to reality mapping. During the transfer process, coordinate mapping is used to align the coordinates of encoded points
in the real environment with those in the simulation environment. This involves aligning the coordinate systems of the
simulation and real environments to ensure consistency between the source domain (simulation) and target domain
(reality). The effectiveness of this mapping is demonstrated in Fig. 11.
The effectiveness of this mapping is demonstrated in Fig. 11. Identical initial poses are set in sim and real.
Snapshots are taken at close time instants. The encoded-point paths reveal a Knowledge-Guided strategy. The robot
first rotates the segment until the orientation error O equals zero. It then translates until the hole offset P equals zero.
Sim and real motions follow this learned assembly sequence.
5.1. Trajectory smoothness
Based on pre-trained simulation models, each algorithm underwent an additional 100 training iterations in a real
environment to ensure practical effectiveness. To evaluate performance, we conducted 20 experiments for each al-
gorithm under various initial poses. Fig. 12a illustrates the motion trajectories of different algorithms during the
assembly. As shown, our algorithm demonstrates smoother motion with less fluctuation in the trajectory, outperform-
ing the methods in [38] and [39] in terms of stability and continuity. In Fig. 12b, a close-up view of the trajectories
reveals the detailed performance of each algorithm at key positions. Our algorithm exhibits significant advantages in
smoothness. Also, it requires fewer steps to reach the same assembly depth.
Further analysis is shown in Fig. 13, where the orientation (Ox, Oy, Oz) and position (Px, Py, Pz) adjustments of
Segment I during assembly experiment are compared with different algorithms. It presents the trajectory of pose and
position changes for each algorithm. The results show that our algorithm outperforms methods in [38] and [39] in
16


Figure 11: Assembly comparison between simulation and reality: (a) Initial state. (b) Rotation-dominated. (c) Translation-dominated. (b) Complete
assembly movement.
pose adjustment and precise position control. Particularly in the final stage of assembly, our algorithm stabilizes more
quickly and maintains smaller errors across all dimensions. A comparison of the required adjustment steps shows that
our algorithm requires significantly fewer steps, achieving a stable state more rapidly. This indicates that our method
optimizes the assembly path while substantially reducing unnecessary adjustment steps.
5.2. Transferability
In both simulation and real-world settings, experiments were conducted using the trained algorithm to execute
assembly task under consistent initial conditions, with an initial position of 50 mm and an initial orientation of 1 deg.
These algorithms were trained for the same number of iterations in the simulation environment and then transferred to
the real environment for additional training with the same number of iterations. Meanwhile, we compared Heuristic
Methods and Learning from Demonstration (LFD).
For heuristic methods, comparative experiments were carried out with two schemes: visual servoing and spiral
search. The visual servoing scheme adopted the method in [34], and it employed the assembly process of pose
adjustment at the mooring point combined with translational docking. It conducts multiple image captures at the
mooring point to acquire the actual pose of the robot’s moving platform, and adjusts the robot’s pose at the mooring
point according to the pose of the fixed cylindrical segment to complete the assembly. The spiral search scheme
adopted the method in [40], integrating two in-hand cameras and a force-torque sensor to compensate for positional
17


Figure 12: Trajectories of Segment I during the assembly experiment: (a) Complete trajectories. (b) Partial trajectories (x: -120 -90mm, y:
20 60mm, z: 40 70mm).
uncertainty and implementing a sequence of learning-based visual servoing, spiral search and impedance control for
the peg-in-hole assembly task.
We perform coarse positioning via binocular visual servoing to guide Segment I to the vicinity of Segment II. The
spiral search is implemented on the xy-plane of frame {M}. A reference coordinate system for spiral search, denoted
as frame {S }, is established with the same orientation as frame {M}, and its origin is offset by r from the initial peg
position. The discrete spiral search path is defined as:
xs = r cos θ,
ys = r sin θ
(26)
where the initial values of θ and r are both 0. The angle θ increases by δθ at each timestep, while the radius r increases
by δr after every full rotation.
Since the force sensor is not employed in this work, the force-based termination condition in the method of [40] is
replaced with a vision-based detection method. The robot advances along the z direction of frame {S } by a small step
after each discrete spiral movement in the xy-plane. If no collision is detected, it continues to move forward along the
z direction, while if a collision is detected, it retreats and resumes the spiral movement.
For LFD, comparative experiments were conducted with two schemes: BC and Dynamic Movement Primitives
(DMPs). The BC scheme trained the network directly using the collected training datase. DMPs stem from the
motor control of biological systems and serve as a rigorous mathematical formulation of motion primitives as stable
nonlinear dynamical systems [41].The DMPs scheme adopted the method in [42], which proposes a demonstration-
trajectory adaptation-enhanced DMP (DA-DMP) based approach for multi-procedure robotic assembly, constructing
a 7-dimensional Cartesian DMP with 3D position and 4D quaternion orientation trajectories.
The position information Px, Py, Pz, Ox, Oy, Oz in the state s field of the expert dataset is extracted, and the orig-
inal Euler angle attitude information is converted to quaternion form qw, qx, qy, qz, which are integrated into a 7-
dimensional pose time series with 3D position and 4D attitude. The DA-DMP method is rooted in a point attractive
system, which aligns expert trajectories to new task configurations. Its fundamental dynamic equation is expressed
as:
τ¨y = α (β(g −y) −˙y) + f
(27)
where τ is the time scaling factor. y is the 7-dimensional pose vector. g is the control target. α and β are gain
coefficients analogous to the proportional-derivative controller gains. f is the nonlinear function.
18


Figure 13: Comparison of pose and position for different algorithms during the assembly experiment of Segment I.
Table 5: Comparison results of the average steps, average reward and success rate
Method
Sim. Environment
Real Environment
Avg. Steps
Avg. Reward
Success Rate
Avg. Steps
Avg. Reward
Success Rate
Heuristic Methods
Visual Servoing [34]
-
-
1.00
-
-
0.75
Spiral Search [40]
209
-
0.97
283
-
0.60
Learning from Demonstration
Behavior Cloning
145
75.1
0.73
183
40.7
0.55
DA-DMP [42]
114
93.7
0.93
149
71.5
0.70
Propose method
47
153.7
0.99
48
149.9
1.00
Method in [39]
62
120.4
0.86
69
100.1
0.90
Method in [38]
57
135.1
0.91
60
123.7
1.00
The experiments included 1000 simulation runs and 20 real-world trials. The results are summarized in Table 5.
Experimental results show that our simulation model helps the algorithm to train effectively and achieve similar
performance in the real environment. Our approach demonstrates significant advantages for cylindrical segment
assembly with tight tolerance. Heuristic methods achieve high success rates in simulation due to noise-free conditions
but drop significantly in real environments because of uncertainties. Spiral Search is limited to 300 steps. It has a
large average step count and low efficiency. For LFD methods, BC achieves low success rates due to the limited
expert dataset. DA-DMP is set with a time scaling factor τ = 1, and its average steps are consistent with the expert
19


dataset. It yields satisfactory performance in simulation but degrades significantly in real-world environments. Our
method outperforms [38] and [39] in steps, reward and overall performance. All three methods exhibit good sim-
to-real adaptability, while ours achieves the lowest performance degradation, showing the strongest robustness and
generalization.
To further validate the generalization of our method to different assembly objects, experiments were conducted
on a cylindrical segment with distinct geometric specifications. It features a Φ200mm, a 0.15mm assembly tolerance,
and 12 circumferential connecting holes, as shown in Fig. 14. The policy adopted herein was directly transferred from
the originally trained strategy, with the experimental setup consistent with the original trials.
Figure 14: Experiment on the new assembly object.
Table 6: Generalization performance comparison of different methods
Method
Avg. Steps
Avg. Reward
Success Rate
Heuristic Methods
Visual Servoing [34]
-
-
0.80
Spiral Search [40]
245
-
0.70
Learning from Demonstration
Behavior Cloning
236
26.1
0.35
DA-DMP [42]
190
49.8
0.55
Proposed method
85
124.1
0.90
Method in [39]
117
87.9
0.80
Method in [38]
99
100.2
0.85
As shown in Table 6, the proposed method maintains a high success rate of 0.9 after direct policy transfer with only
slight performance degradation. Heuristic methods exhibit no significant performance changes, as all experimental
conditions remain unchanged except for the assembly object, and their stability stems from reliance on fixed rule-
based logic rather than data-driven adaptation. LFD methods show a noticeable performance decline due to the lack
of new scenario data in the expert dataset. While the methods in [38] and [39] achieve basic assembly feasibility, their
performance degradation is far more pronounced than that of the proposed method. The method in [38] experiences a
11.1% drop in success rate, and the method in [39] a 15% drop. This gap highlights the advantage of our framework
design: the high-level LSTM dynamically adjusts action strategies based on real-time relative pose feedback, while
the low-level BC-TD3 integrates and generalizes expert experience.
6. Discussion
The framework achieves high efficiency, high accuracy and better adaptability in both simulations and real-world
scenarios. However, there are still limitations that need to be addressed in future work. Firstly, while our method
20


demonstrates good adaptability to initial conditions beyond the training range and shows robustness to sudden distur-
bances in real-world environments, its robustness to physical parameter perturbations, changes in actuator precision,
and noisy sensor conditions remains unexplored. These factors are critical in real-world industrial applications where
environmental uncertainties and hardware imperfections are common. The binocular vision system’s accuracy di-
rectly affects assembly performance, but the correlation between its pose estimation error and assembly success lacks
quantitative analysis. The system is untested under real-world visual disturbances, and simulated Gaussian noise
fails to fully represent real non-Gaussian errors, potentially degrading practical performance. Secondly, the system
relies solely on bounding box detection, which causes misjudgment and frequent collision-triggered emergency stops.
Lacking force sensing and contact handling, unexpected collisions occur under tight tolerance, reducing safety and
reliability in real industrial scenarios. Thirdly, the lack of specific energy efficiency metrics is a notable limitation.
Although the smoother motion profiles of our method suggest potential energy savings, detailed measurements and
evaluations of energy consumption during both learning and assembly phases are currently missing. Lastly, the cur-
rent framework’s scalability to more complex and larger-scale assembly tasks and its generalizability to a variety of
assembly tasks have not been fully evaluated. While the framework demonstrates strong performance in the specific
task of cylindrical segment assembly, its scalability to multi-component or more intricate assembly systems and its
generalizability to different types of assembly tasks and industrial settings remain to be explored.
Future work will focus on addressing these limitations and expanding the framework’s capabilities. We plan to
conduct comprehensive evaluations of the framework’s robustness by introducing physical parameter perturbations,
varying actuator precision, and simulating noisy sensor conditions in real-world experiments. This will involve test-
ing the framework under various practical scenarios to ensure its reliability and stability in the face of real-world
uncertainties. We will also quantitatively analyze the relationship between vision estimation accuracy and assembly
performance, and test system robustness against real-world visual disturbances. Moreover, a force-torque sensor will
be integrated at the robot end-effector to enable real-time contact detection and active compliance control, thus reduc-
ing unexpected collisions and emergency stops. Additionally, we will incorporate detailed energy efficiency metrics
into our evaluations. This will involve measuring and reporting specific energy consumption data during both learning
and assembly phases, and exploring ways to optimize our method for energy efficiency. Furthermore, we aim to en-
hance both the scalability and generalizability of the framework. This will be achieved by extending its application to
more complex and dynamic industrial scenarios, developing advanced control strategies to handle real-time changes
and uncertainties, and applying it to multi-component and multi-hole alignment tasks. By exploring broader use cases,
we will ensure the framework’s broader applicability in real-world industrial settings, thereby enhancing its versatility
and practical utility.
7. Conclusion
A hybrid hierarchical learning framework is proposed for the assembly of cylindrical segment components with
tight tolerance. The task is divided into position and orientation adjustments, with dynamic step size adjustments
breaking it into manageable subtasks. This reduces the complexity of high-dimensional spaces and improves learning
efficiency. The lower-level network uses BC to integrate expert experience, giving the robot human-like intuition.
Paired with the TD3 algorithm, the framework enhances training stability and robustness. The upper-level network
dynamically adjusts lower-level decisions through LSTM based on BC-guided heuristic rules. Simulation environment
is developed to learn before transferred to real world, for an efficient and safe learning process.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Binbin Lian: conducted the writing and editing of the manuscript. Xinyu Liu: carried out the methodology, soft-
ware validation, data curation. Tao Sun: directed the project and conducted the writing and editing of the manuscript.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
21


Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant No.52205028,
in part by Tianjin Major Science and Technology Project on Artificial Intelligence under grant No. 25ZXRGGX00150,
No. 25ZXRGGX00210 and No. 25ZXRGGX00200, and in part by the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Fundamental Research
Project under grant No. E2024203249, and in part by CAST Innovation Fund Project under grant No. QF-2025-
00074, and in part by Xiaomi Young Talent Program, and in part by Guizhou Provincial Science and Technology
Support Project under grant No. 2025-136 and in part by Tianjin Science and Technology Plan Project under grant
No. 24JCZXJC00240, and in part by Seed Foundation of Tianjin University under grant No. 2025XJ1-0012.
Data availability
All data are provided in the manuscript and the Supplementary Materials.
References
[1] L. Yong, M. Zhifu, X. Yuan, Towards advanced manufacturing systems for large parts: a review, The Interna-
tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 125 (7) (2023) 3003–3022. doi:https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00170-023-10939-8.
[2] R. D. Campbell, M. Bagshaw, Human performance and limitations in aviation, John Wiley & Sons, 2002. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470774472.
[3] V. Di Pasquale, S. Miranda, W. P. Neumann, A. Setayesh, Human reliability in manual assembly systems: a
systematic literature review., Ifac-Papersonline 51 (11) (2018) 675–680. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ifacol.2018.08.396.
[4] A. I. Juniani, M. L. Singgih, P. D. Karningsih, Design for manufacturing, assembly, and reliability: An integrated
framework for product redesign and innovation, Designs 6 (5) (2022). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/
designs6050088.
[5] Z. Chen, S. Xie, X. Zhang, Position/force visual-sensing-based robotic sheet-like peg-in-hole assembly, IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 71 (2022) 1–11. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.
2021.3135552.
[6] X. Ma, D. Xu, Robotic assembly of shaft sleeves in different sizes based on deep reinforcement learn-
ing, International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing 26 (3) (2025) 527–537. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s12541-024-01115-3.
[7] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, D. Wierstra, Continuous control with
deep reinforcement learning, 2019. arXiv:1509.02971, doi:https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1509.
02971.
[8] Q. Zeng, X. Huang, S. Li, Z. Deng, High-efficiency posture prealignment method for large component assembly
via igps and laser ranging, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 69 (8) (2020) 5497–5510.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2019.2958579.
[9] Y. LI, W. LIU, H. LU, R. LIU, C. GAO, Q. CHEN, Y. ZHANG, Workspace-based hybrid force position posture
alignment for high quality aircraft assembly of large-scale components, Chinese Journal of Aeronautics (2025)
103414doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2025.103414.
[10] Z. Lianyu, F. Qiang, F. Wei, Z. Xuexin, L. Xinyu, C. Yansheng, In-situ pose measurement method for large
cylinders based on binocular vision and prior processing data, Journal of Mechanical Engineering 59 (11) (2023)
129–146. doi:https://doi.org/10.3901/JME.2023.11.129.
22


[11] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies, J. Mach. Learn. Res.
17 (2015) 39:1–39:40. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dam.2015.09.011.
[12] T. Inoue, G. De Magistris, A. Munawar, T. Yokoya, R. Tachibana, Deep reinforcement learning for high precision
assembly tasks, in: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017,
pp. 819–825. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8202244.
[13] M. Oikawa, T. Kusakabe, K. Kutsuzawa, S. Sakaino, T. Tsuji, Reinforcement learning for robotic assembly
using non-diagonal stiffness matrix, Vol. 6, 2021, pp. 2737–2744. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.
2021.3060389.
[14] X. Wu, D. Zhang, F. Qin, D. Xu, Deep reinforcement learning of robotic precision insertion skill accelerated by
demonstrations, in: 2019 IEEE 15th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE),
2019, pp. 1651–1656. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/COASE.2019.8842940.
[15] Z. Zhou, P. Ni, X. Zhu, Q. Cao, Compliant robotic assembly based on deep reinforcement learning, in: 2021
International Conference on Machine Learning and Intelligent Systems Engineering (MLISE), 2021, pp. 6–9.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/MLISE54096.2021.00009.
[16] S. Kozlovsky, E. Newman, M. Zacksenhouse, Reinforcement learning of impedance policies for peg-in-hole
tasks: Role of asymmetric matrices, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7 (4) (2022) 10898–10905. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3191070.
[17] T. Lutz, Y. Wang, X. Yue, J. Camelio, Reinforcement learning for fuselage shape control during aircraft assem-
bly, IISE Transactions 58 (1) (2026) 1–15. doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/24725854.2024.2413136.
[18] T. Liang, D. Wang, W. Ma, L. Zhang, D. Chen, Visual localization and policy learning for robotic large-
diameter peg-in-hole assembly tasks, Electronics 14 (23) (2025) 4592. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics14234592.
[19] S. Liu, G. Liu, X. Zhang, High-precision peg-in-hole assembly with flexible components based on deep rein-
forcement learning, Machines 12 (5) (2024) 287. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/machines12050287.
[20] L. Brinkschulte, M. Graf, M. Geimer, Reinforcement learning: a control approach for reducing component
damage in mobile machines, in: Proceedings of the 12th International Fluid Power Conference (IFK), Vol. 1,
Technische Universität Dresden, 2020, pp. 433–443. doi:https://doi.org/10.25368/2020.50.
[21] J. Stranghöner, P. Hartmann, M. Braun, S. Wrede, K. Neumann, Share-rl: Structured, interactive reinforcement
learning for contact-rich industrial assembly tasks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13949 (2025). doi:https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.13949.
[22] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, M. Hutter, Per-contact iteration method for solving contact dynamics, IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 3 (2) (2018) 895–902. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2018.2792536.
[23] J. Kober, A. Wilhelm, E. Oztop, et al., Reinforcement learning to adjust parametrized motor primitives to new sit-
uations, Autonomous Robots 33 (2012) 361–379. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-012-9290-3.
[24] A. Polydoros, L. Nalpantidis, Survey of model-based reinforcement learning: Applications on robotics, Vol. 86,
2017, pp. 153–173. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-017-0468-y.
[25] E. Triantafyllidis, F. Acero, Z. Liu, et al., Hybrid hierarchical learning for solving complex sequential tasks using
the robotic manipulation network roman, Nature Machine Intelligence 5 (2023) 991–1005.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00709-2
[26] N. J. Cho, S. H. Lee, J. B. Kim, I. H. Suh, Learning, improving, and generalizing motor skills for the peg-in-hole
tasks based on imitation learning and self-learning, Applied Sciences 10 (8) (2020). doi:https://doi.org/
10.3390/app10082719.
23


[27] J. Li, H. Shi, K.-S. Hwang, Using goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with deep imitation to control robot
arm in flexible flat cable assembly task, IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 21 (4)
(2023) 6217–6228. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2023.3323307.
[28] T. Macpherson, M. Matsumoto, H. Gomi, J. Morimoto, E. Uchibe, T. Hikida, Parallel and hierarchical neural
mechanisms for adaptive and predictive behavioral control, Neural Networks 144 (2021) 507–521. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2021.09.009.
[29] J. Wang, C. Hu, Y. Zhu, Hierarchical gait generation for modular robots using deep reinforcement learning, in:
2021 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics (ICM), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6. doi:https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.1109/ICM46511.2021.9385659.
[30] S. Huang, Z. Xiao, M. Zheng, W. Shi, Hierarchical reinforcement learning for enhancing stability and adaptabil-
ity of hexapod robots in complex terrains, Biomimetic Intelligence and Robotics (2025) 100231doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.birob.2025.100231.
[31] H. Ju, R. Juan, R. Gomez, et al., Transferring policy of deep reinforcement learning from simulation to re-
ality for robotics, Nature Machine Intelligence 4 (2022) 1077–1087.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-022-00573-6.
[32] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, P. Abbeel, Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics
randomization, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018, pp. 3803–
3810. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460528.
[33] S. Yan, X. Tao, X. Ma, T. Hao, D. Xu, Adaptive meta policy learning with virtual model for multi-category peg-
in-hole assembly skills, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 21 (2) (2024) 1605–1614. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3485768.
[34] S. Yimin, W. Ruizhe, L. Binbin, L. Qi, S. Tao, Digital twin based parallel robot system for cylindrical component
assembly, Journal of Mechanical Engineering 61 (1) (2025) 44–59. doi:https://doi.org/10.3901/JME.
2025.01.044.
[35] L. J. Puglisi, R. J. Saltaren, G. Rey Portolés, H. Moreno, P. F. Cárdenas, C. Garcia, Design and kinematic
analysis of 3pss-1s wrist for needle insertion guidance, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 (5) (2013) 417–
427. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2013.02.001.
[36] T. Sun, J. Sun, B. Lian, Q. Li, Sensorless admittance control of 6-DoF parallel robot in human-robot collaborative
assembly, Vol. 88, 2024. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2024.102742.
[37] T. Xu, Z. Meng, W. Lu, Z. Tong, End-to-end autonomous driving decision method based on improved td3
algorithm in complex scenarios, Sensors 24 (15) (2024). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/s24154962.
[38] J. Xu, Z. Hou, W. Wang, B. Xu, K. Zhang, K. Chen, Feedback deep deterministic policy gradient with fuzzy
reward for robotic multiple peg-in-hole assembly tasks, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15 (3)
(2019) 1658–1667. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2868859.
[39] Y. Ma, D. Xu, F. Qin, Efficient insertion control for precision assembly based on demonstration learning and
reinforcement learning, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17 (7) (2020) 4492–4502. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.3020065.
[40] J. C. Triyonoputro, W. Wan, K. Harada, Quickly inserting pegs into uncertain holes using multi-view im-
ages and deep network trained on synthetic data, in: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 5792–5799. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS40897.
2019.8968072.
24


[41] S. Schaal, Dynamic movement primitives-a framework for motor control in humans and humanoid robotics, in:
Adaptive motion of animals and machines, Springer, 2006, pp. 261–280. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/
4-431-31381-8_23.
[42] Q. Liu, Z. Ji, W. Xu, Z. Liu, L. Wang, One-shot learning-driven autonomous robotic assembly via human-
robot symbiotic interaction, npj Advanced Manufacturing 2 (1) (2025) 22. doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/
s44334-025-00030-3.
25
