Title: Learning to Adapt: Self-Improving Web Agent via Cognitive-Aware Exploration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.31365v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 01:21:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Adapt: Self-Improving Web Agent via Cognitive-Aware Exploration 

## Weile Chen 1† Bingchen Miao 1† Qifan Yu 1† Wendong Bu 1 Guoming Wang 1* Wenqiao Zhang 1*

## Shengyu Zhang 1 Juncheng Li 1* Siliang Tang 1

> 1

Zhejiang University 

Corresponding authors: {Nb21013,wenqiaozhang,junchengli }@zju.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Recent advances in Multimodal Large Language Mod-els (MLLMs) have led to promising progress in web agents. However, existing web agents often rely on hand-crafted execution pipelines or expensive expert trajectories, limiting their adaptability to complex, dynamic environ-ments. To address these challenges, we propose SCALE 

(Self-Cognitive-Aware Learning and Exploration), which leverages three adversarial roles—Selector, Predictor, and Judger to autonomously discover the agent’s limitations and expand its cognitive boundaries through environmen-tal exploration. Moreover, we propose SCALE-Hop , a graph exploration strategy that facilitates global planning and helps agents avoid local exploration traps. To fur-ther support learning, we construct SCALE-20k , a large-scale dataset collected from 19 real-world websites, con-taining diverse task types and structured demonstrations generated from SCALE’s exploration traces. Experimental results show that our approach significantly improves the performance and generalization of multiple MLLMs in var-ious web environments. Our framework offers a scalable and generalizable solution for building truly autonomous and adaptive web agents. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recently, with the development of Multimodal Large Lan-guage Models (MLLMs), MLLM-based web agents [14, 27, 33, 34] have demonstrated promising performance in web automation tasks, like product searching [11], shop-ping [35], and navigation [15]. However, most existing web agents heavily rely on the pre-trained capabilities of MLLMs, which are difficult to cover large-scale and di-verse web task data [2, 23]. There remains a significant gap between their prior knowledge and the highly varied and dynamic real-world web pages. To address this gap, prior 

> †Equal Contribution.
> *Corresponding authors.

Manually Crafted Execution  

> Task Wrong
> Need Designed Reward Model Complex Operation

Expert Trajectories  

> Learn
> Task
> Lack of Diversity Expensive and Scarce
> Web
> Selector Predictor Judger
> Interaction
> Agent Self-adaptive Exploration Diverse Task Distribution

SCALE 

> Famil iar
> SCALE-20k SCALE-HOP
> Unfamil iar

Figure 1. A comparison between prior methods and our SCALE framework. SCALE enables autonomous exploration with diverse and scalable task generation, overcoming the limi-tation in previous approaches. 

works usually depend on the design of manually crafted execution pipelines [7, 12, 32] or on the use of human-annotated expert trajectories [3, 10, 29, 30] for fine-tuning web agents. However, these two types of paradigms mentioned above still have notable limitations: 1) Reliance on crafted exe-cution pipelines or expert trajectories. These methods either rely on crafted execution pipelines for task execu-tion or depend on costly expert trajectories to fine-tune MLLMs [16, 22, 27]. Although these pipelines and tra-jectories are often tailored for specific scenarios, they still struggle to cope with the unpredictability and diversity of real-world web environments [8, 23, 26]. Agents in these paradigms tend to act passively and develop dependencies on specific task flows, limiting their ability to explore unfa-miliar environments and adapt to dynamic real-world web-sites. 2) Challenges in evaluating and expanding cogni-tive boundaries. Cognitive boundaries are the limitations of an agent’s abilities, referring to items and operations that the agent struggles to understand or decide on based on prior knowledge [25]. It is significant for agents to im-

> arXiv:2605.31365v1 [cs.AI] 29 May 2026

prove their abilities. However, existing methods have ne-glected the exploration of their own cognitive boundaries. Therefore, how to evaluate and expand agent capabilities in a personalized and dynamic manner remains a critical challenge. In summary , developing general web agents re-quires enabling agents to proactively adapt to novel envi-ronments and continuously expanding their own cognitive boundaries, instead of relying on specific systems or prede-fined trajectories. To address these challenges, we propose SCALE (Self-

Cognitive-Aware Learning and Exploration ), a general framework that removes reliance on expert trajectories and handcrafted pipelines. SCALE enables agents to au-tonomously discover and expand their cognitive boundaries through self-driven interaction in web environments. Since it operates independently of any specific model architecture, it offers broad generalizability across different models. As shown in Figure 1, the agent proactively explores without external supervision by identifying its own limitations, trig-gering exploratory actions in uncertain areas, and adapting based on feedback. To evaluate and refine its understand-ing, SCALE assigns three roles to the same MLLM: Selec-tor , Predictor , and Judger . The Selector proposes challeng-ing actions, the Predictor anticipates their outcomes, and the Judger verifies prediction accuracy after execution. For example, the Selector may choose to click a logo, believing the model is unsure about its effect. The Predictor then esti-mates the outcome based on its current knowledge, expect-ing nothing to happen. However, once executed, the Judger 

observes a jump to the homepage, revealing a gap in the model’s understanding. This forms a closed-loop process in which the Selector and Predictor engage in an adversarial interaction, with one aiming to challenge the model and the other aiming to predict correctly, while the Judger provides feedback to improve both. The iterative process allows the agent to gradually adapt to complex web environments. Furthermore, we aim to enhance SCALE by extending its exploration capability from local interactions to global reasoning and coordination. We propose the SCALE-Hop 

strategy to complement it with global planning and con-trol. SCALE-Hop constructs a graph representation of the agent’s interaction history, where each node represents a specific web state. This graph allows the agent to moni-tor its exploration coverage and make decisions at a higher level. When exploration becomes difficult or complete at a given node, SCALE-Hop evaluates the model’s perfor-mance and determines whether to exit and transition to an-other node that has not been fully explored. This mecha-nism helps the agent efficiently avoid local traps and sup-ports a more comprehensive understanding of the environ-ment. Based on the raw exploration traces from the SCALE process in 19 real-world websites, we construct SCALE-20k , a large-scale web task dataset. Compared to existing datasets [22, 29, 30], SCALE-20k offers not only execution trajectories but also diverse task types, including multi-step tasks, single-step decisions, and page comprehension QA, supporting more comprehensive understanding and reason-ing over web content. Through comprehensive experimentation, our SCALE framework reveals that MLLMs can proactively dis-cover unknown aspects of the environment through self-adversarial processes and achieve self-improvement by con-tinuously discovering and exploring these unknown as-pects. Compared to strategies that rely on random explo-ration or follow task instructions rigidly, SCALE encour-ages the model to collect and update data specifically in regions it does not yet understand. This leads to more in-formative and error-revealing data, which better supports the model’s improvement. Combined with the global route planning of SCALE-Hop, it enables agents to move be-yond shallow, localized behaviors and form a more struc-tured and comprehensive view of complex web environ-ments. Experimentally, SCALE achieves 231.8% improve-ment for InternVL2.5-8B [4] and 176.3% improve-ment for Qwen2.5-VL-7B [1] on average task success rate. Furthermore, the SCALE-20k dataset achieves high scores in task diversity, reasoning quality, and answer qual-ity. Even when applied directly to other MLLMs, SCALE-20k improves their agent capabilities. These results further demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of the SCALE framework. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose SCALE , a self-driven learning and ex-ploration framework that enables web agents to au-tonomously discover and expand their cognitive bound-aries without relying on inference systems or expert tra-jectories. • We introduce SCALE-Hop , a dynamically adjusted ex-ploration strategy according to the evaluation of cognitive boundaries, which facilitates broader content discovery and promotes the collection of more diverse and robust exploration. • We further provide SCALE-20k , a large-scale dataset de-rived from the SCALE exploration process, offering di-verse task types, high-quality reasoning processes and an-swers to support future research on web agent understand-ing and reasoning. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Crafted Supervision for Web Agents 

Early advances in MLLM-based web agents heavily rely on two forms of external supervision: crafted execu-tion pipelines and curated expert trajectories. Crafted pipelines—such as Tree-of-Thought [12], ReAct [32], and Selector                 

> Predictor
> Judger
> Web
> Self - Feedback
> Predict
> Correct
> Predict
> Incorrect
> 𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖
> 𝑝𝑝 𝑖𝑖
> 𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖
> 𝑂𝑂 𝑖𝑖+1
> I need explore
> 𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖
> 2. Self-Check 3. Iterative Update
> Explore data with predict Incorrect
> Judger
> Generate correct descri ption
> (𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖 ,𝑂𝑂 𝑖𝑖 ,𝑂𝑂 𝑖𝑖+1 )
> Explore data with predict correct
> (𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖 ,𝑡𝑡 𝑖𝑖 )
> Selector Action 𝒂𝒂 𝒊𝒊
> Predictor
> Update
> 1. Input Encoding
> Set of Mark
> 𝑂𝑂 𝑖𝑖 Backtrack
> Unexplored
> Partially Explored
> Fully Explored
> Current Node
> Verification
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟏𝟏
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟐𝟐
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟒𝟒
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟓𝟓
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟑𝟑
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟏𝟏
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟐𝟐
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟑𝟑 𝒂𝒂 𝟒𝟒
> 𝒂𝒂 𝟓𝟓
> Predi ctor
> Pre 1
> ……
> Have Wrong
> All Correct
> Judge
> Node
> Obs:
> URL:
> https ://127.0.0.1: 7770
> Verification
> Backtrack
> Continue Explore
> Long time no move
> Pre 2
> Pre N
> Act 1
> ……
> Act 2
> Act N
> Graph Representation

SCALE  SCALE-Hop Figure 2. The overview of SCALE and SCALE-Hop. SCALE consists of Input Encoding, Self-Check, and Iterative Update. It enables agents to identify unfamiliar actions, verify predictions, and iteratively improve their reasoning. SCALE-Hop builds a graph to represent exploration history. It uses verification-guided backtracking to mark nodes as fully explored and guide the agent toward underexplored areas for global navigation. 

world-model-based planning [7]—structure agent reason-ing through explicit modules (e.g., search or simulation) to guide actions. While these enhance decision making, they require extensive manual design and lack flexibility beyond pre-defined scenarios. Meanwhile, approaches using expert trajectories depend on large human-annotated datasets for real-world tasks. Data-centric works like Mind2Web [6], Rico [5], OS-World [29], and AGUVIS [30] advance the field, but face challenges in cost, diversity, and adaptability, resulting in passive agents rigid to new settings. In contrast, our work dispenses with handcrafted modules or costly labels, en-abling agents to self-assess and extend their abilities via au-tonomous exploration. 

2.2. Adaptive Strategy for Web Agents 

To address the rigidity of manual supervision, recent meth-ods pursue autonomous adaptation and self-improvement. Frameworks like OpenWebVoyager [9] and AgentGym [28] use iterative exploration and policy updates [17, 18], yet usually require pre-defined task templates, limiting adapta-tion. Going further, exploration-based strategies such as OS-Genesis [22] and Learn-by-Interact [21] generate trajec-tories directly through unsupervised interactions, retroac-tively creating tasks and filtering via reward models. While this reduces task dependence, most methods overlook sys-tematically probing or expanding agent cognitive bound-aries. In contrast, our approach focuses on self-cognitive-aware exploration, where agents autonomously identify, di-agnose, and broaden their own boundaries for robust envi-ronment adaptation. 

## 3. Method 

In this section, we first introduce the components and pro-cess of the SCALE framework, and then further introduce SCALE-Hop’s graph representation and verification-guided backtracking mechanism. Finally, we introduce the con-struction method and analysis of the SCALE-20k dataset. 

3.1. SCALE 

To move beyond handcrafted pipelines and expert trajec-tories, and to enable agents to proactively identify and ex-pand their own cognitive boundaries in dynamic web en-vironments, we propose a novel framework, SCALE , that enables agents to proactively explore and adapt to web envi-ronments without external supervision. In this part, we first introduce its three key components: the Selector , Predictor ,and Judger , then describe the three core stages that facilitate cognitive boundary assessment, followed by the formalized execution process of the framework. 

Selector, Predictor and Judger. The SCALE framework consists of three essential components: Selector , Predic-tor , and Judger . These roles work together to form a self-confrontation and self-verification mechanism, enabling the agent to continuously identify and focus on actions that are the most challenging to interpret within the current environ-ment. Importantly, all three roles are assumed and executed by the agent itself, forming a fully self-contained reasoning and evaluation loop. The Selector is responsible for identifying elements in the environment that are likely confusing or rarely en-countered by the agent, and generating corresponding ex-ploratory actions. For example, in a shopping page, clicking a product is common and easy to understand. In contrast, clicking the site logo is rare and less familiar. The Selector 

prefers the latter to challenge the agent. Then, the Predictor 

is responsible for analyzing the action and anticipating its expected outcome along with an explanation. This enables the system to assess whether the agent knows about the con-sequences of its decisions before execution. After the action is executed, the Judger is responsible for comparing the pre-dicted outcomes to the actual results to determine whether the agent truly understands the selected actions. These three roles interact in a closed-loop that forms the foundation of the SCALE. 

The process of SCALE. As illustrated in Figure 2, the operation of SCALE consists of three main stages: Input Encoding, Self-Check, and Iterative Update. These stages work together to support autonomous exploration, cognitive boundary assessment, and continual adaptation. 

Stage 1: Input Encoding In this stage, we adopt the commonly used Set-of-Mark (SOM) technique [31] to pro-cess Graphical User Interface (GUI) images. Unlike text-based methods that rely on accessibility trees or HTML structures, our design processes purely visual information. This choice is motivated by the fact that many real-world websites restrict access to DOM or structural metadata, whereas GUI images are always accessible. This design not only improves the generalization ability of SCALE but also aligns more closely with the way humans perceive and interact with the web through vision. 

Stage 2: Self-Check In this stage, the Selector , Predic-tor , and Judger collaborate to probe the agent’s current un-derstanding of the environment and actively search for its cognitive limits. The Selector deliberately proposes chal-lenging actions, targeting uncertain or unfamiliar elements, whose outcomes the agent is least confident about. While the Predictor attempts to anticipate the consequence of each proposed action and explain why that outcome should occur based on its existing knowledge. This creates an internal ad-versarial dynamic: the Selector tries to expose behaviors the agent cannot yet understand, while the Predictor strives to refute it by accurately forecasting the true outcome. After the action is executed, the Judger compares the predicted and observed results to decide whether the agent truly un-derstands the action’s effect. This self-supervised feedback loop reveals where the agent’s understanding breaks down and localizes the cognitive boundaries. 

Stage 3: Iterative Update In this stage, the agent refines its reasoning through iterative self-confrontation. Based on the judgments from the Judger , actions with mismatched predictions are identified as failure cases, which reveal as-pects of the environment that the agent does not understand. We focus on these failure cases rather than successful ones because they expose the agent’s current cognitive limita-tions and provide the greatest learning signal. These cases are then used to update the Predictor , allowing it to learn the actual consequences of previously misunderstood ac-tions and acquire new knowledge about the environment. Meanwhile, these cases also update the Selector , guiding it toward actions that remain challenging. Through this mutually reinforcing cycle, the Selector and Predictor co-evolve in a self-improving manner, continually discovering new cognitive boundaries and expanding the agent’s overall reasoning capability. 

Formalized Execution Process. We denote the environ-ment at step i as Si, the observation as Oi, and the action as ai, where i ∈ [1 , K ], and K is the number of interaction steps in a single self-update iteration. After K steps, the agent undergoes one round of self-update. Let j ∈ [1 , N ]

denote the number of self-update rounds, with N as the maximum number of updates allowed. For each inner-loop iteration, the Selector first receives the current observation 

Oi and generates an action ai:

ai, r sel i = πsel j (Oi)

where rsel i is the reason for selecting ai. This action is then passed to the Predictor , which predicts its outcome: 

pi, r pre i = πpre j (Oi, a i, r sel i )

where pi is the prediction of ai, rpre i is the reason for this prediction. The action ai is then executed in the real environment 

Si+1 = T (Si, a i) and the agent receives the new observa-tion Oi+1 = Ω( Si+1 ). Next, Oi, Oi+1 , and the predicted outcome pi with explanation rpre i are passed to the Judger 

to determine whether the prediction was correct: 

ji = Judger (Oi, O i+1 , a i, p i, r pre i )

where ji ∈ { 0, 1}. If ji = 0 , indicating that the predic-tion was incorrect, the action is considered unfamiliar to the agent and likely lies beyond its current knowledge bound-ary. In this case, we use the Judger to generate the true outcome and explanation: 

ti, r ti = Judger (Oi, O i+1 , a i, r sel i )

where ti is the true description of the result of ai, rti is the true reason for this description. Then we store this ex-ploratory data as ExploreData ij = ⟨Oi, a i, r sel i , t i, r ti ⟩.If ji = 1 , the action is deemed understood and provides no cognitive improvement. The environment is then reset to 

Si, and the Selector generates a new action a′

> i

:

a′

> i

, r ′ 

> sel i

= πsel j (Oi, a i, r sel i )

and the above process is repeated until an unfamiliar ac-tion ( ji = 0 ) is generated. After K steps, all collected data ExploreData j =

{ExploreData ij }Ki=1 is used to fine-tune the Selector and 

Predictor :

πsel j+1 = SFT (πsel j , ExploreData j )

πpre j+1 = SFT (πpre j , ExploreData j ).

Since the ability of judging is not trained during this pro-cess, the Judger can be considered fixed during the iterative updates. The updated policies πsel j+1 and πpre j+1 are then used for the next round of exploration, enabling an iterative self-improvement loop. Through this process, the agent learns from unfamiliar knowledge and expands its cognitive boundaries. Unlike task-driven methods such as ReAct or tree search, SCALE performs self-driven exploration to proactively adapt to new environments and discover boundary cases, enabling higher-quality learning without extra inference-time opera-tions. The full iterative process algorithm and more details can be found in Appendix A. 

3.2. SCALE-Hop 

Exploration in web environments involves not only explor-ing individual pages and actions but also perceiving and navigating the environment as a whole. However, relying solely on SCALE makes it difficult to obtain a global per-spective for exploration and correction. Accordingly, we further propose SCALE-Hop , a global exploration strategy with high-level planning and dynamic control. This sec-tion introduces its Graph Representation and Verification-Guided Backtracking mechanism. 

Graph Representation. As shown in Figure 2, SCALE-Hop models the agent’s exploration as a directed graph 

G = ( N , E), where each node ni = ( Oi, u i) represents a unique observation Oi and its URL ui, and each edge 

e = ( ni, a, n j ) denotes a transition from ni to nj triggered by an action a, where i, j ∈ [0 , K ], and K is the total num-ber of nodes. To distinguish different nodes, both the URL and the observation content are considered. For a candidate environment, we first check whether its URL has appeared before. If the URL is new, we directly create a new node 

nnew = ( Onew , u new ) and add it to the graph. If the URL already exists, we compare Onew with all observations of nodes sharing the same URL using the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM), only when all SSIM scores are below a pre-defined threshold δ do we treat it as a new environment and insert a new node into the graph. During exploration, the graph is dynamically constructed and refined. It provides a compact and expressive way to record the agent’s explo-ration history, enabling efficient tracking of visited regions, recognition of novel states, and subsequent global planning over the environment. 

Verification-Guided Backtracking. To further enhance the agent’s global exploration capability, we propose the Verification-Guided Backtracking mechanism as a core component of SCALE-Hop. Each node in the exploration graph is dynamically assigned one of three states: Unex-plored , Partially Explored , or Fully Explored , reflecting the agent’s current understanding of that local environment. The transition between these states is driven by continuous verification of prediction accuracy and exploration cover-age. When local exploration stalls or appears complete, a ver-ification phase is triggered. The agent samples N random actions from the current node and uses the Predictor to pre-dict their outcomes. If all predictions match the actual re-sults, the node is marked as Fully Explored , otherwise, it re-mains Partially Explored for further investigation. Once the verification is passed, the agent then backtracks to the near-est node that is still Unexplored or Partially Explored . This mechanism balances broad exploration with strategic fo-cus, helping the agent make steady and meaningful progress across diverse web environments. Through the combination of Graph Representation and Verification-Guided Backtracking, SCALE-Hop performs logically consistent and globally aware exploration, avoid-ing getting trapped in local regions and missing globally valuable areas. This design enables the SCALE framework to maintain comprehensive and balanced coverage across the entire web environment. 

3.3. SCALE-20k 

Since high-quality web task data are both scarce and ex-pensive to obtain, based on the exploration conducted by SCALE across 19 real-world websites, we construct the 

SCALE-20k dataset. We first introduce three stages for constructing the dataset, and then analyze its composition and statistics. 

Dataset Construction Pipeline. As shown in Figure 3, based on the exploration data obtained from SCALE, we leverage GPT-4o to assist in task construction and valida-tion, and construct the dataset through the following three stages. 

Stage 1: Single-Step Task Generation From the SCALE exploration process, we collect numerous valid ex-ploration actions. Then we reverse-construct a correspond-ing single-step task and reasoning processes based on this action. 

Stage 2: Multi-Step Task Generation To reflect the complexity of real-world tasks, we extract coherent multi-step trajectories from the SCALE-Hop graph. The logically validated trajectory is then used to reverse-construct the cor-responding task and reasoning process. 

Stage 3: Page Comprehension QA Pair Generation 

To enhance the agent’s understanding of web environments, we generate question-answer pairs for each node in the SCALE-Hop graph, providing rich page-level supervision 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 Filter Task Generate      

> Task verification
> Trajectory
> Task Synthesis
> Task 1 ...
> Sample ··· ··· ··· 𝐀 𝐀
> 𝐀 𝐀+𝐀 𝐀 𝐀+𝐀
> Action Coherence Action List
> 𝐀 𝐀
> 𝐀 𝐀+1
> 𝐀 𝐀+2
> Task 1 ...
> Task verification
> Task Generate
> Resample
> Trajectory
> Mu lti -Step Sample
> Node Extraction
> Page Message
> What is the second product ?V8+Energy, Healthy Energy Drink .
> Task 1 ...
> Task verification
> QA Pair

Stage 1: Single-Step Task Generation Stage 2: Multi-Step Task Generation Stage 3: Page QA Pair Generation 

Web 

> Task 1 ...
> Task 1 ...
> Task 1 ...

···  

> Explore Data
> Single Step Multi Step QA Pair
> 19 Real-World Websites 3 Task Types Built from SCALE explore 20 K training dataset

SCALE-20k Overview 

> QA Pair Single Step Multi Step
> 26.8% 14.7% 58.5%

Figure 3. Overview of the SCALE-20k construction pipeline and composition. The dataset is constructed in three stages: 1) Single-step tasks are reverse-generated from valid exploration steps; 2) Multi-step tasks are synthesized from coherent trajectories extracted via SCALE-Hop graphs; 3) Page QA pairs are created to test content comprehension. The dataset includes 19 real-world websites and supports three task types, providing rich and diverse supervision for training web agents. 

that strengthens the agent’s comprehension and reasoning ability. 

Dataset Composition and Statistics. As shown in Fig-ure 3, SCALE-20k comprises exploration data collected by Qwen2.5-VL-7B and InternVL2.5-8B across 19 real-world websites. It includes 15042 single-step tasks, 3780 multi-step tasks, and 6886 page comprehension QA tasks. 

## 4. Experiments 

In this section, we first describe the experimental setup, then present the main results, followed by an in-depth analysis of the experiments. 

4.1. Experimental Setup 

Baselines. We select Qwen2.5-VL-7B [1] and 

InternVL2.5-8B [4] as backbone models to evalu-ate our method. We used GPT-4o as a representative closed-source baseline. We also compare against strong open-source agents, including Augvis, a vision-only GUI agent [30], and ViGoRL, a vision-based reinforcement learning agent [20]. Beyond zero-shot settings, we con-sider three enhanced strategies: 1) Imitation learning on GPT-4o successful trajectories, 2) OS-Genesis exploration method [22], which constructs tasks from randomly ex-plored trajectories, and 3) Tree Search strategy that ex-plores multiple reasoning paths during inference time via a tree structured search. To further validate the effective-ness of our proposed SCALE-20k dataset, we additionally include a model that is entirely unrelated to our exploration model, LLaVA-NeXT-8B [13], and fine-tune it directly on SCALE-20k. 

Evaluation Benchmarks. We conduct evaluations on two widely-used web agent benchmarks: VisualWebArena and 

WebVoyager . VisualWebArena covers diverse domains such as shopping, classifieds, and forums, while WebVoy-ager includes real-world websites with complex layouts and dynamic, real-time content changes. For WebVoyager, we test on the first 11 tasks of each website to ensure consis-tency. To enable a fair comparison across all methods, we unify the input format by using only webpage screenshots with visual markup as the observation. All other auxiliary information, such as accessibility trees and page descrip-tions, is removed. Further experimental details are provided in Appendix B. 

4.2. Main Results 

Through comprehensive experimentation, we validate the effectiveness and generalization of our proposed method: 

Effectiveness of SCALE. The SCALE framework is ef-fective across MLLMs of different scales. As shown in Table 1, both InternVL2.5-8B and Qwen2.5-VL-7B 

demonstrate the ability to autonomously explore web envi-ronments in SCALE. As a result, they achieve average per-formance improvements of 231.8% and 176.3% over their vanilla counterparts. In addition, SCALE significantly out-performs other open-source vision-language agents such as Augvis, and ViGoRL across most environments. This vali-dates the effectiveness of SCALE in enhancing the agent’s capabilities. Moreover, the consistent improvements across Model Strategy Shopping Classifieds Reddit WebVoyager SR ↑ AS ↓ SR ↑ AS ↓ SR ↑ AS ↓ SR ↑ AS ↓

GPT-4o Zero-Shot 17.2 15.5 13.7 12.5 6.7 17.6 9.6 14.7 

Augvis Zero-Shot 4.3 - 0.4 - 0.5 - 0.0 -ViGoRL Zero-Shot 5.6 13.4 6.9 12.4 2.9 14.6 0.6 14.9 InternVL2.5-8B Zero-Shot 3.9 23.5 0.4 22.7 1.4 22.7 0.0 -GPT Trajectory Imitation 8.8 16.5 3.4 16.7 3.0 17.2 - -OS-Genesis 11.6 6.6 3.0 6.3 4.3 9.7 0.0 -Tree Search 3.0 - 4.3 - 1.0 - - -

SCALE(ours) 11.0 4.9 6.4 5.5 3.3 7.2 1.8 14.9 

Qwen2.5-VL-7B Zero-Shot 4.1 19.4 6.0 15.8 2.4 16.1 0.6 15.0 

GPT Trajectory Imitation 18.3 8.5 10.7 9.2 3.3 12.0 - -OS-Genesis 11.2 12.7 8.6 11.3 1.4 12.7 6.7 15.0 

Tree Search 4.1 - 1.7 - 1.0 - - -

SCALE(ours) 14.4 5.7 12.0 4.1 4.8 8.4 7.9 15.0 

LLaVA-NeXT-8B Zero-Shot 0 - 0 - 1.4 4.6 0.0 -

SCALE-20k 2.1 10.1 0.8 8.2 1.9 9.6 0.0 -

Table 1. Overall Performance Comparison Across Models and Exploration Strategies. Success rate (SR, %) and average steps (AS) of different strategies across models on multiple web benchmarks. SR is reported as a percentage without the % symbol. The best value in each group is shown in bold , and the second-best value is underlined. SCALE denotes each model’s adapted performance via our SCALE procedure, while SCALE-20k refers to results obtained by training directly on the constructed SCALE-20k dataset.                      

> Model Strategy Shopping Classifieds Reddit Overall Qwen2.5-VL-7B Zero-Shot 4.5 6.0 1.9 4.1 SCALE (20-25) 6.7 9.8 5.3 7.2 SCALE (40-25) 9.0 9.0 4.3 7.9 SCALE (60-25) 14.4 12.0 4.8 11.9

Table 2. Performance of Qwen2.5-VL-7B under different ex-ploration levels. SR is shown as a percentage without the % sym-bol. SCALE (X-25) denotes X outer-loop hops and 25 inner-loop steps. Best results are in bold , second-best are underlined. Strategy Shopping Classifieds Reddit Overall SR Node SR Node SR Node SR Node Random Walk 14.8 207 7.3 163 3.8 29 10.4 399 w/o SCALE-Hop 13.5 226 6.0 25 7.1 26 10.1 277 SCALE 14.4 347 12.0 292 4.8 237 11.6 876 

Table 3. Ablation study of exploration strategies across three web domains. We report task success rate (SR) and number of visited nodes (Node) to reflect effectiveness and coverage. SR val-ues omit the % symbol. Best results are in bold , second-best are underlined. 

different models suggest that our method is general and can be applied to a wide range of MLLM backbones. Beyond vanilla zero-shot baselines, SCALE outper-forms two mainstream improvement paradigms—expert-trajectory supervision and manually engineered reasoning pipelines. Compared with models trained on GPT-4o tra-jectories or OS-Genesis exploration data, SCALE achieves consistently better or competitive performance, often reach-ing or surpassing state-of-the-art results. Its advantage is particularly notable on WebVoyager, where dynamic content and diverse page layouts make static or manu-ally curated trajectories insufficient, highlighting SCALE’s stronger generalization and adaptability. In terms of efficiency, we report the average number of steps (AS) taken across all tasks, regardless of success. As shown in Table 1, SCALE achieves the lowest or second-lowest AS in most domains, indicating more concise and effective reasoning paths compared to trajectory-based or tree-search baselines. Moreover, as shown in Table 2, increasing the number of SCALE iterations leads to consistent performance gains, indicating that deeper exploration enables the agent to dis-cover more informative behaviors and improve task success rates. 

4.3. In-Depth Analysis 

In this section, we further analyze how SCALE enables deeper and broader exploration. 

Ablation Study: The Importance of Self-Adversarial Interaction in Exploration. We observe that the self-adversarial mechanism in SCALE plays a vital role in en-hancing exploration behavior. As shown in Table 3, our method significantly outperforms random walk in both task success rate (SR) and exploration coverage. It consistently visits more unique nodes with higher diversity in URL dis-tribution and visual layout. Many of these nodes lie in rarely Action: click [55]               

> Reason: I think that the Advance Search function is new to me.
> Prediction: The products on the current interface will be re-filtered, after clicking "Advance Search".
> Reason: I think ...
> Judge: False
> The prediction is wrong, it will no t
> re-filter the current page.
> Selector Judger Predictor
> Action: click [55]
> Action: click [43]
> Reason: I think click the product is a new action to me.
> Prediction: After clicking on the Energy Drink product, I will enter the specific purchase interface, including ...
> Reason: I think ...
> Judge: True
> The prediction is correct, it will go to the detail page.
> Selector Judger Predictor
> Reselect
> The Product is well understood,
> explore other action .
> Unsure about Advance Search,
> worth exploring .

Figure 4. A case of cognitive boundary discovery by the Selector , Predictor and Judger in SCALE 0.7  

> 0.75
> 0.8
> 0.85
> 0.9
> 0.95
> 1

VisualWebArena OS-Genesis SCALE   

> Task diversity Reasoning quality Answer quality

Figure 5. Comparison of SCALE-20k, OS-Genesis, and Visual-WebArena across three dimensions. 5       

> 7
> 9
> 11
> 13
> 15
> 700 1200 1700 2200 2700
> Amount of training data
> SR on Shopping (%)
> (a) 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> 350
> 400
> 20-25 40-25 60-25
> Exploration Round
> Number of nodes (b)

Figure 6. (a) Impact of training data size on Success Rate in shop-ping environment. (b) Node diversity under different exploration rounds. (X-25 indicates X outer-loops and 25 inner steps.) 

accessed regions—such as footer menus, hidden tabs, and domain edges—that are often overlooked by goal-driven or randomly sampling agents. This demonstrates that self-adversarial interaction is key to enabling not only deeper exploration, but also continual self-driven improvement. 

Ablation Study: Contribution of SCALE-Hop. Table 3 further highlights the impact of SCALE-Hop within the framework. Its integration yields the largest performance improvement across environments, boosting both SR and the number of visited nodes. On average, SCALE-Hop increases node coverage by 216% compared to the w/o SCALE-Hop setting, enabling the agent to escape local pat-terns and uncover a wider range of states. This confirms SCALE-Hop as a crucial driver of long-horizon, diverse, efficient, and self-improving exploration. 

Diversity of the SCALE-20k. To evaluate dataset di-versity, we compute the average cosine distance between Sentence-BERT [19] embeddings of task descriptions. In addition, we assess dataset quality using GPT-4o along two complementary dimensions, reasoning quality and answer quality , with evaluation prompts detailed in Appendix C. As shown in Figure 5, SCALE-20k achieves strong perfor-mance across all three metrics, exhibiting higher semantic diversity and better reasoning-action correctness than other datasets. Moreover, as shown in Table 1, even a model unrelated to our framework (LLaVA-NeXT-8B) gains clear improvements when fine-tuned solely on SCALE-20k, fur-ther demonstrating the effectiveness and generality of our dataset. 

Case Study. As shown in Figure 4, this case demon-strates how SCALE’s components collaboratively identify the agent’s cognitive boundary. On the left, although the selected action (clicking the product) is valid, the Predic-tor already understands its outcome well, suggesting this interaction is within the agent’s current knowledge and of-fers limited exploratory value. On the right, a new action (clicking “Advance Search”) is selected. The Predictor’s expectation is invalidated by the Judger, signaling a gap in understanding. This mismatch reveals a gap in understand-ing and drives targeted exploration, showcasing SCALE’s ability to recognize and expand cognitive boundaries. 

Towards Lifelong Exploration via Self-Adaptation. As exploration progresses, the agent gradually improves its ability to handle complex interfaces without external su-pervision—each update relies solely on internal judgment and feedback. As shown in Figure 6, both task success rate and exploration diversity increase steadily. This illustrates a promising direction toward lifelong exploration learning, where agents continuously adapt to evolving web environ-ments through self-driven feedback loops. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this work, we propose SCALE , a self-driven framework that enables web agents to autonomously explore and ex-pand their cognitive boundaries without relying on hand-crafted pipelines or expert demonstrations. It uses the Se-lector , Predictor , and Judger to collaboratively form inter-nal feedback loops, enabling the agent to identify and over-come its cognitive limitations. At the global level, we de-sign the SCALE-Hop strategy to guide broader and more strategic exploration across diverse web environments. Ad-ditionally, we construct SCALE-20k , a large-scale and di-verse dataset, from SCALE trajectories. Experimental re-sults demonstrate the effectiveness and adaptability of our approach for building general web agents. Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2025ZD0123100), the Zhejiang NSF (LQK26F020001), Key R&D Program of Zhejiang (2026SDXT005), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (226-2025-00057), Ningbo Yongjiang Talent Introduction Programme (2024A-401-G), Zhejiang University Education Foundation Qizhen Scholar Foundation. 

## References 

[1] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. 2, 6, 10 [2] Wendong Bu, Yang Wu, Qifan Yu, Minghe Gao, Bingchen Miao, Zhenkui Zhang, Kaihang Pan, Yunfei Li, Mengze Li, Wei Ji, et al. What limits virtual agent application? om-nibench: A scalable multi-dimensional benchmark for essen-tial virtual agent capabilities. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5725–5748. PMLR, 2025. 1 [3] Xuetian Chen, Hangcheng Li, Jiaqing Liang, Sihang Jiang, and Deqing Yang. Edge: Enhanced grounded gui un-derstanding with enriched multi-granularity synthetic data. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19461 , 2024. 1 [4] Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Zhang-wei Gao, Erfei Cui, Jinguo Zhu, Shenglong Ye, Hao Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, et al. Expanding performance boundaries of open-source multimodal models with model, data, and test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05271 , 2024. 2, 6, 10 [5] Biplab Deka, Zifeng Huang, Chad Franzen, Joshua Hib-schman, Daniel Afergan, Yang Li, Jeffrey Nichols, and Ran-jitha Kumar. Rico: A mobile app dataset for building data-driven design applications. In Proceedings of the 30th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and technology ,pages 845–854, 2017. 3 [6] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web, 2023. 3 [7] Yu Gu, Kai Zhang, Yuting Ning, Boyuan Zheng, Boyu Gou, Tianci Xue, Cheng Chang, Sanjari Srivastava, Yanan Xie, Peng Qi, et al. Is your llm secretly a world model of the in-ternet? model-based planning for web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.06559 , 2024. 1, 3 [8] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. We-bvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large mul-timodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13919 , 2024. 1, 11 [9] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Hong-ming Zhang, Tianqing Fang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. Openwebvoyager: Building multimodal web agents via it-erative real-world exploration, feedback and optimization, 2024. 3 [10] Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Qingsong Lv, Jiazheng Xu, Wenmeng Yu, Junhui Ji, Yan Wang, Zihan Wang, Yuxiao Dong, Ming Ding, et al. Cogagent: A visual language model for gui agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14281– 14290, 2024. 1 [11] Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Chong Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. Visualwe-barena: Evaluating multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13649 , 2024. 1, 11 [12] Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Tree search for language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01476 , 2024. 1, 2, 10 [13] Feng Li, Renrui Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-next-interleave: Tackling multi-image, video, and 3d in large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07895 , 2024. 6, 10, 11 [14] Kevin Qinghong Lin, Linjie Li, Difei Gao, Zhengyuan Yang, Shiwei Wu, Zechen Bai, Stan Weixian Lei, Lijuan Wang, and Mike Zheng Shou. Showui: One vision-language-action model for gui visual agent. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 19498– 19508, 2025. 1 [15] Quanfeng Lu, Wenqi Shao, Zitao Liu, Fanqing Meng, Box-uan Li, Botong Chen, Siyuan Huang, Kaipeng Zhang, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Gui odyssey: A comprehensive dataset for cross-app gui navigation on mobile devices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08451 , 2024. 1 [16] Bingchen Miao, Yang Wu, Minghe Gao, Qifan Yu, Wen-dong Bu, Wenqiao Zhang, Yunfei Li, Siliang Tang, Tat-Seng Chua, and Juncheng Li. Boosting virtual agent learning and reasoning: A step-wise, multi-dimensional, and generalist reward model with benchmark. In Forty-second Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 1 [17] Pranav Putta, Edmund Mills, Naman Garg, Sumeet Mot-wani, Chelsea Finn, Divyansh Garg, and Rafael Rafailov. Agent q: Advanced reasoning and learning for autonomous ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07199 , 2024. 3 [18] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023. 3 [19] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sen-tence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Pro-ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China, 2019. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. 8, 12 [20] Gabriel Sarch, Snigdha Saha, Naitik Khandelwal, Ayush Jain, Michael J Tarr, Aviral Kumar, and Katerina Fragki-adaki. Grounded reinforcement learning for visual reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23678 , 2025. 6, 10 [21] Hongjin Su, Ruoxi Sun, Jinsung Yoon, Pengcheng Yin, Tao Yu, and Sercan ¨ O Arık. Learn-by-interact: A data-centric framework for self-adaptive agents in realistic environments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10893 , 2025. 3 [22] Qiushi Sun, Kanzhi Cheng, Zichen Ding, Chuanyang Jin, Yian Wang, Fangzhi Xu, Zhenyu Wu, Chengyou Jia, Li-heng Chen, Zhoumianze Liu, et al. Os-genesis: Automating gui agent trajectory construction via reverse task synthesis. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19723 , 2024. 1, 2, 3, 6, 10 [23] Gaurav Verma, Rachneet Kaur, Nishan Srishankar, Zhen Zeng, Tucker Balch, and Manuela Veloso. Adapta-gent: Adapting multimodal web agents with few-shot learning from human demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13451 , 2024. 1 [24] Jianqiang Wan, Sibo Song, Wenwen Yu, Yuliang Liu, Wen-qing Cheng, Fei Huang, Xiang Bai, Cong Yao, and Zhibo Yang. Omniparser: A unified framework for text spotting key information extraction and table recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 15641–15653, 2024. 11 [25] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based au-tonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6): 186345, 2024. 1 [26] Shuai Wang, Weiwen Liu, Jingxuan Chen, Yuqi Zhou, Weinan Gan, Xingshan Zeng, Yuhan Che, Shuai Yu, Xinlong Hao, Kun Shao, et al. Gui agents with foundation models: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04890 ,2024. 1 [27] Zhiyong Wu, Zhenyu Wu, Fangzhi Xu, Yian Wang, Qiushi Sun, Chengyou Jia, Kanzhi Cheng, Zichen Ding, Liheng Chen, Paul Pu Liang, et al. Os-atlas: A foundation action model for generalist gui agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23218 , 2024. 1 [28] Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Dingwen Yang, Chenyang Liao, Xin Guo, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Agentgym: Evolv-ing large language model-based agents across diverse envi-ronments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04151 , 2024. 3 [29] Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh J Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, et al. Osworld: Benchmark-ing multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:52040–52094, 2024. 1, 2, 3 [30] Yiheng Xu, Zekun Wang, Junli Wang, Dunjie Lu, Tian-bao Xie, Amrita Saha, Doyen Sahoo, Tao Yu, and Caiming Xiong. Aguvis: Unified pure vision agents for autonomous gui interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04454 , 2024. 1, 2, 3, 6, 10 [31] Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chunyuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. Set-of-mark prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding in gpt-4v. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441 , 2023. 4, 11 [32] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing rea-soning and acting in language models. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. 1, 2 [33] Boyuan Zheng, Boyu Gou, Jihyung Kil, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Gpt-4v (ision) is a generalist web agent, if grounded. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01614 , 2024. 1 [34] Longtao Zheng, Zhiyuan Huang, Zhenghai Xue, Xinrun Wang, Bo An, and Shuicheng Yan. Agentstudio: Atoolkit for building general virtual agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17918 , 2024. 1 [35] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web en-vironment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2023. 1 Learning to Adapt: Self-Improving Web Agent via Cognitive-Aware Exploration 

# Supplementary Material 

## Overview 

In this supplementary material, we present: • Formal definition of the SCALE framework as a POMDP, along with the self-check and iterative update algorithm and exploration-specific parameters, in Section A.1, Sec-tion A.2 and Section A.3. • Detailed prompt designs for the Selector , Predictor , and 

Judger modules, in Section A.4. • Task construction prompts for the SCALE-20k dataset, as well as representative examples of single-step tasks, multi-step tasks, and page-level QA tasks from SCALE-20k , in Section A.5 and Section A.6. • Comprehensive description of baselines, evaluation benchmarks, and standardized input protocols used in our experiments, in Section B.1. • Hardware configurations and training hyperparame-ters for fine-tuning Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct ,

InternVL2.5-8B and LLaVA-NeXT-8B , in Sec-tion B.2. • Design of three dataset quality assessment metrics and evaluator prompts for reasoning quality and action opti-mality, in Section C.1 and Section C.2. 

## A. Details of SCALE Framework and SCALE-20k Dataset 

This section provides a comprehensive overview of the for-mal definition, algorithm, and implementation details of the SCALE framework, as well as the construction of the 

SCALE-20k dataset. It covers the POMDP formulation, the iterative self-check algorithm, prompt designs for each module, exploration-specific parameters, and representative dataset examples to facilitate reproducibility. 

A.1. Formulation of the SCALE 

We model the exploration process as a partially observ-able Markov decision process (POMDP), defined as a tu-ple (S, A, O, T, R, Ω) , where S denotes the set of environ-ment states, A is the action space, including actions such as 

Click , Type , Hover and Scroll , and O represents the set of observations available to the agent. T : S × A → S

is the state transition function that models how the environ-ment changes in response to an action, and R is a binary function used to determine whether an exploration action is worth performing in a given state. Ω : S → O is the observation function that maps the underlying state to the observable interface. This formulation captures the uncer-tainty and partial observability inherent in real-world web environments. 

Algorithm 1 Self-Check and Iterative Update Process 

Require: Initial policies πsel  

> 1

, πpre  

> 1

, fixed Judger, max up-date rounds N , steps per round K, initial state S1 

> 1:

for j = 1 to N do  

> 2:

Initialize buffer: Dj ← ∅  

> 3:

for i = 1 to K do  

> 4:

Oi ← Ω( Si) 

> 5:

(ai, r sel i ) ← πsel j (Oi) 

> 6:

repeat ← True  

> 7:

while repeat do  

> 8:

(pi, r pre i ) ← πpre j (Oi, a i, r sel i ) 

> 9:

Si+1 ← T (Si, a i) 

> 10:

Oi+1 ← Ω( Si+1 ) 

> 11:

ji ← Judger (Oi, O i+1 , a i, p i, r pre i ) 

> 12:

if ji = 0 then {Action not understood } 

> 13:

repeat ← False  

> 14:

else {Action understood, try again } 

> 15:

Si+1 is reverted to Si 

> 16:

(ai, r sel i ) ← πsel j (Oi, a i, r sel i ) 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end while  

> 19:

(ti, r ti ) ← Judger (Oi, O i+1 , a i, r sel i ) 

> 20:

Dj ← D j ∪ { (Oi, a i, r sel i , t i, r ti )} 

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

πsel j+1 ← SFT (πsel j , Dj ) 

> 23:

πpre j+1 ← SFT (πpre j , Dj ) 

> 24:

S1 ← SK 

> 25:

end for 

A.2. Algorithm of the SCALE Framework 

This is the specific algorithm of the SCALE method. We de-note the environment at step i as Si, the observation as Oi,and the action as ai, where i ∈ [1 , K ], and K is the number of interaction steps in a single self-update iteration. After 

K steps, the agent undergoes one round of self-update. Let 

j ∈ [1 , N ] denote the number of self-update rounds, with N

as the maximum number of updates allowed. The algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. 

A.3. Exploration Specific Parameters 

We define several key parameters in the SCALE-Hop mod-ule to support effective exploration and verification in web environments. 

Node Differentiation. To determine whether two nodes represent different web states, we jointly consider the URL 

and the visual similarity between observations. Specifi-cally, we compute the Structural Similarity Index Mea-sure (SSIM) between the two screenshots. A new node is created only if the URL differs or the SSIM value is below a strict threshold of 0.99, ensuring that visually similar pages are not redundantly revisited. 

Verification-Guided Backtracking. To avoid infinite loops in local exploration, we introduce a self-verification mechanism. If the agent remains within the same node for more than 10 consecutive steps without successful progres-sion, it triggers Verification-Guided Backtracking. During this process, the system generates 5 candidate verification actions to determine whether the current state has been mis-understood or overlooked due to subtle changes in the envi-ronment. When there is link fluctuation or the exploration becomes stuck and difficult to continue, the self-verification mechanism is proactively activated to trigger verification-guided backtracking and switch to another node. 

A.4. Prompts Used in SCALE 

In this section, we provide the prompts used in Selector ,

Predictor , and Judger in SCALE .

Selector Prompt Prompt for Selector 

You are an exploration system designed to discover unknown interactions and the resulting changes in the environment. Your task is to generate a single exploratory action based on the provided image. The action of exploration needs to be meaningful !The action you generate should be one whose func-tionality and outcome are uncertain and unpre-dictable .Based on the input image, generate an exploratory action. The generated action must satisfy the fol-lowing requirements: 

1. The action command should start with action: followed by a concise command. (for example, action: click [<insert item number in picture>] ,

type [<insert item number in picture>][<typing text>] , action: hover [<insert item number in picture>] , action: scroll [<down or up>] ). 

2. The action command should be a simple com-mand without any extra explanation. 3. Immediately following the action command, provide a reason starting with reason: that explains why you chose this action and why its effect is unknown, requiring exploration. 

4. The only possible actions you can generate are: scroll , click , hover , type , or 

fill . When you use type or fill action 

you must provide the specific element in the im-age and the fill content. For example: type [1][chips] .

5. Your output must include both the action and reason parts , separated by a newline, exactly in the following format: 

action: <insert action> reason: <insert why you choose this action, and why this action will lead to unknown interactions> 

In any given instance, you should generate only one action and its corresponding reason. If it hasn’t been generated before, try action: scroll [down] to explore more content. 

Predictor Prompt Prompt for Predictor 

You are a prediction system designed to forecast the result of an action within a given environment. Your task is to predict what will happen after the provided action is performed in the environment represented by the image. 

The result should be described in detail, focusing on the changes in the environment. Please predict the result after the action in the picture given. The action is as follows: [ACTION] 

Describe the changes in the environment after the action is performed, focusing on the details of the transformation. If you think this action cannot change the environment, please answer accordingly that this action cannot make any changes. The description should start with describe: ,followed by a detailed account of the changes that might occur. After that, provide a reason for the prediction starting with reason: .For example: 

describe: <insert detailedly describe the changes in the environment after the action is performed, including specific details. The description must include changes in page content, interface elements, functionality, etc.> reason: <insert reason why the described changes are expected, based on interface design rules, common user behavior patterns, or situational reasoning. You can mention page layout, interface interaction rules, or typical user actions and expectations.> 

Judger Prompt Prompt for Judger 

System Prompt 

You are a judgment system designed to verify whether the predicted result matches the actual out-come after the action is performed. Your task is to evaluate whether the prediction described matches the environment change shown in the picture. The first picture given is the original image before any action is performed, the second picture the image with labeled elements to assist in understanding the action, and the third picture shows the environment after the action has been performed. Your job is to determine if the prediction matches the changes between the first picture and the third picture after the action was performed. If the prediction matches the outcome, return 

judge: TRUE . If the prediction does not match, or uses vague descriptions like a new page appears or the layout changes, return judge: FALSE ,and provide a correct description of the action’s re-sult starting with true describe: .In true describe , you should list the most sig-nificant modifications and then describe every small detail that has changed (e.g., text content, button po-sitions, colors, UI layout, icons, images, main func-tion changes, etc.). 

!!! Avoid vague descriptions like a ‘new page ap-pears’ or ‘the layout changes’. Instead, describe exactly what is different. 

Please output your response in the following format: • judge: TRUE if the prediction matches the outcome. • If it does not match, judge: FALSE and pro-vide the correct description starting with true describe: , then give the true judgment reason starting with true reason: 

Example 1: 

judge: TRUE 

Example 2: 

judge: FALSE true describe: <insert describe detailedly the 

change between the first picture and the third picture, which is the change after the action.> true reason: <insert analyze the real reason why the first picture will produce the third picture result after this action.(the action label is shown in the second picture)> 

User Prompt 

The action performed is described as: [ACTION] 

The predicted result is described as: [PREDIC-TION] 

Determine whether the predicted result matches the actual outcome in the third image. If it matches and describes detailedly, respond with judge: TRUE .If it does NOT match or does NOT describe de-tailedly, respond with judge: FALSE , and pro-vide a correct and detailed description of the action’s result starting with true describe: .

Important: Your description must be detailed and specific. If the predicted result is inaccurate or the description is too vague, it should be considered in-correct. When answering, do not mention ‘first image’ or ‘third image’, but rather the original environment and the environment after the action. Provide enough detail to explain what exactly changed in the environment after the action was performed, and make sure to describe any visual or functional differences in the image. 

Note: The third image shows no environmental changes, meaning no alterations occurred after per-forming the action. (Optional hint when same==1 )

A.5. SCALE-20k Prompt 

In this section, we introduce the construction process of the 

SCALE-20k dataset. Specifically, we detail the prompt formulations used to generate three types of supervision signals—single-step tasks, multi-step tasks, and page-level question answering (QA) pairs. The SCALE-20k dataset includes data collected from a total of 19 websites, four from VisualWebArena and fifteen from WebVoyager. 

Action description generation Prompt Prompt for Action Description 

The image shows the current state of the webpage interface. The corresponding action is: [ACTION] 

Your task is to generate a simple, accurate, and di-rect one-sentence description of the operation im-plied by this action. • Do not include the action syntax like click [id] or type [id] [content] in your re-sponse. • Do not use words like label , id , or technical terms — just describe what the user would do. • IMPORTANT: The description must align with the action type; for example, do not describe a 

click action using the word hover or other un-related verbs. • Only output the natural language description. Do not include Action: or any other prefixes in your answer. 

Examples (input → output): 

• Action: click [12] → Click the ‘Event’ but-ton. • Action: type [6] [xxx] → Type xxx in the name field. • Action: scroll [down] → Scroll the page down to view more listings. 

Single-Step Task Construction Prompt Prompt for Single-Step Task Construction 

The provided image shows the current status of the website environment. Please generate higher-level tasks based on this action [ACTION] and the object 

[ACTION DESCRIBE] it operates on. Do not refer to its border — it is marked only for identifying the location. Focus on the content of the item itself. 

Examples: 

• Task: Buy me the T-shirt with darkest color. • Task: Add the cheapest item to my wish list. • Task: Can you search watch for me. • Task: Scroll down to load more products in the current category. The task should be a simple instruction that can be executed in the current environment. • DO NOT generate literal tasks like “Click [ob-ject]” or “Do xxx”. • Combine the object’s function and the action’s re-sult to form a meaningful user goal. You should only return the task and nothing else, 

following the format below: 

Task: <insert the generated task here> 

Multi-Step Task Construction Prompt Prompt for Multi-Step Task Construction (Three Steps) 

You are given four interface screenshots represent-ing a user workflow: 1. Initial State (First Image) : The environment before any action. 2. After Action 1 (Second Image) : The environ-ment after executing Action 1 .3. After Action 2 (Third Image) : The environ-ment after executing Action 2 .4. After Action 3 (Fourth Image) : The environ-ment after executing Action 3 , which should rep-resent the final task completion state. The three actions performed are: • Action 1: [ACTION 1] 

• Action 2: [ACTION 2] 

• Action 3: [ACTION 3] 

You are also provided with abstract descriptions of the visual and contextual features of the targets for each action: • For Action 1: [ACTION DESCRIBE 1] 

• For Action 2: [ACTION DESCRIBE 2] 

• For Action 3: [ACTION DESCRIBE 3] 

These describe what the target looks like or its pur-pose (e.g., position, layout, category), but not its ex-act label or wording. 

Your task is to generate a realistic and specific user goal that is fully completed by executing the above three actions in order .• The task should reflect a natural user intent — not a technical UI action description. • Avoid phrasing the task as a sequence of steps (e.g., ‘first do A, then do B, then do C’). • Keep the task concise, meaningful, and achievable with the provided actions. • The generated task must have been fully com-pleted in the fourth image. 

Examples of valid tasks: 

• Add a discounted smartphone to the cart by enter-ing the smartphone category and selecting an item under $300. • Submit a review for a recently ordered vacuum cleaner by opening its product page and filling out the review form. • Find a blue sofa listed in the top-rated furniture section and initiate a purchase. • View the seller’s contact options for a kitchen blender by navigating to the product details page. • Open the support chat window to get help with a delayed shoe delivery. Now, only return the final task using the following format: 

Task: <insert your generated task here> 

Page QA Construction Prompt Prompt for Page QA Construction 

You are a useful task generation assistant. I will provide you with a screenshot of a web page and you will generate a question and answer pair based on the content of this screenshot. 

Questions must strictly align with the content of the image and relate directly to it. Do not generate ques-tions about elements outside the image. 

Answers to the questions must be strictly derived from the visual information provided in the image. You can’t fabricate the answer yourself. The generated answer should be concise and direct. It should not be a long text answer. It is best to provide a brief answer with numbers or a price range. 

Example 1: 

• Question: What is the price range of the products on the first line? • Answer: $1.00 – $600.00 

Example 2: 

• Question: Tell me the price of the yellow item in the first row. • Answer: $10.00 

Example 3: 

• Question: What is the length of the product in inches? • Answer: 40.00 

Example 4: 

• Question: What is the price of the darkest product in this page? • Answer: $12.00 

Example 5: 

• Question: Tell me the price of the product with owl in the page. • Answer: $45.00 

IMPORTANT: Only one question–answer pair can 

be generated at a time. The generated pair must be relevant to the given image, and the answer should be short and meaningful. You should follow the output format exactly, with nothing else: 

Question: <Your generated task> Answer: <Your generated answer of the question> 

Think Process Prompt In task-oriented web environments, reasoning about the next action based on the current obser-vation is essential for agent decision-making. We design think process prompts to help the model infer the immedi-ate intention behind the first action in a given task context. While different types of tasks may involve different rea-soning strategies depending on task structure and action de-pendencies, we unify the prompt format across examples with slight variations depending on action ordering. Here, we present the think process prompt tailored for a two-step task, where the reasoning focuses on initiating the first ac-tion .

Prompt for Think Process Construction 

System Prompt 

You are an assistant that generates simple and direct reasoning based on a task and current web environ-ment. Only focus on the present situation and what needs to be done first, without predicting future out-comes. Use ‘I’ as the subject, and keep your answer to one short paragraph (1–2 sentences max). Write in a nat-ural, direct tone. Avoid any lists, explanations, or formatting. Avoid using phrases like “step-by-step”, “first”, “second”, etc. 

Examples: 

• Let’s think step-by-step. I need to check a com-ment, and the post is right here, so I should go into it. • Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. 

User Prompt 

The first image shows the current website environ-ment. The second image shows the result after executing 

[ACTION 1] .The task is: [TASK] .The related actions are [ACTION 1] and [ACTION 2] .In this initial situation, you need to think about exe-cuting the first action [ACTION 1] first. Generate a short reasoning based only on the envi-ronment and the task. 

Important: 

• Keep it very short and natural. • Do not describe outcomes. • Do not use formatting or list-style language. • Output just one short paragraph. 

A.6. SCALE-20k Examples. 

In this section, we provide specific SCALE-20k examples, including examples of single-step tasks, multi-step tasks, and page QA tasks. 

Example of Single-Step Tasks 

User Input: Image Observation: 

Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

Navigate back to the homepage to explore more cat-egories for shopping. 

PREVIOUS ACTION: IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

To get back to the homepage and explore more categories, I need to find a way to return to the main page. I can see the One Stop Market logo, which is a common website feature for returning to the homepage, so I should click on it to navigate back. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [58] ``` 

Example of Multi-Step Tasks 

STEP 1: User Input: Image Observation: Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link 

is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

Browse the available video game accessories under $999.99. 

PREVIOUS ACTION: IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

I need to click on the One Stop Market logo marked with [56] to navigate to the homepage. In sum-mary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [56] ``` 

STEP 2: User Input: Image Observation: 

Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

Browse the available video game accessories under $999.99. 

PREVIOUS ACTION: 

click [56] 

IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

Let’s think step-by-step. To browse video game accessories, I need to navigate to the Video Games section, which is accessible through the Video Games category link with ID [42]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [42] ``` 

STEP 3: User Input: Image Observation: 

Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based 

tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

Browse the available video game accessories under $999.99. 

PREVIOUS ACTION: 

click [56] click [42] 

IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

Let’s think step-by-step. To browse video game accessories under $999.99, I click on the price filter [16] that matches the set range. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [16] ``` 

STEP 4: User Input: Image Observation: 

Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

Browse the available video game accessories under $999.99. 

PREVIOUS ACTION: 

click [56] click [42] click [16] 

IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

I have displayed video game accessories filtered by the price range of $0.00 - $999.99. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` stop[I have browsed the available video game accessories under $999.99] ``` .

Example of Page QA Tasks 

User Input: Image Observation: 

Task Description: 

You are an intelligent agent completing web-based tasks. Based on the user’s objective (i.e. instruc-tion), current interface information (i.e. screenshot and its corresponding accessibility tree), and action history, determine the next action. 

Available Actions: 

• click [id] : This action clicks on an element with a specific id on the webpage. • type [id] [content] [press enter after=0|1] : Use this to type the content into the field with id. By default, the “Enter” key is pressed after typing unless press enter after is set to 0. • hover [id] : Hover over an element with id. • press [key comb] : Simulates the pressing of a key combination on the keyboard (e.g., Ctrl+v). • scroll [direction=down|up] : Scroll the page up or down. • new tab : Open a new, empty browser tab. • tab focus [tab index] : Switch the browser’s focus to a specific tab using its index. • close tab : Close the currently active tab. • goto [url] : Navigate to a specific URL. • go back : Navigate to the previously viewed page. • go forward : Navigate to the next page (if a pre-vious ‘go back’ action was performed). • stop [answer] : Issue this action when you believe the task is complete. If the objective is to find a text-based answer, provide the answer in the bracket. If you believe the task is impossible to complete, provide the answer as “N/A” in the bracket. 

Output Format: 

First, generate the reasoning process for the action. Then, generate the action in the correct format. Start with a ”In summary, the next action I will perform is” phrase, followed by action inside `````` . For example, Let’s think step-by-step. To add a product to the shopping cart, I need to navigate to the catalog or product section. The “CATALOG” link is available with ID [1234]. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` click [1234] ``` 

OBJECTIVE: 

What is one of the popular search terms related to food in the image? 

PREVIOUS ACTION: IMAGES: (1) Assistant Output: 

The task is to find a popular search term related to food. I see the search term Cereal is listed among the popular search terms, and it is related to food. So, Cereals is the answer. In summary, the next action I will perform is ``` stop [Cereals] ``` 

## B. Detailed Experimental Setup 

In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of the ex-perimental settings to facilitate reproducibility. We first introduce the baselines and benchmarks, then outline the evaluation protocol, and finally detail the hardware and training settings for Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [1], 

InternVL2.5-8B [4] and LLaVA-NeXT-8B [13]. 

B.1. Baselines and Evaluation Benchmarks 

Baselines. To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we compare against the following categories of baselines: 

Closed-source Model. We include GPT-4o, a strong commercial vision-language agent accessed via OpenAI’s official API. All GPT-4o evaluations are conducted in a strict zero-shot setting, without additional training or in-context demonstrations. This serves as an upper bound ref-erence. 

Open-source Agent Model. We evaluate against two representative open-source agents: • Augvis [30]: a unified vision-based GUI agent that op-erates directly on raw screen images and performs cross-platform tasks through standardized visual interactions. Augvis is trained on a large-scale multimodal dataset with GUI grounding and reasoning annotations. It achieves strong performance on both offline and real-world bench-marks without relying on closed-source models. • ViGoRL [20]: a vision-language agent trained via rein-forcement learning to perform spatially grounded reason-ing. It anchors each reasoning step to specific visual coor-dinates and dynamically adjusts visual attention through multi-turn RL. This design enables effective fine-grained exploration and visual decision-making across complex GUI environments. 

Backbone Models. Our method is implemented on two strong open-source multimodal foundation models: 

InternVL2.5-8B and Qwen2.5VL-7B-Instruct .

Enhanced Training or Inference Strategies. To further investigate the web agent capabilities of the models, we ap-ply three widely used enhancement strategies on top of the above backbones: • GPT Trajectory Fine-tuning : We fine-tune the agent us-ing successful trajectories obtained from GPT-4o on the evaluation tasks. These trajectories are collected by run-ning GPT-4o in the test environments and extracting cor-rect responses. As a result, this strategy introduces a pow-erful form of supervision, especially effective in improv-ing performance on tasks the model has seen during fine-tuning. • OS-Genesis [22]: This setting uses the OS-Genesis-Web dataset, which is employed to fine-tune the model. The dataset is constructed by having an agent randomly ex-plore synthetic websites and then automatically reverse-construct corresponding tasks and aligned trajectories. The dataset contains high-quality expert demonstrations across various domains (e.g. shopping, reddit and classi-fieds). • Tree Search Inference [12]: A manually crafted in-ference pipeline that enables language model agents to perform multi-step planning in interactive web environ-ments. To ensure experimental efficiency, we adopt the following setup: the agent generates five candidate ac-tions at each step and selects two valid ones for simula-tion. The resulting states are evaluated using the model itself as a value function, and only high-scoring paths are retained while low-value branches are pruned. The search is performed with a depth of three steps. This method sup-ports strategic exploration and multi-step reasoning dur-ing inference without requiring any additional training. 

SCALE. We leverage the SCALE framework to collect trajectory data through autonomous interaction with corre-sponding web environments. It enables agents to explore, assess, and adapt beyond their cognitive boundaries in dy-namic and unfamiliar web settings. Based on these, we use another model to construct structured tasks (e.g., single-step, multi-step, QA), which are then used to fine-tune the base model. This enables the agent to improve through its own experience without relying on human annotations. 

SCALE-20k. To further evaluate the effectiveness of our collected SCALE-20k dataset, we fine-tune an-other model, LLaVA-NeXT-8B [13], which has a dif-ferent architecture, directly on the data collected by 

Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct and InternVL2.5-8B ,and compare its performance with its own baseline. 

Evaluation Benchmarks. We evaluate our method and baselines on two established benchmarks: VisualWe-bArena [11] and WebVoyager [8], which together cover both predefined and real-world web environments. • VisualWebArena: VisualWebArena includes evaluation tasks from three representative websites, Shopping, Clas-sifieds, and Reddit, along with a small number of cross-domain tasks. For each individual website, we exclu-sively train the agent on the data collected by SCALE within that website’s environment, ensuring that eval-uation remains domain-specific. To account for vary-ing website complexity, we set the maximum explo-ration depth to 60-25 , where the agent runs up to 60 self-update rounds with 25 interaction steps each. Since over-exploration may introduce noisy actions, we evalu-ate models trained with different exploration depths and report results from the depth with the highest validation success rate. • WebVoyager: WebVoyager is a large-scale benchmark designed for evaluating web agents in real-world web-sites. In our experiments, we evaluate on all 15 websites in WebVoyager, using the first 11 tasks from each site to construct a comprehensive evaluation suite. For data col-lection, SCALE is used to explore each site at depths 10-25, where the agent runs up to 10 self-update rounds with 25 interaction steps each. We then combine exploration data from all 15 websites to train a general-purpose agent for evaluation. Due to the lack of official GPT-4o trajecto-ries and the limited generalizability of Tree Search-style methods to highly dynamic and diverse real-world web-sites, we exclude those two baselines from this bench-mark. 

Input Standardization: To ensure consistency across all methods and backbones, we standardize the input for-mat for all agents. Specifically, we remove all auxiliary metadata (e.g., accessibility trees or HTML DOM repre-sentations) provided by the original benchmarks and re-tain only the visual screenshot and its corresponding set-of-mark (SOM) [24, 31]. For different model backbones, image resolution is automatically adjusted to meet the input size constraints, ensuring stable inference across evaluation settings. 

B.2. Training Hardware and Hyperparameters 

Hardware. During the exploration phase, we used a to-tal of 8 GPUs for SCALE deployment, model training, and updates. All training and evaluation experiments are con-ducted on NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs. We utilize 2 or 4 GPUs for model fine-tuning and inference. 

Training Hyperparameters. We fine-tune three dif-ferent vision-language models in our experiments: 

Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct , InternVL2.5-8B 

and LLaVA-NeXT-8B .

Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct: We fine-tune the model us-ing the LLaMA Factory framework with LoRA-based supervised fine-tuning. The main configurations are as fol-lows: • LoRA: Applied to all modules with rank 8. • Input: Images resized to a maximum of 921,600 pixels; token cutoff length set to 4096. • Batching: 2 GPUs, with per-device batch size 1 and gra-dient accumulation of 8. • Optimization: Learning rate 1e-4, cosine decay, warmup ratio 3%, 15 training epochs. Select approximately 1000 steps checkpoint for testing (the checkpoint that per-formed best during training). • Precision: bf16 and FlashAttention v2 enabled. 

InternVL2.5-8B: We follow the official LoRA training pipeline with the following key hyperparameters: • LoRA: Only LLM is fine-tuned with LoRA (rank 8); vi-sion backbone, MLP, and LLM weights are frozen. • Input: Dynamic image resolution with thumbnails en-abled; forced image size set to 448; max dynamic patch is set to 4. • Batching: 2 GPUs, with per-device batch size 1 and gra-dient accumulation of 8. • Optimization: Learning rate 1e-4, cosine schedule, weight decay 0.05, warmup ratio 3%, 10 training epochs. • Precision: bf16 training with gradient checkpointing enabled. LLaVA-NeXT-8B: We fine-tune the model using the 

LLaMA Factory framework with LoRA-based super-vised fine-tuning. The main configurations are as follows: • LoRA: Applied to all modules with rank 8. • Input: Images resized to a maximum of 921,600 pixels; token cutoff length set to 4096. • Batching: 4 GPUs, with per-device batch size 1 and gra-dient accumulation of 8. • Optimization: Learning rate 1e-4, cosine decay, warmup ratio 3%, 15 training epochs. Select approximately 500 steps checkpoint for testing (the checkpoint that per-formed best during training). • Precision: bf16 and FlashAttention v2 enabled. 

## C. Quality Evaluation of SCALE-20k 

In this section, we first introduce three metrics for evalu-ating dataset quality and provide corresponding evaluation prompts. 

C.1. Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate the diversity and quality of the SCALE-20k 

dataset, we adopt three complementary metrics: 

Task Diversity. We follow the procedure described in the main paper and embed each task description using Sentence-BERT [19]. We then compute the average pair-wise cosine distance between all task embeddings. A larger average distance indicates greater semantic variation across tasks, reflecting broader coverage of task types. 

Reasoning Quality. To assess the quality of the agent’s reasoning, we employ GPT-4o as an automatic evaluator. For each task instance, the evaluator is given the task ob-jective, the generated reasoning, the proposed next action, and screenshots for context. GPT-4o scores the reasoning on a 1-10 scale by examining whether it is accurate, concise when appropriate, free of hallucinations, and tightly aligned with the proposed action and task. A brief justification is produced together with the numerical score. The final rea-soning quality score is obtained by averaging the GPT-4o scores across all instances and linearly mapping the result to the 0-1 range. 

Answer Quality. Similarly, to evaluate the correctness and appropriateness of the agent’s proposed next action (or final answer), we employ GPT-4o as an automatic evalu-ator. For each task instance, the evaluator is given the task instruction, the assistant’s reasoning and action, and screen-shots. GPT-4o scores the answer on a 1-10 scale by exam-ining whether the action is valid for the current observa-tion, follows all agent side constraints (e.g., one action at a time, whitelist-restricted action types, and required output format), and constitutes the best or near-best step toward ac-complishing the objective. A brief justification is produced together with the numerical score. The final answer quality score is obtained by averaging the GPT-4o scores across all instances and linearly mapping the result to the 0-1 range. In summary, these three metrics jointly capture the semantic diversity of tasks and the quality of reasoning and actions, providing a comprehensive assessment of the SCALE-20k dataset. 

C.2. Prompts for Quality Evaluation 

The exact evaluation prompts used for reasoning quality and answer quality are provided below. 

Reasoning Quality Evaluation Prompt Reasoning Quality Evaluation Prompt 

You are a professional web-agent evaluator focusing ONLY on the agent’s reasoning quality. You will be given: 1) OBJECTIVE — the task goal. 2) Agent’s reasoning and proposed next action (as-sistant content). 3) Screenshots for context. 

Your Objective: 

- Evaluate ONLY the REASONING (not the ac-tion’s optimality). Prioritize ACCURACY over length. - If the task is simple, concise reasoning is pre-ferred; if complex, more elaboration is accept-able. - The reasoning MUST be tightly aligned with the final action/answer: no off-topic chains, and no mismatch between reasoning and the proposed action. - Check compliance with agent reasoning rules (one action at a time, correct format reasoning-to-action flow), but do NOT score the action op-timality here. 

Evaluation Scale (1–10): 

- 9–10: Clear, accurate, stepwise when needed; tightly linked to the final action; no hallucina-tions; reasoning references the page context ap-propriately; concise when the task is simple. - 7–8: Mostly clear and accurate with minor omis-sions; still aligned with the final action; minor verbosity or slight gaps. - 5–6: Partial accuracy; noticeable gaps, vague steps, or weak linkage to the final action; occa-sional rule looseness. - 3–4: Several logical issues; unclear or verbose without need; weak/contradictory linkage to the action. - 1–2: Largely incoherent or irrelevant; contra-dicted by the final action; ignores rules or con-text. Guidance: 

- Penalize verbosity without substance, hallucina-tions, or reasoning–action inconsistency. - Reward concise-but-correct reasoning for simple objectives; reward stepwise clarity for complex ones. - Do not evaluate whether the chosen action is the best one (that is scored separately). 

Output Format 

Provide a brief justification (1–3 sentences) about reasoning quality, then ONLY this JSON: 

{

“reason”: “<brief justification about reasoning quality >”, “score”: X 

}

OBJECTIVE: 

{objective text }

Agent’s reasoning and action: 

{assistant text }

Answer Quality Evaluation Prompt Answer Quality Evaluation Prompt 

You are a professional web-agent evaluator focusing ONLY on the action/answer quality w.r.t. the OB-JECTIVE. You will be given: 1) OBJECTIVE — the task goal. 2) Agent’s reasoning and proposed next action (as-sistant content). 3) Screenshots for context. Your Objective: - Evaluate whether the proposed NEXT ACTION (or final answer) is the BEST choice for the current environment/state. - STRICTLY check the following RULES are obeyed: 1. The action must be VALID given the current observation. 2. Only ONE action at a time. 3. Follow examples to reason step by step and then issue the next action. 4. Correct output format: must start with the phrase: “In summary, the next action I will perform is” followed by the action inside triple backticks. - The action MUST be one of the ALLOWED AC-TIONS (whitelist): 

Page Operation Actions :- click [id] 

- type [id] [content] (optional enter suppres-sion: type [id] [content] [0]) - hover [id] - press [key comb] - scroll [down] | scroll [up] 

Tab Management Actions :- new tab - tab focus [tabindex] - close tab 

URL Navigation Actions :- goto [url] - go back - go forward 

Completion Action :- stop [answer] 

Evaluation Scale (1–10): 

- 9–10: The action is clearly optimal/near-optimal for the current state; valid, correctly formatted, follows all rules; directly progresses or completes the OBJECTIVE without harmful side effects. - 7–8: Good choice that likely helps progress; mi-nor inefficiency or small risk, but still valid and compliant. - 5–6: Partially helpful or somewhat redundant; may miss a clearer step or have limited progress value. - 3–4: Poor choice; low impact, potentially invalid for the state, or weak alignment with the objec-tive; may break minor format/rule expectations. - 1–2: Clearly wrong or counterproductive; vio-lates core rules/format, not in the allowed action set, or does not move toward the objective. 

Guidance: 

- Penalize any rule or format violation, wrong ac-tion type, multiple actions at once, or inapplica-ble id. - Reward the most effective, necessary, and safe action that best advances/completes the objective now. - Do NOT score the reasoning clarity here (that is evaluated separately). 

Output Format Provide a brief justification (1–3 sentences) about action optimality and rule compli-ance, then ONLY this JSON: 

{

“reason”: “ <brief justification about action/answer quality >”, “score”: X 

}

OBJECTIVE: 

{objective text }

Agent’s reasoning and action: {assistant text }