Title: Synergizing Efficiency and Reliability for Continuous Mobile Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05430v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:44:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Synergizing Efficiency and Reliability for Continuous Mobile Manipulation 

> Journal Title XX(X):1–33 ©The Author(s) 0000 Reprints and permission: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned www.sagepub.com/

SAGE 

## Chengkai Wu 1, Ruilin Wang 2, Yixin Zeng 2, Jiayuan Wang 2, Mingjie Zhang 1, Guiyong Zheng 2,Qun Niu 2, Juepeng Zheng 2, Jun Ma 1, and Boyu Zhou 3

Abstract 

Humans seamlessly fuse anticipatory planning with immediate feedback to perform successive mobile manipulation tasks without stopping, achieving both high efficiency and reliability. Replicating this fluid and reliable behavior in robots remains fundamentally challenging, not only due to conflicts between long-horizon planning and real-time reactivity, but also because excessively pursuing efficiency undermines reliability in uncertain environments: it impairs stable perception and the potential for compensation, while also increasing the risk of unintended contact. In this work, we present a unified framework that synergizes efficiency and reliability for continuous mobile manipulation. It features a reliability-aware trajectory planner that embeds essential elements for reliable execution into spatiotemporal optimization, generating efficient and reliability-promising global trajectories. It is coupled with a phase-dependent switching controller that seamlessly transitions between global trajectory tracking for efficiency and task-error compensation for reliability. We also investigate a hierarchical initialization that facilitates online replanning despite the complexity of long-horizon planning problems. Real-world evaluations demonstrate that our approach enables efficient and reliable completion of successive tasks under uncertainty (e.g., dynamic disturbances, perception and control errors). Moreover, the framework generalizes to tasks with diverse end-effector constraints. Compared with state-of-the-art baselines, our method consistently achieves the highest efficiency while improving the task success rate by 26.67%–81.67%. Comprehensive ablation studies further validate the contribution of each component. The source code will be released. 

Keywords 

Continuous Mobile Manipulation, Whole-Body Motion Planning, Reactive Control 

## Introduction 

Mobile Manipulators (MMs) hold great potential for scalable automation across manufacturing Johns et al. (2023), healthcare Zhang and Demiris (2022), and scientific laboratories Burger et al. (2020); Dai et al. (2024). However, deploying MMs for continuous, tightly arranged tasks in complex real-world environments faces a fundamental challenge: replicating the human-like synergy of efficiency and reliability. Efficiency requires anticipatory planning of long-horizon whole-body motions across multiple tasks to minimize the overall execution time of successive tasks. Reliability, in contrast, demands (i) the capability for real-time error compensation to mitigate misalignment between the end-effector and the desired operational pose, caused by inaccurate environmental priors, perception or control errors, and even target movement, as well as (ii) the avoidance of unintended interactions between the end-effector, the target, and the environment. However, existing paradigms struggle to reconcile these two seemingly incompatible objectives, often encountering three critical bottlenecks. First, a fundamental trade-off exists between long-horizon planning and reactivity (Fig. 2C). Efficiency-oriented planners generate long-horizon whole-body trajectories that consider multiple tasks to minimize inter-task transition time Thakar et al. (2018, 2020a); Zimmermann et al. (2021); Reister et al. (2022). However, their high computational complexity prevents reactive planning, making them vulnerable to real-world uncertainties (e.g., uncertainties in target poses, control errors, and dynamic disturbances). A

B

Figure 1. Teaser. Continuous on-the-move mobile manipulation for tightly arranged task sequences, synergizing efficiency and reliability under real-world uncertainty using onboard sensing.         

> 1Robotics and Autonomous Systems Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
> 2School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
> 3Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China Ruilin Wang and Yixin Zeng contributed equally to this work. Chengkai Wu, Ruilin Wang and Yixin Zeng are core contributors.
> Corresponding author:
> Boyu Zhou, Southern University of Science and Technology, China. Email: zhouby@sustech.edu.cn
> Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]
> arXiv:2604.05430v1 [cs.RO] 7 Apr 2026

2 Journal Title XX(X) LiDAR & IMU 

> Onboard Computer
> Gripper
> RGB-D Camera
> Manipulator
> Mobile Base
> RGB & Depth Image
> Point Cloud
> & IMU Data

two close tasks  tasks 

reach kinematic limit insufficient perception 

safety: 

push coffee away 

efficient 

motion 

task:  put coffee 

on the table   

> t=27.133s t=27.467s
> t=27.800s t=28.133s

expensive computation 

Pose Estimation Update 

Task 1: Pick Coffee A 

Task N: Place Coffee X 

B Task Set: coffee delivery in a café 

> Efficient Motions Leave Short Observation Window
> Efficient Motions Leave Limited Compensation Margin
> Unsafe Motions during
> Pre-grasp and Post-place
> Conflict between Task Requirement and Safety
> Efficient Motions – Real-time Replanning Trade-off
> C(i)
> C(ii)
> C(iii)
> D(i)
> D(ii)
> D(iii)
> E(i)
> E(ii)
> E(iii)
> F(i)
> F(ii)
> F(iii)
> G(i)
> G(ii)
> G(iii)

A(i) 

> whole-body trajectory
> task-error
> compensation

knock  coffee  down 

A(ii) 

Task 2: Place Coffee A 

Figure 2. Overview of challenges and solutions for efficient and reliable mobile manipulation. ( A) (i) A mobile manipulator robot capable of coupled locomotion, manipulation, and perception, and (ii) a composite top-view of the execution trajectory for a mobile manipulator performing continuous tasks, where colored segments correspond to specific challenges in (C)–(G). ( B) Example task set. ( C)–( G) illustrate five challenges while pursuing both efficiency and reliability (rows i–ii) and our corresponding solutions (row iii): ( C) To bridge long-horizon planning and real-time reactivity, we propose a high-frequency controller that bridges whole-body trajectory tracking with real-time task-error compensation using a phase-dependent switching scheme. ( D) To prevent insufficient observation windows due to fast motion, we introduce Time-assured Active Perception to ensure sufficient observation time. ( E) To avoid limited compensation margins while pursuing efficiency, we present Compensation Margin Zone. ( F) To resolve unsafe end-effector motions, we propose Efficient Safe Interaction for pre-grasp and post-place phases. ( G) To handle conflicts between task and safety requirements, we propose Elastic Collision Spheres. 

In contrast, high-frequency reactive controllers prioritize local reactivity to compensate end-effector error in real-time Haviland et al. (2022); Burgess-Limerick et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2025). But they typically operate on short horizons, leading to greedy behavior that significantly reduces global efficiency. Second, the pursuit of efficiency introduces two critical flaws that undermine reliable task execution. To minimize task time, efficiency-oriented trajectories often result in insufficient observation windows for modern perception models Wen et al. (2024) to estimate accurate target poses (Fig. 2D), leaving the robot to execute based on stale pose information and thereby causing misalignment between the end-effector and the target. Furthermore, such trajectories often drive MMs close to their kinematic limits (Fig. 2E), eliminating the kinematic margins required to compensate for end-effector errors induced by the real-world uncertainties. Third, safely establishing necessary contact without sacrificing efficiency is a key bottleneck. To avoid unintended collisions among the end-effector, target objects, and the environment (Fig. 2F-G), most methods use rigid end-effector motion primitives that cause unnecessary halts for MMs Thakar et al. (2018); Reister et al. (2022); Shen et al. (2025), disrupting operational continuity and reducing overall efficiency. Moreover, standard collision-avoidance models struggle to handle tasks requiring intentional environmental contact (e.g., placing the bottle on the table) Ichnowski et al. (2020) and exhibit two critical failure modes: (i) overly conservative behavior, which misclassifies intentional contact as a dangerous collision and blocks MMs from reaching the desired task pose, or (ii) overly aggressive behavior, which causes collisions between the manipulated object and the environment during transport, even leading to object slippage from the gripper. To break this efficiency-reliability dilemma, we propose a unified framework for continuous mobile manipulation in complex environments, which minimizes the time required for successive tightly arranged tasks while maintaining high reliability under real-world uncertainties. Rather than   

> Prepared using sagej.cls Wu et al. 3

treating efficiency and reliability as a zero-sum trade-off, our framework explicitly embeds reliability awareness into the spatiotemporal trajectory optimization paradigm. During execution, a phase-dependent switching controller (Fig. 2C(iii)) seamlessly transitions between (i) global trajectory tracking during non-critical phases for efficiency and (ii) real-time error compensation during task-critical phases to improve reliability under real-world uncertainties, while preserving the safe interaction structure and overall efficiency of the planned trajectory. The reliability-aware long-horizon planner formalizes efficiency maximization as a constrained spatiotemporal optimization problem and employs a compact trajectory representation for mobile manipulators. To address reliability gaps in efficiency-oriented planning, we encode reliability awareness via meticulously designed differentiable metrics that incorporate core requirements. Specifically, the Time-assured Active Perception strategy (Fig. 2D(iii)) ensures adequate onboard perception for reliable target pose estimation. To effectively capture the potential of corrective motions, Compensation Margin Zone (CMZ) (Fig. 2E(iii)) is designed to promote compensation capability within kinematic limits. For object contact safety, two mechanisms are adopted: (i) Efficient Safe Interaction (ESI) (Fig. 2F(iii)) optimizes pre-grasp/post-placement motions to avoid end-effector–object collisions without redundant stops; (ii) Elastic Collision Sphere (ECS) (Fig. 2G(iii)) with acontact-adaptive radius enables precise, safe, and efficient manipulation during object–support surface contact. These constraints are flexibly blended through spatiotemporal joint optimization, establishing a reliability-aware optimization paradigm that prioritizes efficiency while promoting reliable execution. The above optimization is computationally intensive due to the high dimensionality of the MM, long planning horizon, and complex nonlinear constraints. For online solving, we design a hierarchical initialization strategy that efficiently generates high-quality feasible initializations. First, a Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* algorithm generates a feasible base path, ensuring the end-effector reaches all keypoints, where a tailored reachability map and a progress-aware function accelerate reachability checks and search progress. Subsequently, the manipulator path is searched over a compact configuration graph that captures potential safe motions between key base waypoints. The proposed framework is rigorously validated in chal-lenging real-world and simulation settings, demonstrating effective regulation of efficiency and reliability in contin-uous mobile manipulation (Extension 1). Specifically, we deployed the robot in tightly arranged tasks across two sce-narios: a confined office lounge and a dynamic setting with moving obstacles and a non-stationary target. Its robustness was further verified through an uninterrupted marathon test, during which the robot completed consecutive tasks with ad hoc object placements without failure. Furthermore, the framework extends to complex skills across varied end-effector trajectories, such as valve turning and umbrella insertion into a stand hole. Extensive benchmarks against state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods show our framework yields significantly more fluid, time-efficient motions and higher reliability. Furthermore, comprehensive ablation studies con-firm the necessity of each component. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: 1) A unified hierarchical framework for continuous mobile manipulation that systematically reconciles operational efficiency and execution reliability. 2) A reliability-aware spatiotemporal optimization for-mulation for time-efficient long-horizon whole-body trajectory planning, while promoting reliable execu-tion. 3) A hierarchical initialization strategy for online long-horizon trajectory optimization under high dimensionality and complex nonlinear constraints. 4) A safe-warping-based phase-dependent execution layer bridging long-horizon trajectory tracking and real-time task-error compensation while preserving the planned safe interaction structure. 5) Comprehensive real-world and simulation experi-ments, demonstrating the superior performance and validity of the proposed framework. The source code will be made publicly available. 

## Related Work 

## Efficiency-oriented Long-Horizon Planning 

To achieve efficient task execution, early methods typically adopt long-horizon whole-body motion planning to coordi-nate the mobile base and manipulator Zucker et al. (2013); Schulman et al. (2014); Thakar et al. (2020b); Spahn et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2024); Deng et al. (2025); Xu et al. (2025), which avoids redundant time consumption caused by decoupled planning Pilania and Gupta (2015); Wu et al. (2023), where the mobile base and manipulator move sepa-rately. However, these methods primarily focus on optimiz-ing execution for single tasks, resulting in low efficiency in sequential mobile manipulation tasks. The inefficiency is mainly due to the failure to fully leverage the kinematic redundancy of the mobile manipulator to (i) reduce the base movement distance between tasks and (ii) avoid increased total operation time caused by the mobile base coming to a halt during task execution. To address these two key ineffi-ciencies, recent works have shifted toward sequential mobile manipulation, leveraging the robot’s kinematic redundancy to target both aspects. Specifically, to tackle the first aspect (reducing inter-task base movement distance), some methods optimize base placements so that a single placement supports as many subsequent tasks as possible, thereby reducing the need for repeated base repositioning Xu et al. (2020, 2021). Others determine the optimal next placement by inte-grating manipulation costs with navigation costs evaluated over the next two consecutive tasks Reister et al. (2022); Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024). Both strategies minimize unnecessary base movement and improve overall efficiency. To address the second aspect (avoiding base halts during task execution), other planners generate continuous paths that not only minimize total base travel distance but also enable the mobile base to keep moving toward the next task while executing the current one, thereby eliminating time losses from unnecessary stops Thakar et al. (2018, 2020a); Zimmermann et al. (2021); Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024).   

> Prepared using sagej.cls 4Journal Title XX(X)

Despite significant efficiency gains, these methods have critical limitations in real-world deployments, often falling into two extremes. On one hand, long-horizon whole-body planners incur high computational overhead that inherently restricts reactive planning Thakar et al. (2018, 2020a); Zimmermann et al. (2021); Reister et al. (2022). Unable to adjust trajectories in real time when task poses are updated online, the robot is forced to execute outdated trajectories generated from stale task-pose information, which can ultimately lead to task failure. On the other hand, methods that pursue real-time performance often achieve it by severely simplifying the problem, such as solely optimizing the base path while completely ignoring the manipulator’s 3D kinematic feasibility and collision avoidance Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024). This decoupled over-simplification frequently leads to unreachable target poses or unexpected collisions in complex environments. Moreover, these efficiency-driven planners tend to drive the manipulator close to its kinematic limits to maximize global efficiency. In this process, they unintentionally eliminate the compensation margin required for online error correction. While some approaches Haviland et al. (2022) attempt to retain kinematic flexibility by maximizing classical manipulability indices Yoshikawa (1985), merely driving the manipulator away from singularities only guarantees instantaneous end-effector velocity generation. However, it fails to ensure the capability to compensate for finite end-effector errors, necessitating explicit consideration of both joint limits and configuration. 

## Reliability-oriented Reactive Execution 

To address the inherent task-pose uncertainties in real-world environments, existing literature typically employs active perception and reactive control. Active perception strategies aim to acquire observations of the target first, then utilize perception algorithms to estimate the true target pose before task execution, thereby enabling successful manipulation of the object Reister et al. (2022); Burgess-Limerick et al. (2023, 2024); Zhang et al. (2024); Jauhri et al. (2024). However, they often force the robot to come to a full stop to acquire stable observations, which severely degrades operational efficiency Reister et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2024); Jauhri et al. (2024). Conversely, methods that perform active perception during approaching do not require the robot to come to a halt, thus improving operational efficiency Burgess-Limerick et al. (2023, 2024). However, their efficient motion inherently compresses the time available for sensor data accumulation, often failing to provide sufficient observation windows for stable pose estimation. This is particularly problematic because modern 6D pose estimators Wen et al. (2024); Liang et al. (2025) rely on stable and sufficient observation windows to initialize and refine accurate predictions. Without such observation windows, these estimators cannot function properly, thereby compromising the overall reliability of task execution. To compensate for end-effector error caused by coarse task priors, perception errors, and control errors, existing approaches rely on reactive controllers (typically operating above 20 Hz) Haviland et al. (2022); Du et al. (2023); Burgess-Limerick et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024, 2025); Spahn et al. (2023, 2024). While highly reliable for reaching target end-effector poses, these controllers inherently operate over short horizons and generate greedy control behaviors that completely ignore global task efficiency. Although attempts Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024) have been made to integrate reactive long-horizon base controllers Missura et al. (2022) to improve efficiency, maintaining real-time performance over extended horizons forces these methods to plan base motions without considering the manipulator’s kinematic feasibility, leading to task failures or collisions in complex 3D environments. 

## Safe Interaction during Manipulation 

Beyond reaching the target, achieving safe contact without compromising smooth motion remains a major bottleneck in sequential mobile manipulation. During the critical pre-grasp approach and post-placement retraction phases, failing to account for collisions between the gripper and the manipulated object can easily cause the end-effector to collide with and knock over the target Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024). To mitigate this, many approaches enforce hand-crafted, rigid motion primitives, including deliberately halting to execute isolated end-effector approach and retraction motions Thakar et al. (2018); Reister et al. (2022); Shen et al. (2025); Vosylius and Johns (2025). While these primitives ensure safety, the resulting stops disrupt the robot’s operational continuity and reduce overall efficiency. Furthermore, standard collision-avoidance constraints struggle to handle tasks that require intentional contact. Treating the target object rigidly as an obstacle significantly narrows the feasible solution space and increases computa-tion time when the robot needs to grasp the object Thakar et al. (2020a). Alternatively, attaching the object’s colli-sion model to the robot’s kinematic chain during transport inherently triggers false-positive collisions with the sup-port surface upon placement, preventing the end-effector from reaching the desired operational pose Ichnowski et al. (2020). Therefore, an adaptive collision handling mechanism is required to flexibly manage intentional contacts and actual obstacles without relying on inefficient, hand-crafted stops. 

## Task Model and Problem Statement 

## Task Model 

Denote T all = {T 1, . . . , TNall } as an ordered set of Nall 

coarse object-centric mobile manipulation tasks (Fig. 3). Each task Ti is specified by three components: (1) the coarse initial pose of the manipulated object P oi ∈ SE(3) (relative to the world frame); (2) a set of feasible end-effector grasp poses Ci ⊂ SE(3) (defined relative to the object frame); (3) a task trajectory, consisting of an object-centric pose trajectory  

> oi

P i(τ ) ∈ SE(3) (expressed in the object’s initial frame), together with a binary end-effector command trajectory 

si(τ ) ∈ { 0, 1} (0 for open, 1 for closed), both defined over a local task time horizon τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ] Huang et al. (2024); Hsu et al. (2025); Pan et al. (2025). The coarse object pose P oi serves as an initial reference, while the unknown but true object pose is denoted by 

P ⋆ 

> oi

. For tasks that require object pose estimation (e.g., grasping tasks), P ⋆ 

> oi

must be estimated before execution to ensure reliable task completion. We assume bounded pose  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 5... 

Coarse Task Set: coffee delivery in a café   

> Coarse Initial Pose Grasp Pose Set Task Trajectory

Task : Place the coffee 

Task : Pick the coffee  

> Figure 3. Illustration of Task Model.

uncertainty, under which viewpoints planned from the coarse object pose remain valid for online estimation of the actual pose. During execution, the latest pose estimate is denoted by ˆP oi , with ˆP oi = P oi at initialization. The corresponding task trajectory in the world frame is given by 

P t,i (τ ) := ˆP oi 

> oi

P i(τ ), τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ]. (1) We assume that the resulting task trajectory P t,i (τ ) is safe for the manipulated object. In particular, an instant pick or place task is modeled by setting TT ,i = 0 , which reduces the task trajectory to consist of one single task pose P t,i (0) = ˆP oi and one single gripper command si(0) . Given a feasible grasp oi P C,i ∈ Ci, define ¯P t,i (τ ) := P t,i (τ ) oi P C,i as the task end-effector trajectory, which induces the desired object motion P t,i (τ ).

## Problem Statement 

We consider a mobile manipulator robot capable of coupled locomotion, manipulation, and perception, operating in a 3D workspace with obstacles Menv ⊂ R3 (Fig. 2A). The mobile manipulator consists of a mobile base, a manipulator with an end-effector, and an onboard perception sensor (e.g., RGB-D camera). Its nonlinear dynamics are given by 

˙x = fMM (x, u),

where x ∈ X and u ∈ U are the whole body states and control inputs. X and U denote the state and input space. Define xinit as the initial state. Let fFK ,ee : X → SE(3) and 

fFK ,c : X → SE(3) denote the forward-kinematics maps that return the poses of the end-effector and the onboard perception sensor in the world frame, respectively. 

Problem. Given the environment map Menv , the ordered task set T all , and the initial state xinit , our goal is to compute a whole-body state-input trajectory pair (x(t), u(t)) , t ∈

[0 , T ], such that all tasks are executed in the prescribed order while minimizing the overall mission duration. Formally, the objective is to minimize T subject to: 1) the robot dynamics ˙x = fMM (x, u) with x(0) = xinit ; 2) sequential execution of tasks without overlap; 3) feasible realization of each task through the prescribed task-relative end-effector motion; and 4) safety and feasibility constraints arising from robot kinematics, actuation limits, obstacle avoidance, and manipulated-object safety. For tasks whose reliable execution requires online estimation of the actual target pose, the trajectory must also provide sufficient object observability before task execution. 

## System Overview 

As illustrated in Fig. 4, we propose a co-designed planning– execution framework for sequential mobile manipulation that operates at two complementary levels. The system takes as input (i) a prior environmental point-cloud map and (ii) a set of tightly arranged sequential tasks T all with coarse initial poses of the manipulated objects. The prior map serves only as a coarse global geometric reference for long-horizon planning. During execution, the robot relies exclusively on onboard perception to continuously update dynamic obstacles, together with the whole-body state and the actual pose estimate of the target object, without requiring external sensing infrastructure. Rather than processing the entire task sequence at once, the framework operates on a rolling active subset of tasks, as is common in sequential mobile manipulation tasks Burgess-Limerick et al. (2023); Du et al. (2023). Specifically, we define the active task set as T act =

{T l, . . . , Tl+NT −1}, where NT is the number of currently active tasks. Once the leading task Tl is completed, the active task set advances by one task. Reliability-aware whole-body trajectory generation 

> Reliability-aware
> Trajectory Optimization
> Hierarchical multi-task
> whole-body path planning
> Static &
> Whole-body States
> Active Task Set

Safe-warping-based 

phase-dependent controller   

> Safety-preserving
> trajectory warping
> Phase-dependent
> weight transition
> Dynamic Obstacle
> 50 Hz
> <1 Hz
> Static Environment Coarse Task Set
> Figure 4. System overview. Starting from a coarse prior environment map and a coarse task set, the planner computes a time-efficient whole-body trajectory that is explicitly shaped to support reliable task execution. During execution, the planner continuously replans using the latest obstacle, robot state, and task information updated online via onboard perception. Based on both the planned trajectory and the latest online information, the controller then smoothly switches between global trajectory tracking and task-error compensation while preserving the safe interaction structure and the overall efficiency of the planned motion. This planning–control loop runs continuously until all tasks are completed.

Based on the coarse references, the planner computes an efficient long-horizon whole-body trajectory x(t) that minimizes inter-task transition time while explicitly shaping the trajectory to promote reliable task completion under real-world uncertainties (Sec. Reliability-aware Whole-body Trajectory Generation). Especially during the robot’s  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

6 Journal Title XX(X) 

approach to the target vicinity for the task, the whole-body trajectory generates motions that allow the onboard perception sensor to observe the actual object to be manipulated. The perception module then uses these observations to estimate the object’s actual pose, and the planner replans at each planning cycle using the latest estimates of the object’s pose. In addition, the trajectory facilitates actual task execution without compromising efficiency, including leaving kinematic margin for the manipulator to compensate for task errors under perception, target pose, and control uncertainty, and ensures the safety of the manipulated objects. For execution, a model predictive controller (MPC) employs a phase-dependent smooth transition strategy between global trajectory tracking and task-error compensa-tion, while preserving the safe interaction structure and over-all efficiency of the planned trajectory (Sec. Safe-warping-based Phase-dependent Controller). In particular, it tracks the efficient motion of the global trajectory and the active perception motion before executing the task. Then, during task-critical phases, it performs task-error compensation to correct errors induced by the lag between replanning updates and the latest object pose estimates, ensuring successful task execution. 

## Reliability-aware Whole-body Trajectory Generation 

At the planning level, we first formulate the whole-body trajectory generation problem as a spatial-temporal optimization that minimizes overall execution time while explicitly promoting reliable task execution (Sec. Reliability-aware Trajectory Optimization Formulation). We then warm-start this optimization with a whole-body path generated by a hierarchical multi-task planner (Sec. Hierarchical Multi-task Whole-body Path Planning), which provides (i) a collision-free discrete whole-body path P = {x0, x1, . . . , xM }, (ii) one feasible grasp transform oi P C,i ∈ Ci per task, and (iii) task-phase indices K = {(κi, s, κ i, e)}NT

> i=1

, where κi, s and κi, e

are the start and end waypoint indices of task i on P.

## Reliability-aware Trajectory Optimization Formulation 

For the experimental studies, we use a representative mobile manipulator configuration Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024) in this work, specifically a two-wheel differential-drive base paired with an L-DOF manipulator with a two-finger gripper attached to the last link of the manipulator (Fig. 4). The state of the mobile manipulator is denoted as x = [ x⊤ 

> b

, q⊤

> m

]⊤,where xb = [ qb, ψ ]⊤ ∈ SE(2) is the pose of the mobile base and qm ∈ RL is the joint angles of the manipulator. 

qb = [ qx, q y ]⊤ ∈ R2 and ψ represents the mobile base planar position and orientation, respectively. 

Trajectory Representation We plan the whole-body MM trajectory in generalized joint configuration space q =[q⊤ 

> b

, q⊤

> m

]⊤ ∈ R2+ L. The whole-body trajectory x(t) = [qx(t), q y (t), ψ (t), q⊤

> m

(t)] ⊤ can be easily obtained from q(t),with ψ(t) = atan2( ˙ qy (t), ˙qx(t)) being the orientation of the differential-driven mobile base. We represent trajectory q(t) as a M -segment piecewise polynomial of degree 2s − 1:

q(t) = 



q1(t) = C⊤ 

> 1

β(t − ¯t0), t ∈ [¯ t0, ¯t1]

... ...

qM (t) = C⊤ 

> M

β(t − ¯tM −1), t ∈ [¯ tM −1, ¯tM ],

(2) where β(t) = [1 , t, . . . , t 2s−1]⊤ is the time basis vector, 

T = [ T1, . . . , T M ]⊤ is the vector of segment durations, ¯ti =

Pij=1 Tj is the cumulative time at the end of segment i,and C = [ C⊤ 

> 1

, . . . , C⊤ 

> M

]⊤ is polynomial coefficient matrix, which can be obtained in linear complexity by a map C =

C(Qm, T , q0, qf) Wang et al. (2022) that minimizes control effort of the trajectory. q0 and qf are the start and final state of the trajectory. Qm denotes the intermediate waypoints. We additionally introduce the perception time allocation T p =

{Tp,i }i∈I perc , where Tp,i represents the optimizable duration of the active perception phase preceding the start of task 

i, and Iperc denotes the index set of tasks that necessitate task pose estimation (e.g., grasping tasks). Treating Tp,i as a decision variable enables the solver to adaptively optimize observation windows, leveraging available temporal slack to acquire more visual data for robust pose estimation without compromising overall efficiency. 

Trajectory Optimization We then formulate the whole-body trajectory generation problem as a spatial-temporal trajectory optimization (Fig. 5). To make the non-convex problem tractable, we assume that the task-phase indices K and the discrete grasp transforms { oi P C,i } are provided by the front-end planner (detailed in the Sec. Hierarchical Multi-task Whole-body Path Planning) and remain fixed during optimization. We seek to find the optimal intermediate waypoint Qm, time allocation T , final state qf and perception time allocation T p that minimize a cost function balancing control effort, operation time, and perception duration: 

min   

> Qm,T,qf,Tp

Z ¯tM

> 0
> (s)

q (t)

> 22

dt + ωT ¯tM − ωTp ∥T p∥1

s.t. Ti > 0, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , M }Gg (q[s](t), T , T p) ≤ 0, ∀t ∈ S g , ∀g ∈ D G

Hh(q[s](t), T , T p) = 0 , ∀t ∈ S h, ∀h ∈ D H

(3) This minimization is subject to: • Time Allocation : Segment durations must be positive: 

Ti > 0, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , M }.• General Constraints : The trajectory must adhere to various inequality constraints Gg and equality constraints Hh over specified time intervals S and constraint sets DG and DH, which will be further discussed in the following sections. In addition to the reliability-aware constraints described below, the optimizer enforces standard whole-body feasibil-ity constraints, including task-satisfaction, dynamic feasibil-ity, and safety constraints. Explicit formulations are provided in Appendix B: Task, Feasibility and Safety Constraints.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 7Occluded or Target-Absent FOV 

> Occlusion-Free
> Target FOV

(i) Time-assured Perception   

> Camera Trajectory
> without Feasible FOV
> Camera Trajectory
> with Feasible FOV

(iii) Efficient Safe Interaction 

Whole -Body  Trajectory Optimization  

> Start State
> Goal State
> Task

Collision 

Avoidance 

(vii) 

Dynamic 

Feasibility 

(vi) (viii) 

(iv) Elastic Collision Sphere 

> Task-Specific Position
> Center of Elastic Collision Sphere

(ii) Compensation Margin 

(v) Task Satisfaction 

z-axis  

> Figure 5. Overview of reliability-aware whole-body trajectory optimization. It generates a time-parameterized whole-body trajectory while enforcing (i) time-assured active perception, (ii) compensation margin zone constraints, (iii) efficient safe interaction constraints, (iv) elastic collision sphere safety constraints, (v) task satisfaction constraints, (vi) dynamic feasibility, and (vii) collision avoidance, yielding (viii) the optimized whole-body trajectory.

Time-assured Active Perception To address the insuffi-ciency of observation windows for reliable task pose estima-tion (arising from efficiency-observability trade-offs in high-efficiency trajectories), we propose a simple yet effective Time-assured Active Perception (TAP) constraint (Fig. 5(i)) to guarantee adequate observation time Tp,i before manipu-lation: 

Tp,min ≤ Tp,i ≤

> κi, s−1

X

> j=κi−1,e

Tj , ∀i ∈ I perc . (4) Here, we define κ0,e := 1 . Tp,min is the minimum observation time required to accommodate the latency of perception pipelines; and Pκi, s−1 

> j=κi−1,e

Tj corresponds to the time interval between the end of the (i − 1) -th task and the start of the i-th task, i.e., the available time span for perception. Subsequently, visibility constraints are enforced during the perception interval preceding the start of task i to ensure the onboard perception sensor can observe the target throughout Tp,i :

Gg,i (q[s](t), T , T p) ≤ 0, ∀g ∈ D Gv ,

∀t ∈ [¯ tκi, s − Tp,i , ¯tκi, s ), ∀i ∈ I perc , (5) where DGv = {va, vd, vo} defines the set of visibility constraint indices, corresponding to the field-of-view constraint ( va), the maximum sensing range constraint ( vd), and the occlusion-free constraint ( vo), respectively. Detailed formulations of these three constraints are provided in Appendix C: Visibility Constraints. By explicitly coupling a time guarantee with visibility constraints, TAP mitigates the efficiency-observability trade-off, preventing the optimizer from neglecting observation requirements in pursuit of efficiency while ensuring our system has sufficient tolerance for the perception pipeline’s latency to generate a reliable pose estimate, thus eliminating task failures caused by stale information. 

Compensation Margin Zone To preserve sufficient kine-matic margin for online task-error compensation under time-efficient motions, we introduce the Compensation Margin Zone (CMZ) constraint (Fig. 5(ii)). Instead of solely ensuring the nominal task end-effector pose is reachable, the CMZ explicitly restricts the manipulator base to zones from which a neighborhood of the nominal pose also remains reachable. In this way, the robot can still compensate for bounded task-pose errors during task-critical phases, rather than operating at configurations where even small target deviations would cause compensation failure. Inspired by inverse reachability-based placement meth-ods Xu et al. (2020, 2021), we formulate the CMZ as a continuous-time trajectory constraint to promote compensa-tion capability during execution. Let Icmz denote the index set of tasks that require task-error compensation (e.g., grasp-ing tasks), and let Scmz ,i represent the corresponding set of local timestamps during task i where this compensation capability must be maintained (e.g., grasping instant). For each task i ∈ I cmz and timestamp τ ∈ S cmz ,i , we construct a local neighborhood of the nominal task end-effector pose ¯P t,i (τ ) by sampling a set of nearby poses 

Pcmz ,i (τ ) ⊂ SE(3) . (6)  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

8 Journal Title XX(X) 

These samples represent bounded task pose perturbations caused by real-world uncertainty in perception, control, and target pose. They provide a tractable discrete approximation of the local deviations that the online controller is expected to compensate for. In practice, Pcmz ,i (τ ) is constructed by sampling both position and orientation perturbations around 

¯P t,i (τ ). We first sample positions on a sphere of radius 

rcmz centered at the nominal end-effector position. For each sampled position, we then sample rotational perturbations around the nominal approach direction after a fixed tilt offset. Any sampled pose that is in collision is discarded. The resulting set provides a discrete approximation of the target-pose deviations that the controller is expected to compensate online. Details of the sampling strategy are provided in Appendix D: Sampling Strategy for Pcmz ,i .For each sampled pose P ∈ P cmz ,i (τ ), we use the inverse reachability map Vahrenkamp et al. (2013) to compute the set of planar manipulator-base positions from which P is reachable, denoted by R(P ) ⊂ R2. We then intersect these reachable sets across all sampled poses: 

Rcmz ,i (τ ) = \  

> P∈P cmz ,i (τ)

R(P ). (7) The resulting intersection Rcmz ,i (τ ) contains the manipulator-base positions from which all the sampled poses in the neighborhood remain reachable. Therefore, it defines the set of base positions from which bounded task-pose errors can still be compensated kinematically. If Rcmz ,i (τ ) is empty, this implies that the requested compensation margin rcmz is too large under current workspace constraints. In such cases, we iteratively reduce 

rcmz and repeat the sampling and intersection procedure until a nonempty feasible compensation zone is obtained. Thus, the CMZ acts as a feasibility-aware robustness constraint, maximizing the allowable local compensation margin within the physical workspace limits. To facilitate efficient trajectory optimization, we approx-imate Rcmz ,i (τ ) with a 2D ellipse using Principal Compo-nent Analysis (PCA) Abdi and Williams (2010), denoted as 

Ec,i (τ ) ⊂ R2:

Ec,i (τ ) = 

n

oc,i (τ ) + Rc,i (τ )Qc,i (τ )v

v ∈ R2, ∥v∥2 ≤ 1

o

.

(8) where oc,i (τ ) ∈ R2, Rc,i (τ ) ∈ SO(2) and Qc,i (τ ) = diag( ai(τ ), b i(τ )) denote the center, orientation, and semi-axes matrix of Ec,i (τ ), respectively. Consequently, we constrain the manipulator base 

pm,b,i (τ ) := fFK ,b(x(¯ tκi, s + τ ))  

> xy

to reside within 

Ec,i (τ ) at the compensation timestamps: 

∥Q−1c,i (τ )R⊤

> c,i

(τ )( pm,b,i (τ ) − oc,i (τ )) ∥2 ≤ 1,

∀τ ∈ S cmz ,i , ∀i ∈ I cmz . (9) Here, [·]xy : SE(3) → R2 extracts the planar position, and 

fFK ,b(x) ∈ SE(3) denotes the pose of the manipulator base at state x.By explicitly enforcing Eq. (9), the CMZ prevents the optimizer from forcing the manipulator into kinematic-limit configurations in pursuit of time-efficient motions, while ensuring that the online controller retains sufficient kinematic redundancy to compensate for end-effector errors arising during execution under real-world uncertainty, thus improving reliability. 

Efficient Safe Interaction Motion To avoid failure modes caused by gripper–object collisions during the pre-grasp approach and post-placement retraction (e.g., grasp failure caused by pushing the object away during approach), we introduce the Efficient Safe Interaction (ESI) motion constraints (Fig. 5(iii)). The key idea is that the grasp/place pose of the end-effector is chosen to be collision-free by construction; thus, we restrict approach/retraction to a 1D manifold by (i) keeping the end-effector orientation close to the grasp/place orientation and (ii) translating along the approach ray defined at that pose (Fig. 5(iii)). Crucially, ESI is imposed over a time window whose length scales with Tκi, s (pre-grasp) and Tκi, e+1 (post-placement), which are optimized jointly with the trajectory. Therefore, the solver can adjust the timing of approach/retraction without prescribing a fixed duration. Let Igrasp denote the index set of tasks that start with grasping an object and Iplace denote the index set of tasks that end with placing an object. Define Spre ,i :=  ¯tκi, s −

αmTκi, s , ¯tκi, s

 and Spost ,i := (¯ tκi, e , ¯tκi, e + αmTκi, e+1 ) as the pre-grasp and post-place time window, respectively, where αm ∈ (0 , 1) determines the relative window length. The optimization of Tκi, s and Tκi, e+1 will adjust the time window Spre ,i and Spost ,i thus determining the best duration for the safe pre-grasp and post-place motion. Then we define ESI motion constraints. Denote [·]p, [·]z ,and [·]R as the operators that extract the position, the z-axis of the rotation matrix, and the rotation matrix from a homogeneous transform, respectively. To simplify notation, let ¯P t,b,i := ¯P t,i (0) , ¯P t,e,i := ¯P t,i (TT ,i ), and pee (t) := fFK ,ee (x(t)) 

> p

. For each i ∈ I grasp and t ∈ S pre ,i , we enforce 

fd, ray 

 pee (t), [ ¯P t,b,i ]p, −[ ¯P t,b,i ]z

 ≤ dpos , (10) 

fd, R

  fFK ,ee (x(t)) 

> R

, [ ¯P t,b,i ]R

 ≤ do, (11) where dpos and do are position and orientation tolerances. 

fd, ray (p, pr , ˆvr ) is the smooth distance from point p to the ray that originates at pr and points along ˆvr . To ensure differentiability when the point projects behind the ray origin, we blend the perpendicular distance with the Euclidean distance to the origin (Fig. 6) using a smooth step function: 

fd, ray (p, pr , ˆvr )=



1 − flog 

 ˆv⊤ 

> r

ˆvrp , −μ, μ 

∥p − pr ∥2

+ flog 

 ˆv⊤ 

> r

ˆvrp , −μ, μ   I3 − ˆvr ˆv⊤

> r

 (p − pr ) 2

,

(12) where ˆvrp = ( p − pr )/ ∥p − pr ∥2 is the unit vector pointing to p, and μ is a smoothing parameter. The blending function flog (x, a, b ) is a C2-continuous scalar function  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 9  

> Figure 6. Illustration of

fd, ray : smooth transition from perpendicular distance to Euclidean distance. 

defined as: 

flog (x, a, b ) = 



0, ¯x ≤ − μ,  

> (¯ x+μ)3(μ−¯x)2μ4

, −μ < ¯x ≤ 0, 

> (¯ x+μ)(¯ x−μ)3
> 2μ4

+ 1 , 0 < ¯x ≤ μ, 

1, ¯x > μ, 

(13) where ¯x = x − 0.5( a + b) and μ = 0 .5( b − a).

fd, R(R1, R2) = arccos 

 12 tr 



R⊤ 

> 1

R2



− 12



(14) is the orientation error between R1 and R2. We define the local z-axis of the end-effector to point along the direction of the gripper fingers (Fig. 5(iii)). To avoid starting the ESI window excessively close to the object, we additionally constrain the gripper position at the window start to lie on the same ray, at a prescribed offset distance dm from the grasp pose: 

pee (t) −



[ ¯P t,b,i ]p − dm[ ¯P t,b,i ]z



> 2

≤ dpos ,t = ¯ tκi, s − αmTκi, s , ∀ i ∈ I grasp .

(15) Post-place ESI constraints are defined analogously for 

i ∈ I place , using the final task end-effector pose ¯P t,e,i :

fd, ray 

 pee (t), [ ¯P t,e,i ]p, −[ ¯P t,e,i ]z

 ≤ dpos ,t ∈ S post ,i , (16) 

fd, R

  fFK ,ee (x(t)) 

> R

, [ ¯P t,e,i ]R

 ≤ do, t ∈ S post ,i , (17) 

pee (t) −



[ ¯P t,e,i ]p − dm[ ¯P t,e,i ]z



> 2

≤ dpos ,t = ¯ tκi, e + αmTκi, e+1 .

(18) Overall, ESI provides an explicit safety envelope for approach and retraction, while the optimizability of Tκi, s and 

Tκi, e+1 preserves temporal flexibility and thus supports time-efficient planning. 

Elastic Collision Spheres for Intended-Contact Manipula-tion Manipulation tasks that involve intended contact with the environment, e.g., placing an object onto a support surface, require the held object to be allowed to approach the environment at task poses, while maintaining a strict safety margin during transport to avoid slipping from the end-effector. A fixed collision model is therefore prone to being overly conservative at intended-contact poses or unsafe in non-contact phases. We address this with Elastic Collision Spheres (ECS), which modulate sphere radius as a smooth function of the sphere’s displacement from its task-specific target. We model the environment using a Euclidean Signed Distance Field (ESDF) map Zhou et al. (2019) DESDF :

R3 → R, where a collision sphere centered at p with radius 

r is nominally collision-free if DESDF (p) ≥ r. However, in practice, a positive safety margin ds is incorporated to provide a robust buffer against tracking errors during motion and numerical optimization tolerances, resulting in the robust safety condition 

DESDF (p) ≥ r + ds. (19) For a held object o, to simplify collision checking while maintaining safety, its geometry is approximated by elastic spheres indexed by m ∈ { 1, . . . , m o} with centers opo,m in the object frame and conservative radius ro,m . Let pt,o,m 

denote the task-specific target location in the world frame of sphere m at the relevant task pose. For example, if the task requires to place the object o at pose P t, the task-specific target location of sphere m is pt,o,m = P t opo,m .

Elastic radius. Here, we simplify the notion for clearance by omitting the object and sphere indices (o , m ). The elastic radius is designed to dynamically adjust with the sphere center p relative to the task-specific target position pt

(Fig. 5(iv)). At the intended contact pose pt, the signed distance to the environment DESDF (pt) is inherently small. Consequently, the standard safety condition Eq. (19) is often impossible to satisfy with the initial conservative radius 

r. However, we assume that the target pose is physically feasible and safe for the object. This apparent violation of the safety constraint typically arises from the use of an overly conservative bounding radius r and the inherent discretization in the ESDF map, rather than from actual physical penetration. To make the constraint satisfied, the maximum permissible radius becomes rmin = DESDF (pt) −

ds. We therefore define the required shrinkage for initial conservative radius r at pt as 

fdv (pt, r ) = max(0 , r + ds − DESDF (pt)) , (20) which represents how much the initial radius r exceeds the safety limit at pt.Based on the required shrinkage fdv (pt, r ), we design an elastic radius that equals rmin at pt to satisfy Eq. (19), and smoothly recovers toward the conservative radius r as the sphere moves away from pt. This recovery intentionally biases departures motion toward increasing clearance to prevent unintended contact between the object and the support surface (Fig. 5(iv)). Therefore, we define the elastic radius for a sphere centered at p as 

relastic (pt, p, r ) = r − fdv (pt, r )+ fs(∥pt − p∥2, f dv (pt, r )) , (21) where fs(x, d v ) serves as a smooth recovery function (with 

x = ∥pt − p∥2 and dv = fdv (pt, r )). It is constructed to increase monotonically from 0 (at x = 0 ) to dv , allowing the  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

10 Journal Title XX(X)   

> Figure 7. Illustration of the elastic radius

relastic as a function of the distance x = |pt − p|2 from the target position. 

elastic radius to gradually recover back to the conservative radius r as the sphere moves away from pt. The formulation is defined as: 

fs(x, d v ) = 



(μ − 0.5x)

 xμ

3

, 0 ≤ x < μ, x − 0.5μ, μ ≤ x < d v ,dv − (μ − 0.5¯ x)

 ¯xμ

3

, dv ≤ x < d v + μ, dv , x ≥ dv + μ, 

(22) where ¯x = dv + μ − x, and 0 < μ < d v is a small smooth-ing parameter. The elastic radius consists of four phases (Fig. 7): (i) Smooth Start ( 0 ≤ x < μ ): The radius starts at rmin 

with zero derivative at x = 0 , ensuring that the gradient of the elastic radius with respect to position vanishes at the exact intended contact point. It smoothly accelerates to a slope of 1 at x = μ.(ii) Linear Recovery ( μ ≤ x < d v ): In this region, the elastic radius expands at a 1:1 ratio with the distance from the target, biasing the departure trajectory away from the support surface. (iii) Smooth Saturation (dv ≤ x < d v + μ): The radius decelerates smoothly, transitioning the slope from 1 back to 0. (iv) Full Recovery ( x ≥ dv + μ): The radius saturates at r.

Object safety constraint. Based on the elastic radius, we define the object safety constraint. Let Ihold denote the set of indices for tasks that result in the robot holding an object upon completion, such as a picking task. For each task i ∈ I hold , the held object must remain safe from the end of the task i to the start of the task i + 1 (i.e., Shold ,i =[¯ tκi, e , ¯tκi+1 ,s ]). During Shold ,i , for each elastic collision sphere m of the held object oi, we enforce: 

relastic 

 pt,i, oi,m , poi,m (t), r oi,m 

 + ds

≤ DESDF 

 poi,m (t) + dela , (23) 

relastic 

 pt,i +1 ,oi,m , poi,m (t), r oi,m 

 + ds

≤ DESDF 

 poi,m (t) + dela , (24) where poi,m (t) = fFK ,ee (x(t)) oi P −1  

> C,i oi

poi,m is the posi-tion of the m-th elastic collision sphere of the object oi in the world frame when held by the MM with grasp pose oi P C,i .The terms pt,i, oi,m and pt,i +1 ,oi,m are the task-specific sphere position for the end of the task i and the start of the task i + 1 , respectively. dela is a small constraint tolerance introduced to account for finite optimization accuracy near intended-contact poses. In summary, ECS resolves the contact–safety conflict by state-dependent radius modulation, which (i) preserves the reachability of intended-contact poses and (ii) biases departures toward increasing clearance to prevent unintended contacts through radius recovery. 

## Hierarchical Multi-task Whole-body Path Planning 

The continuous-time optimization in Eq. (3) is computation-ally intensive due to the long planning horizon, the high dimensionality of the mobile manipulator, and the complex constraints coupled through non-linear forward kinematics (Fig. 5). For online solving, it is crucial to provide the optimizer with a high-quality initialization. To achieve this efficiently, we propose a hierarchical path planning framework (Fig. 8). First, we discretize the continuous task trajectories into a sequence of reachable keypoints. Next, a Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* algorithm searches for a collision-free mobile base path from which the end-effector can sequentially visit these keypoints (Sec. Sequential-Progress Hybrid A*). Finally, we construct a layered graph to compute an optimal manipulator path conditioned on this base path (Sec. Manipulator Path Planning based on Layered Graph). Seamlessly synchronizing the base and manipulator paths yields the complete collision-free whole-body path P, while simultaneously determining the task phase indices K and selecting a feasible, consistent grasp oi P C,i ∈ Ci for each task. 

Keypoint Sequence To enable discrete path search over continuous multi-task trajectories, we discretize each task trajectory into an ordered sequence of representative poses. Specifically, for each task trajectory P t,i (τ ), i ∈{1, . . . , N T }, we uniformly sample poses in time and concatenate them in task order to obtain a global keypoint sequence p = {p1, . . . , pNp }, where each pk = {P p,k , i p,k }

consists of a task pose P p,k ∈ SE(3) sampled on P t,i (τ )

and a task index ip,k ∈ { 1, · · · , N T }. The resulting keypoints serve as the ordered discrete targets for both the subsequent mobile base and manipulator path planning. A keypoint pk is reachable from a base pose xb if there exists a collision-free manipulator configuration qm such that the end-effector reaches the task pose with one admissible grasp oip,k P C ∈ Cip,k for that task: 

∃ qm, oip,k P C ∈ Cip,k ,

s.t. fFK ,ee 

 [x⊤ 

> b

, q⊤

> m

]⊤ = P p,k oip,k P C . (25) 

Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* Overview We first plan a collision-free mobile-base path that visits the keypoints in sequence (Fig. 8A). The overall planner is outlined in Algo. 1. To encode sequential progress, we extend Hybrid A* Dolgov et al. (2010) by augmenting the search state from the base pose xb to (xb, n), where n indexes the next target keypoint. The progress index n advances by one whenever  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 11 Hierarchical multi-task whole-body path planning 

A Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* 

B Manipulator Planning based on Layered Graph    

> Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Start
> Optimal Path Removed edge Edge
> Approximate
> reachability region
> Start
> State
> Key base waypoint Mobile Base
> Path

Figure 8. Overview of hierarchical multi-task whole-body path planner consisting of ( A) Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* for the mobile base, and ( B) a layered-graph shortest-path search for the manipulator. 

Algorithm 1 Sequential-Progress Hybrid A* 

Input: Initial base pose xb,0, initial manipulator state 

qm,0, initial grasp pose set Cinit , keypoints {pk}Np

> k=1

,reachability ellipses {E k}Np

> k=1

Output: Base path Pb, key base waypoint indices κ,manipulator configs Qm 

> 1:

Create node N0 with N0.xb ←

xb,0, N0.n ← 1, N0.g ← 0, N0.h ←

ProgressAwareHeuristic (xb,0, 1, N p, {E k}Np

> k=1

),

N0.Qvalid ← { qm,0}, N0.Cvalid ← Cinit  

> 2:

Initialize open set O ← {N 0} and close set C ← ∅  

> 3:

while O̸ = ∅ do  

> 4:

Pop node N with minimum g + h from O 

> 5:

if N .n = Np + 1 then  

> 6:

return Pb, κ, Qm by backtracking  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

for all each successor base pose x′ 

> b

of N .xb do  

> 9:

g′ ← N .g + ∆ g′, n′ ← N .n 

> 10:

Q′

> valid

, C′ 

> valid

←ReachabilityCheck( x′

> b

, N , pn, En) 

> 11:

if Q′

> valid

̸ = ∅ then  

> 12:

n′ ← N .n + 1  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

h′ ←ProgressAwareHeuristic( x′

> b

, n′, N p, {E k}Np

> k=1

) 

> 15:

N ′ ←Node( x′

> b

, n′, g ′, h ′, Q′

> valid

, C′

> valid

, N ) 

> 16:

if N ′ /∈ C then  

> 17:

O.Update( N ′) 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

C.Push (N ) 

> 21:

end while 

the current keypoint pn is reachable from the evaluated base pose xb.The search terminates successfully when a node with 

n = Np + 1 is popped from the open set. At this point, backtracking yields a short base path Pb =

{xb,0, . . . , xb,M } alongside key base waypoint indices κ =

{κ1, . . . , κ Np }, where xb,κ k denotes the specific waypoint from which pk is reachable. Additionally, the planner outputs the collected manipulator configurations Qm =

{Q1, . . . , QNp }, where each Qk = {qm,k,i }i corresponds to the valid joint set Qvalid stored in the node associated with 

xb,κ k .

Algorithm 2 Reachability Verification 

Input: Base pose xb, current node N , keypoint pn,reachability ellipse En

Output: valid joint configurations set Qvalid , valid grasp poses set Cvalid  

> 1:

Qvalid ← ∅ , Cvalid ← ∅ , qb ← GetPosition( xb) 

> 2:

if qb ∈ E n then ▷ Fast geometric filter 

Step A: Grasp-consistency enforcement  

> 3:

if IsContinuousOperation( pn) then  

> 4:

Nkey = N 

> 5:

while Nkey .Cvalid = ∅ do ▷ Find last key node  

> 6:

Nkey = Nkey .Parent  

> 7:

end while  

> 8:

Ccand ← N key .Cvalid  

> 9:

else  

> 10:

Ccand ← Cip,n 

> 11:

end if Step B: Feasibility verification  

> 12:

for all oP C ∈ Ccand do  

> 13:

QIK ← ComputeIK (xb, P p,n, oP C ) 

> 14:

for all qm ∈ QIK do  

> 15:

if FeasibilityCheck( qm, N ) then  

> 16:

Qvalid .Push ( qm) 

> 17:

Cvalid .Push ( oP C ) 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

return Qvalid , Cvalid 

To evaluate the state transitions and guide the search efficiently, the main algorithm relies on two core sub-routines: a two-stage reachability verification (Algo. 2) and a progress-aware heuristic (Algo. 3), detailed as follows. 

Reachability verification To efficiently evaluate the reachability condition in Eq. (25), we adopt a two-stage verification procedure (Algo. 2). Given a candidate base pose xb, we first apply a lightweight geometric filter to prune poses that are unlikely to reach pn. For the remaining candidates, we perform an exact kinematic check based on inverse kinematics (IK). This second stage explicitly enforces grasp consistency and task-trajectory constraints across continuous manipulation sequences. 

Stage 1: Fast Geometric Filter. For each keypoint pi,we pre-compute a 2D reachability region Ei ⊂ R2 to  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

12 Journal Title XX(X) 

approximate the set of valid base placements (Fig. 8A). Derived from the inverse reachability map Vahrenkamp et al. (2013), this region is parameterized as an ellipse: 

Ei = oE,i + RE,i QE,i v v ∈ R2, ∥v∥2 ≤ 1 . (26) A successor base pose x′ 

> b

is considered a valid candidate for 

pn only if its position component q′ 

> b

lies within this region (i.e. q′ 

> b

∈ E n). Since Ei serves only as a coarse geometric filter, inclusion within this region does not guarantee a feasible and collision-free manipulator configuration. Therefore, candidates that pass this filter must undergo an exact IK-based verification, which addresses two critical requirements: grasp consistency (Step A of Algo. 2) and kinematic feasibility (Step B of Algo. 2). 

Stage 2, Step A: Grasp-Consistency Enforcement. Suc-cessful manipulation often requires the end-effector to main-tain an invariant grasp pose relative to the object over a con-tinuous operation sequence, which applies both to multiple keypoints within a single task (e.g., maintaining the same grasp while closing a drawer) and to semantically coupled tasks (e.g., a placing task following a picking task). To preserve this consistency, each search node maintains a valid grasp set, Cvalid . We define the key nodes as search nodes that successfully reach the keypoint. Only key nodes have a nonempty Cvalid , which stores the subset of grasp poses for which feasible manipulator configurations exist to reach the corresponding keypoint. When evaluating reachability for pn, we determine a candidate grasp pose set Ccand according to whether pn belongs to a continuous operation. If pn is an independent operation or the first keypoint of a continuous operation, the robot can select any task-compatible grasp pose (i.e. Ccand = Cip,n ). Otherwise, we backtrack along the search tree to the last key node Nkey 

and inherit its valid grasp pose Ccand = Nkey .Cvalid . The IK solver is subsequently evaluated only over Ccand , ensuring grasp consistency throughout the continuous manipulation segment. 

Stage 2, Step B: Feasibility verification. For each candi-date grasp pose in Ccand , we compute IK solutions Diankov (2010) to reach P p,n from the base pose xb. Each solution is then subjected to a feasibility check. In addition to standard safety and joint limit validations, we verify task-trajectory consistency for consecutive keypoints within the same task, which is necessary for operations with explicit geometric execution constraints, such as the straight-line end-effector motion required during drawer opening. Specifically, we reconstruct the synchronized whole-body motion by com-bining the searched base path with linearly interpolated arm joint configurations, traced back to the previous keypoint node. We then compare the resulting end-effector trajectory against the desired task trajectory, ensuring the deviation remains below a predefined threshold (detailed in Appendix F: Task-trajectory Consistency). Only IK solutions satisfy-ing all criteria are retained, with their corresponding joint configurations and grasp poses stored in Qvalid and Cvalid ,respectively. 

Progress-aware heuristic To accelerate the search by guiding the planner through the sequence of remaining reachability regions, we propose a progress-aware heuristic 

h(xb, n). This heuristic estimates the remaining travel 

Algorithm 3 Progress-Aware Heuristic 

Input: Base state xb, progress index n , total keypoints Np,reachability ellipses {E k}Np

> k=1

Output: Heuristic value h 

> 1:

qb ← GetPosition (xb) 

> 2:

keffect ← n 

> 3:

h ← 0

Step 1: Determine effective start index and position  

> 4:

while qb ∈ E keffect and keffect ≤ Np do  

> 5:

keffect ← keffect + 1  

> 6:

end while  

> 7:

if keffect = Np + 1 then  

> 8:

return h 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

if keffect = n then  

> 11:

pstart ← qb 

> 12:

else  

> 13:

pstart ← arg min 

> p∈∂En

dpE (p, Ekeffect ) 

> 14:

end if Step 2: Calculate heuristic value  

> 15:

cE,last ← pstart  

> 16:

for k = keffect to Np − 1 do  

> 17:

cE ← arg min 

> p∈∂Ek

∥cE,last − p∥2 + dpE (p, Ek+1 ) 

> 18:

h ← h + ∥cE,last − cE ∥2 

> 19:

cE,last ← cE 

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

h ← h + dpE (cE,last , ENp ) 

> 22:

return hdistance required to visit the remaining reachability ellipses 

{E k}Np 

> k=n

sequentially from the current state xb. The computation consists of two main steps (Algo. 3). 

Step 1: Determine effective start index and position. To prevent the heuristic from guiding the robot back toward the boundary of the region it has already satisfied, we first determine the effective start index keffect (keffect ≥ n). If the current base position qb already resides within Ekeffect with initially keffect = n, we iteratively increment keffect until 

qb /∈ E keffect .Next, we determine the starting position of the heuristic path, denoted as pstart . If no regions are skipped ( keffect =

n), we simply set pstart = qb. However, if regions are skipped (keffect > n), pstart is selected as the point on the boundary of the current target region ( ∂En) that minimizes the distance to the next effective region Ekeffect :

pstart = arg min 

> p∈∂En

dpE (p, Ekeffect ). (27) The function dpE (p, E) calculates the distance from a query point p ∈ R2 to an ellipse E:

dpE (p, E) = 

(0, if ∥˜p∥2 ≤ 1,

p −



oE + RE QE

> ˜p
> ∥˜p∥2



> 2

, otherwise ,

(28) where ˜p = Q−1 

> E

R⊤E (p − oE ) transforms the query point into the ellipse’s canonical frame. In practice, we solve Eq. (27) efficiently by uniformly sampling points along the boundary 

∂En. 

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 13 

Step 2: Calculate heuristic value. Computing the exact shortest path that goes through the remaining regions 

{E k}Np 

> k=keffect

is computationally expensive. Therefore, we approximate the remaining travel distance using a greedy piecewise-linear path. Starting from cE,last = pstart , the algorithm incrementally accumulates the lengths of line segments connecting representative boundary points. These points are selected sequentially via a one-step lookahead rule. For each region Ek, we select the boundary point cE ∈

∂Ek that minimizes the sum of the distance from the previous point cE,last and the shortest distance to the subsequent region Ek+1 :

cE = arg min 

> p

∥cE,last − p∥2 + dpE (p, Ek+1 ),

s.t. p ∈ ∂Ek.

(29) Similar to Eq. (27), we solve Eq. (29) efficiently in practice by uniformly sampling candidate points along the boundary 

∂Ek. The term dpE (p, Ek+1 ) acts as a potential field, biasing the selection of cE toward the entrance of the next region. This aligns the piecewise linear path with the global task direction. The final heuristic h is the total length of this path, concluding with the distance to the final region ENp .

Manipulator Path Planning based on Layered Graph 

Given the base path Pb, waypoint indices κ, and valid manipulator configurations Qm, we plan manipulator path between successive key base waypoints. We formulate this as a shortest-path problem on a layered graph (Fig. 8B). The first layer contains the starting configuration qm,0 at base pose xb,0. Each subsequent k-th layer corresponds to the keypoint pk, where nodes represent the feasible manipulator configurations stored in Qk at base waypoint xb,κ k .Directed edges connect nodes in adjacent layers. The existence of an edge is determined by successfully generating a local, collision-free manipulator path Wu et al. (2024), constrained by the concurrent base motion along the corresponding segment of Pb. The cost of the valid edge is defined as the length of the generated path, and the path itself is temporarily cached within the edge. To ensure valid execution, we explicitly prune edges (e.g., the dashed line in Fig. 8B) that (i) violate the grasp consistency constraints or (ii) deviate excessively from the task trajectory between consecutive keypoints that belong to the same task. We then apply Dijkstra’s algorithm Dijkstra (2022) to find the shortest path through the graph (red edges e∗ 

> k

in Fig. 8B). By concatenating the cached manipulator paths along this optimal sequence and synchronizing them with base path Pb, we reconstruct a discrete whole-body path 

P = {x0, . . . , xM } that sequentially visits all keypoints. Furthermore, this process yields (i) a selected grasp pose  

> oi

P C,i ∈ Ci for each task, and (ii) execution segments 

K = {(κi, s, κ i, e)}NT 

> i=1

for each task mapped onto P.Finally, (P, { oi P C,i }, K) is used to initialize the spatial-temporal trajectory optimization in Eq. (3). And it is solved using the Powell-Hestenes-Rockafellar Augmented Lagrangian Method (PHR-ALM) Rockafellar (1974), which refines a time-parameterized whole-body trajectory x(t), t ∈

[0 , ¯tM ].

## Safe-warping-based Phase-dependent Controller 

The solution to Eq. (3) provides a time-efficient and reliability-aware whole-body reference trajectory x(t).However, during execution, directly tracking x(t) can still lead to task failure due to uncertainty in the true manipulated object pose P ⋆ 

> oi

. In particular, the latest pose estimate 

ˆP oi may become available after the final planning cycle preceding the execution of task Ti, creating a mismatch between the planned and actual task conditions. To improve robustness to pose uncertainty while maintaining the efficiency and reliability of the planned global trajectory, we develop a safe-warping-based phase-dependent controller (Fig. 9). It smoothly switches between (i) global trajectory tracking during task-noncritical phases, prioritizing time efficiency, and (ii) real-time task error compensation during task-critical phases, enhancing reliability by compensating state and pose errors induced by real-world uncertainties in real time using the warped end-effector reference (Fig. 9B) together with smoothly scheduled cost weights (Fig. 9C). 

## Controller Overview 

The controller is implemented using a cascaded MPC archi-tecture (Fig. 9A): at each control cycle, a mobile-base MPC first plans a short-horizon reactive base motion for trajec-tory tracking and collision avoidance; conditioned on this predicted base motion, a manipulator MPC optimizes joint commands to track the global trajectory and compensate task errors during the task-critical phase using smoothly scheduled cost weights (Sec. Phase-dependent Weight Tran-sition). Crucially, our safety-preserving trajectory warping (Sec. Safety-preserving Trajectory Warping) modifies the end-effector reference so that online task pose updates can be incorporated without destroying the planned pre-/post-task safe-interaction structure, thereby maintaining safety among the end-effector, the manipulated object, and the environment during real-time compensation. 

## Safety-preserving Trajectory Warping 

During execution, there may be a mismatch between the nominal end-effector reference P ref ee (t) = fFK ,ee (x(t)) , t ∈

[¯ tκi, s , ¯tκi, e ] and the latest task end-effector trajectory 

¯P t,i (τ ), τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ] (i.e., P ref ee (¯ tκi, s + τ )̸ = ¯P t,i (τ )) due to the task pose estimate update. Naively replacing P ref ee (t)

with ¯P t,i (τ ) is infeasible, because the planned safe interaction motions around task are crucial for reliable and safe task execution. Direct replacement would destroy these motions and introduce discontinuities. We therefore propose a safety-preserving trajectory warping strategy that retargets the task-related segments to the latest estimated task trajectory while preserving the nominal relative safe motions before and after the task-critical phase (Fig. 9B). 

Task-critical Phase and Warping Window For each task i,we define a task-critical phase 

Smani ,i = [ˆ ti, s, ˆti, e], (30)  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

14 Journal Title XX(X) Mobile Base 

MPC 

Manipulator 

MPC 

A Cascade  MPC B End-effector trajectory warping 

nominal 

end-effector 

trajectory 

> Task-error
> Compensation
> (Active)
> Whole-body
> Tracking
> (Inactive)

C Smooth Transition 

Figure 9. Safe-warping-based phase-dependent controller. ( A) a cascaded model predictive controller, ( B) end-effector trajectory warping incorporates online task pose estimation into a safe compensation motion, and ( C) smooth switching weights transition between whole-body trajectory tracking and task-error compensation. 

where ˆti, s = ¯ tκi, s − Ts,i and ˆti, e = ¯ tκi, e + Te,i . Smani ,i 

extends the nominal task interval [¯ tκi, s , ¯tκi, e ] by pre-/post-task safe-interaction durations Ts,i and Te,i , which covers the aforementioned pre- and post-task safe interaction motions generated by the trajectory planner. To ensure seamless transitions, we introduce a switching duration Tsw and define the warping window 

S+mani ,i := [ˆ ti, s − Tsw , ˆti, e + Tsw ). (31) In our setting, we assume the windows {S +mani ,i } do not overlap for all tasks, so at any time there exists at most one active task index i.

Preserving Nominal Relative Safe Motions The key idea is to preserve the nominal relative end-effector motion around the task, but expressed in the latest task frame. Specifically, we define the nominal relative end-effector motions with respect to the task start and end end-effector poses, covering the pre- and post-task segments together with the switching intervals, as 

P rel  

> i, s

(t) = P ref ee (¯ tκi, s )−1P ref ee (t), t ∈ [ˆ ti, s − Tsw , ¯tκi, s ),

P rel 

> i, e

(t) = P ref ee (¯ tκi, e )−1P ref ee (t), t ∈ [¯ tκi, e , ˆti, e + Tsw ).

Then, we rigidly retarget these relative motions to the latest task trajectory during the pre- and post- manipulation phases 

¯P t,i (0) P rel  

> i, s

(t), t ∈ [ˆ ti, s, ¯tκi, s ),

¯P t,i (TT ,i ) P rel 

> i, e

(t), t ∈ [¯ tκi, e , ˆti, e),

which are the safe interaction motions for the latest task pose estimates. 

Smooth Blending via SE(3) Interpolation To avoid control discontinuities, we blend between the nominal and warped references over the entry/exit switching intervals using an 

SE(3) interpolation operator f interp (P A, P B , α ) (SLERP for rotation and linear interpolation for translation). The interpolation factors are scheduled as 

αin (t) = αpoly 



1 − ˆti, s − tTsw 



, t ∈ [ˆ ti, s − Tsw , ˆti, s),αout (t) = αpoly 



1 − t − ˆti, e

Tsw 



, t ∈ [ˆ ti, e, ˆti, e + Tsw ),

where αpoly (τ ) = 6 τ 5 − 15 τ 4 + 10 τ 3 for τ ∈ [0 , 1] .Accordingly, we define 

fin ,i (t) = f interp 



P ref ee (¯ tκi, s ), ¯P t,i (0) , α in (t)



,t ∈ [ˆ ti, s − Tsw , ˆti, s),

(32) 

fout ,i (t) = f interp 



P ref ee (¯ tκi, e ), ¯P t,i (TT ,i ), α out (t)



,t ∈ [ˆ ti, e, ˆti, e + Tsw )

(33) which act as transition transforms that smoothly inter-polate between the nominal reference pose and the lat-est task trajectory. In particular, they satisfy fin ,i (ˆ ti, s −

Tsw ) = P ref ee (¯ tκi, s ) and fin ,i (ˆ ti, s) = ¯P t,i (0) , and sim-ilarly fout ,i (ˆ ti, e) = ¯P t,i (TT ,i ) and fout ,i (ˆ ti, e + Tsw ) = 

P ref ee (¯ tκi, e ), thus avoiding pose and control discontinuities. 

Piecewise Construction of the Warped Trajectory We compose the warped trajectory (Fig. 9B) by (i) blending into the warped trajectory, (ii) retargeted approach, (iii) task tracking, (iv) retargeted retreat, and (v) blending back to the nominal reference trajectory. The warped end-effector trajectory is constructed piecewise as 

P warp ee (t) = 



fin ,i (t) P rel  

> i, s

(t), ∃ i : t ∈ [ˆ ti, s − Tsw , ˆti, s),

¯P t,i (0) P rel  

> i, s

(t), ∃ i : t ∈ [ˆ ti, s, ¯tκi, s ),

¯P t,i (t − ¯tκi, s ), ∃ i : t ∈ [¯ tκi, s , ¯tκi, e ),

¯P t,i (TT ,i ) P rel 

> i, e

(t), ∃ i : t ∈ [¯ tκi, e , ˆti, e),fout ,i (t) P rel 

> i, e

(t), ∃ i : t ∈ [ˆ ti, e, ˆti, e + Tsw ),

P ref ee (t), t / ∈ S 

> i

S+mani ,i .

(34) This construction preserves the nominal pre-/post-task motion up to a rigid transformation in the updated task frame, thereby maintaining the planned collision-clearance and interaction structure, while allowing the end-effector to follow the latest estimated task trajectory within [¯ tκi, s , ¯tκi, e ].

## Phase-dependent Weight Transition 

With the safe warped trajectory as the reference, the complementary switching weights σs and σee are tuned to  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 15 

prioritize task error compensation within Smani ,i (i.e., σs ≈ 0

and σee ≈ 1) and revert to whole-body trajectory tracking outside this phase (Fig. 9C). To avoid abrupt changes in the MPC objective that could induce oscillatory behavior, the weight transition is synchronized with the trajectory warping over the same duration Tsw .

σs,i (t) = 1 − (flog (t − ˆti, s, −Tsw , 0) 

− flog (t − ˆti, e, 0, T sw )) ,σs(t) = Y

> i

σs,i (t),σee (t) = 1 − σs(t).

(35) This ensures σee ≈ 1 (and σs ≈ 0) within the task-critical phase Smani ,i to enforce task compliance, while reverting to global trajectory tracking outside. 

## Cascaded MPC Integration 

Let N denote the prediction horizon and ∆t the time step. Denote tref as the current time on the reference trajectory x(t). We define the prediction time steps as 

tk = tref + k∆t for k = 0 , . . . , N . At each MPC update, the base MPC continues to track the global reference and avoid dynamic obstacles, while the manipulator MPC uses P warp ee ,k = P warp ee (tk) as the end-effector reference and 

σs, σ ee to smoothly reweight its objective between tracking the whole-body and compensation for task-errors. Specifically, conditioned on the predicted base trajectory 

¯X∗ 

> b

computed by the base MPC, the manipulator MPC solves a receding-horizon Optimal Control Problem (OCP) whose stage cost is composed as 

lm,k = σs(tk) ltrack ,k + σee (tk) ltask ,k + lm,dy ,k , (36) where ltrack ,k penalizes deviations from the global reference 

x(tk), lm,dy ,k penalizes proximity to obstacles, and the task error compensation term is defined w.r.t. the warped reference: 

ltask ,k = [eee ,k ]p Qp

− ωR · tr  [eee ,k ]R

. (37) Here eee ,k := P −1ee ,k P warp ee ,k represents the pose error, 

P ee ,k = fFK ,ee (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k ) is the predicted end-effector pose along the horizon. Qp ⪰ 0 and ωR ≥ 0 are position and orientation weight. Because σs(t) and σee (t) are synchronized with the warping window S+mani ,i , the objective transitions smoothly: outside task-critical phases, σs ≈

1 emphasizes global tracking, while inside task-critical phases, σee ≈ 1 emphasizes task error compensation relative to P warp ee ,k . The complete OCP formulations, dynamic extensions, and obstacle modeling details are provided in Appendix E: Controller Formulation. The resulting OCPs are solved online in a real-time receding-horizon manner using Acados Verschueren et al. (2021) with HPIPM Frison and Diehl (2020) as the underlying solver. In summary, the proposed controller integrates a safety-preserving end-effector trajectory warping and synchronized smooth weight switching into a cascaded MPC execution layer. This design enables online incorporation of task pose updates for reliable error compensation during task-critical phases, while retaining the planned safe-interaction structure and reverting to efficient global trajectory tracking outside these phases. 

## Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed framework through a set of real-world and simulation experiments, designed to answer five questions: 1) Can the framework efficiently execute long-horizon continuous mobile manipulation in constrained and dynamic real-world environments? 2) Can it maintain reliable and efficient execution under substantial task-pose uncertainty in long-horizon continuous tasks? 3) Can the framework extend to complex mobile manip-ulation tasks with diverse end-effector constraints that require continuous base–arm coordination? 4) How does the proposed framework compare with the SOTA methods in terms of both efficiency and reliability? 5) How does each component of the proposed framework contribute to the overall improvements in system performance? The first three questions are addressed through adiverse set of real-world experiments in Sec. Real-world Experiments, including long-horizon mobile manipulation in constrained and dynamic environments, reliability validation under persistent task-pose uncertainty, and complex tasks with diverse end-effector constraints. Sec. Evaluation of Efficiency and Reliability then compares the proposed framework with SOTA methods on simulation benchmarks, demonstrating superior performance in both efficiency and reliability. Finally, the ablation studies in Sec. Ablation Studies examine the contribution of each key component to task-error compensation, as well as to safe and precise motion generation. 

## Implementation Details 

As shown in Fig. 2(A), we adopt a differential-drive mobile manipulator, a simple yet sufficient platform to validate the problems considered. It comprises a two-wheel differential-drive base AgileX (2026), a 6-DOF manipulator Unitree (2026) with a two-finger gripper, and an onboard computer, integrating the mobility and manipulation capabilities required for implementing and validating our framework. For real-time perception, the robot relies solely on onboard sensors with no external devices. A base-mounted LiDAR–IMU unit Livox (2026) enables the estimation of the mobile base state through LiDAR–inertial odometry Xu et al. (2022) and the detection of dynamic obstacles from LiDAR measurements. The joint states of the manipulator are obtained from internal joint encoders. An eye-in-hand RGB-D camera Orbbec (2026) on the manipulator’s last link supports real-time estimation of target object states Liang et al. (2025), critical for task-error compensation. In the real-world experiments, the prior environmental point cloud map is built using Fast-LIO Xu et al. (2022), and online registration to the map is performed using small gicp Koide (2024). Task trajectories are specified either from human-demonstrated target object motions or by manual design. For online planning, the size of the active task set is set to NT = 2 , meaning that at most two upcoming   

> Prepared using sagej.cls 16 Journal Title XX(X)

tasks are considered at each time step. For each updated active task set, the first planning call is allocated 2.5 s after the previous leading task is completed, and subsequent replanning is performed every 1.4 s until the current leading task is completed. The controller runs at 50 Hz to maintain responsiveness to real-world uncertainties. For computation, the real-world system runs entirely on the onboard computer equipped with an Intel i9-14900HX CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 4060 GPU. Simulation experiments are conducted on a computer equipped with an Intel i7-13700F CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. 

## Real-world Experiments     

> Constrained and Dynamic Real-World Environments

To answer the first question, two long-horizon real-world experiments were conducted in a constrained office lounge and a dynamic environment, validating the framework’s ability to generate continuous whole-body motion across tightly arranged tasks, manipulation-on-the-move performance, and robustness to dynamic disturbances. Visual experimental results are provided in Extension 2. 

Scenario 1: Constrained indoor environment. In this scenario (Fig. 1A and Fig. 10A), set in an office lounge, the MM coordinated navigation and manipulation and sequentially completed five tasks within a confined space. It started by traversing a narrow corridor before approaching a target coffee bottle. To ensure stable perception, the MM actively adjusted the camera viewpoint via our time-assured active perception strategy. In a particularly demanding maneuver, the robot simultaneously grasped the bottle while its mobile base executed a tight U-turn (Fig. 10A(iii)), demonstrating reliable manipulation-on-the-move in a constrained space. After delivering the coffee to a nearby table, the robot smoothly closed an open drawer along its path (Fig. 10A(iv)) before proceeding to grasp a randomly placed bottle (Fig. 10A(v)) on the opposite side of the lounge, then seamlessly discarded the bottle in a nearby trash can. The entire sequence was executed as a single continuous motion without unnecessary stops. 

Scenario 2: Dynamic environment. The second sce-nario, consisting of six consecutive tasks (Fig. 10B), evalu-ated the system’s performance under dynamic disturbances, including moving targets and obstacles. The sequence began with grasping a bottle from a reciprocating turntable (Fig. 10B(v)), which required continuous motion adjust-ments enabled by our real-time task-error compensation con-troller. The robot then traversed a blocked aisle, navigating beneath a table (Fig. 10B(vi)) through coordinated base–arm motion from whole-body trajectory generation. Next, before the placing task, a pedestrian suddenly crossed the robot’s path (Fig. 10B(vii)). The controller reacted in real-time to generate collision-avoidance motions, demonstrating robust-ness to unexpected obstacles. Then, after grasping a bottle from the shelf, the under-table passage became obstructed by a chair (Fig. 10B(viii)). The robot replanned an efficient alternative route through the main aisle, adapting to the updated environment. Before placing the bottle, a pedestrian moved randomly (Fig. 10B(ix)). The system replanned a trajectory online again to maintain clearance. Finally, when the target object was displaced before grasping (Fig. 10B(x)), task-error compensation adapted the motion to the latest target pose, enabling a successful grasp. The experiment ended with the bottle being disposed of successfully. Collectively, these two long-horizon experiments validate that our framework enables the efficient and reliable execution of tightly arranged mobile manipulation tasks in both constrained and dynamic environments. Throughout the complete sequence of tasks, the robot maintained a continuous base movement (Fig. 10A(ii), B(ii), and B(iv), where wheel angular velocities were calculated by Eq. (46) via the measured linear and angular velocities of the mobile base), while generating smooth whole-body motions that integrate navigation and manipulation with safe interaction motions, maintaining object stability during approach, manipulation, and retraction to support reliable task completion. 

> Reliability Validation in Long-Horizon Continuous Tasks

To assess the reliability of our framework in real-world long-horizon tasks, we designed a challenging experiment in which a mobile manipulator sequentially picked up 10 dominoes from a table (Fig. 11A) and placed them in a straight line on the opposite side (Fig. 11B), totaling 20 tasks. As illustrated in Fig. 11A, only coarse initial poses of dominoes were provided across trials, and the system had to rely on its eye-in-hand camera to estimate the actual poses and adjust its motion during execution. After each placement, a tester deliberately introduced target pose uncertainty by randomly repositioning the next domino. Throughout the experiment, the mobile base and the manipulator of the MM maintained continuous coordinated motion, and the system completed all 20 tasks, producing a straight domino line comparable to that arranged by a human (Fig. 11B, and Extension 3). In this experiment, there are two key challenges: target pose uncertainty from randomized domino placements and estimation deviations. Fig. 11C shows snapshots of the grasping moment from the ten picking tasks, with the MM grasping the dominoes randomly positioned on the table. Fig. 12 compares the coarse initial pose with the final refined estimate (last domino pose estimate before grasping) for each picking task, revealing discrepancies of up to 0.2 m. Here, because external ground truth is unavailable, we use the final refined estimate as a reference. Fig. 13 then summarizes the deviation of earlier estimates from this reference over time across ten picking tasks. Specifically, the deviation at each time step is computed as the difference between the current estimate and the final refined estimate. As shown in Fig. 13, the persistence of these deviations highlights the necessity for the system to adjust its motion in real-time using the latest pose estimate to ensure a successful grasp. We evaluate whether our planner can effectively replan trajectories online to retarget the end-effector to the latest pose estimate. This capability is crucial for efficient and reliable mobile manipulation. It allows the robot to maintain continuous motion by ensuring that each new trajectory is computed before the current trajectory completes execution. It also preserves reliability by keeping the replanned manipulation pose sufficiently accurate to meet the desired end-effector pose. To quantify this capability, we use three metrics: (i) the trajectory duration, (ii) the computation time (Fig. 14), and (iii) the position and orientation error between  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 17 A( i)

# A(iii)  A(iv)  A(v) 

iii 

## A(ii) 

0

1

2

4

≥5

> Measured Max Wheel
> Angular Velocity(rad/s)

iv 

v

iii 

iv 

v

> Measured Max Wheel
> Angular Velocity(rad/s)

0

1

2

3

4

5

## B(ii) 

## B(iv) 

## B(v)  B(vi)  B(vii) 

## B(viii)  B(ix)  B(x) 

ix 

x

vvii 

viii B( i)

# B(iii) 

vvi 

viii 

ix 

x

# A

# B

vi vii 

3

≥7

6a

b

c

d

e

f

a

b

c

d e

dynamic obstacle 

Figure 10. Mobile manipulation in constrained and dynamic environments. ( A) Constrained indoor environment. (i) Overview of the office lounge with the executed trajectory of the mobile manipulator and five task locations (a-e). (ii) Point cloud of the environment with the executed mobile base trajectory color-coded by the measured maximum wheel angular velocity of the two driven wheels. (iii)–(v) Representative motion segments: (iii) grasping a bottle while the mobile base executes a tight U-turn, (iv) closing an open drawer while moving toward the opposite side of the lounge, and (v) grasping a bottle randomly placed on the table. ( B) Dynamic environment. (i) and (iii) Overviews of the environment and the mobile manipulator trajectories during two phases with six task locations (a-f). (ii) and (iv) Point clouds of the environment and dynamic obstacles with mobile base trajectories, color-coded by the measured maximum wheel angular velocity during two phases. (v)–(x) Representative events: (v) grasping a bottle on a reciprocating turntable, (vi) lowering the manipulator to pass under a table, (vii) raising the manipulator to avoid a pedestrian, (viii) a person moving a chair to block the path under the table, (ix) the mobile base detouring to avoid a pedestrian, and (x) grasping a bottle that is displaced by a person just before grasping. 

the planned and target manipulation pose (Fig. 15). Here, the target manipulation pose is defined as the desired end-effector pose derived from the most recent pose estimate  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

18 Journal Title XX(X) B

Placed by 

MM 

Placed by 

Human 

Active Perception, then Picking 

Placing Dominoes in a Line 

Tester randomly 

places  the next 

domino 

A

C(i)  C(ii)  C(iii)  C(iv)  C(v) 

C(vi)  C(vii)  C(viii)  C(ix)  C(x)  

> Figure 11. Long-horizon tasks under task pose uncertainty. ( A) Tasks overview: the MM repeatedly (

10 ×) employs active perception to estimate domino poses, then grasps and arranges them into a straight line. ( B) Final placement comparison: the line of dominoes arranged by a human (left) versus that produced by the MM (right). ( C) Snapshots captured at the grasping instant for the ten consecutive grasping tasks (i)–(x). Coarse Initial Pose 

Final Refined Estimate 

of i-th Domino  

> i
> Figure 12. Top-down comparison of the coarse initial pose and the final refined estimate (last perception estimate before grasping) of the domino for the ten grasping tasks.

Mean 

Min-Max Range 

Mean 

Min-Max Range  

> Figure 13. Time evolution of pose estimation deviation (mean and min-max range over the ten trials) relative to the final refined estimate.

available at the planning instance. As shown in Fig. 14, the computation time remained consistently below the corresponding trajectory duration across replanning cycles. Even in the most demanding cycle, the planned trajectory lasted about 6.8 times longer than the time needed to compute it, leaving sufficient time to generate the next trajectory before execution finished and avoiding pauses for replanning. As summarized in Fig. 15, the planner effectively converged to the target manipulation pose, yielding a median position error of 0.0096 m (max 0.0167 m) and an orientation error of 0.0195 rad (max 0.03 rad). These results confirm that the planner can replan online to align the end-effector with the latest pose estimate during continuous execution. Computation Time 

Trajectory Duration  

> Figure 14. Comparison of computation time and trajectory duration.

Finally, we evaluate the real-time task-error compensation ability of our system. Despite the satisfactory precision of the planner (Fig. 15), whole-body replanning is computationally intensive and executed at a much lower rate than the perception module (above 5 Hz). Consequently, the final refined estimate may become available after the last  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 19  

> Figure 15. Distribution of pose errors between the planned and target manipulation poses.

replanning update (Fig. 13). This latency results in adiscrepancy between the planned manipulation pose and the target grasp pose derived from the final refined estimate (labeled as Trajectory Error in Fig. 16). To mitigate this, we employ a safe-warping-based phase-dependent controller (50 Hz) that smoothly switches between global trajectory tracking and task-error compensation during task-critical phases while maintaining safe interaction. As shown in Fig. 16 (Post-compensation Error), this controller significantly reduces the final execution error to less than 0.014 m (median 0.0086 m) in position and 0.027 rad (median 0.0193 rad) in orientation. Trajectory Error  

> Post-compensation Error
> Figure 16. Position and orientation errors with respect to the final refined estimate, including trajectory error (deviation of the planned trajectory) and post-compensation error (final deviation after task-error compensation).

Overall, these results demonstrate that our proposed unified framework enables the reliable execution of long-horizon manipulation sequences under perception-induced domino pose uncertainty. By synergizing reliability-aware long-horizon planning with a high-frequency safe-warping-based phase-dependent controller, our system sustains precise manipulation across repeated trials even with large (0.2 m) discrepancies between coarse and final refined domino poses. 

Base-Arm Coordination for Complex Tasks with Diverse End-effector Constraints To demonstrate the extensibility of our framework to complex tasks beyond pick-and-place, specifically those with diverse end-effector trajectory constraints, we conducted several experiments (Fig. 17). Successful completion of these tasks requires the end-effector to follow task-imposed geometric constraints while the mobile base and manipulator coordinate continuously. Importantly, in contact- and constraint-rich behaviors (e.g., door opening and valve turning), task success requires more than just end-effector trajectory tracking; it often involves complex whole-body constraints. Specifically, the mobile base must retract to ensure smooth door opening or maintain an appropriate distance during valve turning. Through these experiments, we demonstrate that our method enables reliable task completion via whole-body coordination, which is more challenging than tracking the end-effector trajectory in open free space. Visual results are provided in Extension 4. For flower watering (Fig. 17A), the end-effector followed a complex 6D motion: the robot first grasped the watering can while moving swiftly and kept it level when approaching the flowers. It then smoothly tilted and translated the can along a cubic B-spline, maintaining a consistent height and passing directly above each flower to water the row, before finally returning to a level pose. Opening a cabinet (Fig. 17B) and pulling a curtain (Fig. 17C) required long geometric paths—a circular arc and a straight line, respectively—whose spatial extent exceeded the standalone workspace of the manipulator. In both cases, the mobile base had to continuously reposition to keep the end-effector within a feasible manipulation region while the manipulator performed the constrained motion. Inserting an umbrella into a stand hole (Fig. 1B and Fig. 17D) and turning off a stove knob (Fig. 17E) instead involved constrained phases of varying durations in which the end-effector had to remain within a small region for a finite time. For umbrella insertion, the constrained phase lasted about 0.8 s; nevertheless, our method enabled precise insertion without noticeable slowdown of the mobile base. In contrast, turning off the stove required an in-place rotational motion of the end-effector, confining the end-effector to an even smaller region for a longer duration (about 1.6 s). In this case, the mobile base autonomously slowed down to ensure the successful completion of the task. Finally, turning a large valve (Fig. 17F) required the mobile base to move around the valve while the end-effector executed circular motion around the valve axis. At the beginning of this task, the manipulator retracted to allow the mobile base to move along a smaller radius around the valve, thereby shortening its path and improving efficiency; during the turning phase, it extended to maintain clearance between the mobile base and the valve pedestal, illustrating efficient and safe whole-body coordination of base and manipulator under task-imposed end-effector constraints. Attributed to our whole-body long-horizon planning, the proposed framework successfully extends to complex tasks with diverse end-effector constraints. The flower-watering, cabinet-opening, and curtain-pulling tasks demonstrate our framework’s ability to execute long and diverse constrained end-effector motions by continuously repositioning the base. In contrast, the umbrella-insertion, stove-knob, and valve-turning tasks highlight its ability to autonomously coordinate the mobile base and manipulator to remain efficient while ensuring task completion. Across all six tasks, the system maintains continuous whole-body motion, avoiding unnecessary stops during both the approach and the constrained phases. As shown in Fig. 17, the mobile base wheel velocities remain non-zero throughout execution and are automatically modulated in response to the evolving task constraints. 

## Evaluation of Efficiency and Reliability 

Simulated Scenarios and Experimental Setup To evaluate the efficiency and reliability of the proposed method, we  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

20 Journal Title XX(X) F

## D

## C

## A

## B

## E

left 

right 

Time(s) 

Time(s) 

Time(s) 

Time(s) 

Time(s) 

left 

right 

left 

right 

left 

right 

left 

right 

left 

right 

Time(s) 

Figure 17. Base-arm coordination for complex tasks. For each of six mobile manipulation tasks, the top row shows representative snapshots and the bottom row plots the left and right wheel angular velocities over time. In each plot, four shaded time intervals indicate the trajectory segments corresponding to the four snapshots above and highlight how the wheel angular velocities evolve across representative phases of execution. The tasks include ( A) watering a row of flowers, ( B) opening a cabinet door along a circular arc, ( C) pulling a curtain open along a straight line, ( D) inserting an umbrella into an umbrella stand, ( E) turning off a stove knob, and ( F) turning a large valve while moving around it. Across all tasks, the wheel velocities remain non-zero and are automatically modulated to accommodate the end-effector–constrained phases while maintaining continuous whole-body motion. 

conducted benchmark experiments in Isaac Sim NVIDIA (2026) across four scenarios of increasing complexity (Fig. 18): an office ( 8 m × 15 m ), an apartment ( 9 m ×

9 m ), a caf´ e ( 9 m × 11 m ), and a simple scenario (Simple) (6 m × 5 m ) adapted from Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024). In each scenario, the mobile manipulator was required to execute six pick-and-place or pick-and-drop missions. Each mission comprised a pick task followed by a place or drop  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 21 

task. These missions were designed to require coordinated whole-body motion and safe interaction with both the manipulated objects and the surrounding environment, while also enabling large-scale quantitative evaluation. In all missions, the target objects were initially placed on support surfaces of different heights (Fig. 18), and the robot was required to pick them up and transport them to a target region for placement or dropping. For each mission, the coarse initial pose of the object to be picked, as well as the target pose for placement or dropping, was specified a priori. Office  Apartment 

Café  Simple Scenario 

Reister Ours  Thakar Burgess  

> Figure 18. Overview of four benchmarking scenarios (office, apartment, caf ´ e, and simple scenario) and mobile base trajectory for our method versus baselines. Each scenario comprises six pick-and-place/drop missions with object displacements of 0, 0.05, or 0.10 m.

To evaluate robustness to discrepancies between the coarse and true object poses, we introduced perturbations to the ground-truth poses of the objects to be picked. Specifically, for each mission, the coarse planar position (x, y ) of the target object was generated by perturbing its ground-truth position (xgt , y gt ) with a displacement of fixed magnitude 

dσ ∈ { 0, 0.05 , 0.10 } m in a random direction: 

(x, y ) = ( xgt , y gt ) + dσ [cos θ, sin θ],

where θ was sampled uniformly from [0 , 2π), and samples that resulted in collision were discarded and resampled. These displacement magnitudes were chosen such that the resulting offsets were large enough to require noticeable motion correction during picking, while still ensuring that the true object remained within the camera field of view when the onboard sensor was oriented toward the coarse initial pose. During execution, the algorithms had no access to ground-truth object poses. Instead, in all experiments, the position and orientation of the target objects were continuously estimated from simulated RGB-D observations using the same perception module Liang et al. (2025). We compared our method against three state-of-the-art baselines: Burgess et al.’s reactive base controller for on-the-move manipulation Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024), Reister et al.’s stop-then-manipulate method Reister et al. (2022), and Thakar et al.’s planning-based method Thakar et al. (2018). Each method was evaluated 10 times in each scenario for each noise setting (a total of 4 × 3 × 10 × 6 = 720 

missions per method). The experiment terminated at any of the three conditions: (i) the algorithm alternately sent six cycles of gripper closing and opening commands, which the algorithm considered as the completion of six missions; (ii) a collision occurred between the MM and the environment, or a self-collision occurred to the MM; (iii) the robot was stuck, i.e., the distance the mobile base moved within 30 seconds was less than 0.15 m. 

Evaluation Metrics Mission Success. We categorize each trial into two mission types: (i) pick-and-place, where success is defined as completing a full pick-and-place cycle—i.e., the robot (a) successfully grasps the object (verified by the gripper not being fully closed), (b) transports it to the designated target, and (c) releases it, with the released object resting within the target region and meeting the pose tolerance (position error below 0.15 m and tilt (roll/pitch) less than 45 ◦; and (ii) pick-and-drop, where success is defined as successfully releasing the object and the final planar position of the object lying within 0.15 m of the target location inside the specified target region. 

Mission Cycle Time. Mission efficiency is quantified by the mission cycle time, defined as the elapsed time between consecutive task milestones. We designate the timestamp of a “gripper-open” event as the completion marker for each mission, since opening the gripper to release the object signifies the end of the mission. Consequently, for a sequence of N missions, the cycle time for any subsequent mission is the interval between two consecutive gripper-open events. For the first mission, where there is no preceding gripper action, the cycle time is measured from the global execution trigger (issued to initiate the entire N missions) to the first gripper-open event. Lower cycle time indicates higher execution efficiency. 

Mission Success weighted by Cycle Time (MSCT). 

Mission performance is quantified by the Mission Success-weighted Cycle Time (MSCT) Yokoyama et al. (2021), which jointly evaluates mission success and efficiency. For each mission, MSCT is computed as: MSCT = s · T

max( C, T ) (38) where s ∈ { 0, 1} is the success indicator, T is the idealized lower-bound time for the mission, and C is the actual mission cycle time. The idealized time T is calculated as the time required for the mobile base to traverse the shortest collision-free path for the mission at maximum speed, accounting for the maximum reach of the manipulator. The MSCT metric ranges from 0 to 1, where MSCT = 0 indicates mission failure, and 0 < MSCT ≤ 1 reflects successful completion scaled by execution efficiency. Higher values indicate better performance. 

Scenario Success weighted by Cycle Time (SSCT). For a scenario consisting of N missions, we report the Scenario  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

22 Journal Title XX(X) 

Table 1. Simulation benchmark results across four scenarios under different levels of task-pose displacement dσ . For each scenario, we report the mission success rate, scenario success weighted by cycle time (SSCT), and average base linear velocity (Avg Vel) over 60 missions; for SSCT, both the mean and standard deviation (Std) are provided.                                                                                                                                                                                      

> Scenarios Methods Mission Success Rate (%) ↑SSCT ↑
> Avg Vel (m/s) ↑
> dσ= 0 .0dσ= 0 .05 dσ= 0 .1dσ= 0 .0dσ= 0 .05 dσ= 0 .1
> Mean Std Mean Std Mean Std
> Office Thakar 30.00 15.00 3.33 0.0852 0.0561 0.0374 0.0385 0.0171 0.0343 0.1335 Reister 93.33 68.33 65.00 0.2628 0.0151 0.1905 0.0801 0.1979 0.0802 0.1118 Burgess 26.67 18.33 21.67 0.1674 0.0712 0.1001 0.0845 0.1217 0.0859 0.2362 Ours 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.6125 0.0168 0.6143 0.0118 0.6230 0.0193 0.2462
> Apartment Thakar 0.00 3.33 0.00 0.0000 0.0000 0.0097 0.0200 0.0000 0.0000 0.1347 Reister 50.00 25.00 38.33 0.1150 0.0000 0.0638 0.0277 0.1030 0.0402 0.1088 Burgess 0.00 8.33 13.33 0.0000 0.0000 0.0473 0.0876 0.0767 0.0907 0.1846 Ours 100.0 100.0 98.33 0.7006 0.0154 0.6919 0.0186 0.6754 0.0401 0.2459
> Caf ´ eThakar 56.67 8.33 0.00 0.1957 0.0758 0.0274 0.0475 0.0000 0.0000 0.1287 Reister 100.00 100.00 100.00 0.3062 0.0095 0.3076 0.0024 0.3087 0.0017 0.1145 Burgess 46.67 51.67 48.33 0.3647 0.0699 0.3995 0.1069 0.3856 0.1262 0.2465
> Ours 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.7436 0.0213 0.7397 0.0150 0.7304 0.0182 0.2459 Simple Thakar 86.67 15.00 0.00 0.2396 0.0655 0.0376 0.0243 0.0000 0.0000 0.1172 Reister 100.0 96.67 41.67 0.2206 0.0001 0.2115 0.0142 0.0943 0.0733 0.1047 Burgess 90.00 76.67 88.33 0.4701 0.0595 0.3978 0.0739 0.4483 0.0662 0.2186 Ours 100.0 100.0 100.0 0.5749 0.0174 0.5724 0.0160 0.5783 0.0096 0.2421

Success weighted by Cycle Time (SSCT) as the mean MSCT over all missions in that scenario: SSCT = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

MSCT i, (39) SSCT also ranges from 0 to 1. Higher values indicate better overall scenario performance, jointly reflecting the scenario-level success rate and time efficiency across missions. 

Benchmark Results and Analysis We evaluated reliability using the mission success rate in Tab. 1, defined as the fraction of missions that completed the prescribed pick-and-place and pick-and-drop missions across all benchmark scenarios and perturbation settings. Over 720 missions spanning all object displacements, our method achieved a 99.86% success rate, indicating consistently robust execution even under substantial target pose discrepancies. Burgess et al. Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024) achieved a success rate of 40.83%, with failures primarily attributable to four systemic limitations. First, the base placement is selected from a predefined candidate set solely based on transition efficiency, without considering the feasibility of subsequent manipulation. Consequently, the chosen placement may render the target unreachable or require unsafe manipulation motions in complex 3D environments. Second, in terms of motion generation, the decoupled control of the mobile base and manipulator lacks unified whole-body collision awareness. Specifically, the base navigates without considering the manipulator’s safety, leading to collisions with obstacles in cluttered environments (e.g., Office and Apartment). Third, the base motion generator Missura et al. (2022) in Burgess et al. Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024) is prone to getting stuck near obstacles due to the limited computational time. This issue is exacerbated by the manipulator’s limited workspace, which necessitates close-proximity navigation to obstacles (e.g., tables) for reachability. Finally, the method does not explicitly account for end-effector–object interaction during the approach and retraction phase. This lack of sensitivity often leads to unintended contact, knocking the object down before grasping or after placing. Reister et al. Reister et al. (2022) achieved a success rate of 73.19%, with failures primarily attributed to the limitations of stop-then-manipulate decomposition. While a fixed base placement can ensure reachability for a coarse initial pose, it guarantees neither a collision-free pre-grasp configuration nor robustness to target displacement. Consequently, this results in either pushing the object away before grasping or failing to reach the actual target pose. Thakar et al. Thakar et al. (2018) achieved 18.19% success. This method assumes a perfect task specification and does not incorporate online task pose estimation to correct motion. Moreover, because its base navigation and manipulation are decoupled, the base trajectory may fail to position the robot in a configuration that admits a valid pre-grasp pose, causing the robot to topple the object during the approach and resulting in grasp failure. Overall, the failures of the baseline methods can be summarized into three categories: (i) decoupled base–manipulator motion generation that leads to infeasible manipulation motion under workspace limits or target displacement; (ii) insufficient treatment of object collision, which can disturb the target and invalidate the grasp; and (iii) lack of closed-loop correction to reconcile execution with task pose estimation. In contrast, our method achieves near-perfect performance across all scenarios by combining reliability-aware whole-body trajectory generation with safety-aware task-error compensation, thereby sustaining reliability throughout long-horizon mobile manipulation. Beyond reliability, the practical utility of a mobile manipulator also depends on how efficiently it executes the task sequence. However, efficiency is rendered futile without successful mission completion. Therefore, we evaluated efficiency using two complementary metrics: (i) the Scenario Success weighted by Cycle Time (SSCT) score (Fig. 19 and Tab. 1), which provides a single scenario-level score that jointly reflects both the success rate and the time  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 23 Office  Apartment  Café  Simple Scenario 

Reister Ours  Thakar Burgess  

> Figure 19. Scenario Success-weighted Cycle Time (SSCT) for the benchmarked methods; bar heights denote the mean, and error bars the standard deviation, across 10 trials for each scenario–displacement combination.

Reister Ours  Thakar Burgess  limit  

> Figure 20. Distributions of mobile base linear velocity before collision or getting stuck for the four methods in each scenario, computed from 30 trials per scenario (10 trials for each displacement). White circles and capped vertical bars represent the median and interquartile range (IQR), respectively.

efficiency, and (ii) the distribution of the linear velocity of the mobile base before the MM completes all the missions, gets stuck, or collides (Fig. 20 and Tab. 1). Our method achieves the highest average base velocity across most scenarios, except for the Caf´ e scenario, where Burgess et al. exhibit a slightly higher mean velocity (0.2465 vs. our 0.2459 m/s), and attains the best SSCT across all four scenarios and displacement levels, indicating that it preserves fast mission execution while remaining robust to target pose perturbations. Burgess et al. Burgess-Limerick et al. (2024) exhibit a comparable average base speed, reflecting its aggressive on-the-move strategy; however, its overall efficiency is ultimately limited by the failure modes discussed above, which reduce effective throughput when failures are accounted for in SSCT. In contrast, Reister et al. Reister et al. (2022), and Thakar et al. Thakar et al. (2018) are penalized both by lower success rates and by slower motion: the stop-then-manipulate decomposition in Reister et al. (2022) introduces frequent halts and re-alignments, while the separated plan–execute-replan structure in Thakar et al. (2018) induces additional waiting for replanning, both of which reduce efficiency. Overall, our framework improves mission throughput by jointly optimizing whole-body motion for feasibility and robustness, while using online, safety-aware task-error compensation to maintain high-speed execution under target displacement. 

## Ablation Studies 

To answer the fifth question, we perform ablation studies to isolate the contributions of the main components in the proposed framework. We organize the analysis around two aspects that are central to overall system performance: (i) compensation ability under task-pose uncertainty (Sec. Ablation on Compensation Ability), and (ii) safe and precise motion generation during task execution (Sec. Ablation on Safe and Precise Motion Generation). Across these studies, we use mission success rate to reflect reliability, and operation time to reflect efficiency. Specifically, operation time is defined as the sum of mission cycle time within a scenario: 

Top =

> N

X

> i=1

Ci, (40) where N is the number of missions in the scenario and Ci

is the mission cycle time of mission i. Lower Top indicates higher efficiency. 

Ablation on Compensation Ability We ablate two key com-ponents that contribute to task-error compensation during trajectory generation, including (i) Time-assured Active Per-ception (TAP), and (ii) Compensation Margin Zone (CMZ). The experimental setting follows Sec. Evaluation of Effi-ciency and Reliability, except that we inject an initial target displacement of d = 0 .1 m to elicit compensation behavior. For each variant, we report mission success rate and opera-tion time as shown in Fig. 21 and Tab. 2. 

Impact of Time-assured Active Perception (TAP). TAP explicitly enforces a guaranteed observation window before manipulation, ensuring that the perception pipeline has sufficient time to produce a pose estimate. We compare against a variant without TAP ( w/o TAP ), which enforces an active-perception constraint only within a prescribed distance range (following Gao et al. Gao et al. (2023)). To stress-test practical perception latency Wen et al. (2024), we emulate perception initialization delays of 1 s (D1) and 2 s (D2) for a new target. To better characterize the observation conditions for online pose estimation and the remaining time budget for compensation before task execution, we  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

24 Journal Title XX(X) w/o TAP  w/o CMZ Ours(D1&2 * ) Ours(N * )

Figure 21. Distribution of operation time across four scenarios for our method and two ablations. 

Table 2. Ablation results on compensation ability. For each variant, we report the mission success rate (SR) across 240 missions and the mean operation time averaged over 40 runs (10 per scenario).                    

> Variants SR (%) Operation Time (s)
> w/o TAP(D1 ∗)90.42 119.87
> Ours(D1 ∗)99.58 123.24 w/o TAP(D2 ∗)76.67 120.23
> Ours(D2 ∗)99.17 122.91 w/o CMZ 88.75 119.97
> Ours(N ∗)100.0 123.56
> ∗D1 and D2 denote perception-module initialization delay of 1 s and 2 s, respectively. N denotes keeping the trajectory generator conditioned on the coarse initial pose.

additionally report effective observation time Teff , and time from first pose estimate to manipulation Tmani (Fig. 22 and Tab. 3). Here, Teff refers to the duration during which the object remains within the camera’s field of view without being occluded; Tmani refers to the time from the first available pose estimate to the start of manipulation. D1 * D2 *

Figure 22. Distribution of (a) effective observation time and (b) time from first pose estimate to manipulation, comparing our method and the variant without time-assured active perception (TAP), under perception initialization delays of 1 s (D1) and 2 s (D2). D1 and D2 denote the perception-module initialization delay of 1 s and 2 s, respectively. 

As shown in Tab. 3, our method maintains high success rates of 99.58% (D1) and 99.17% (D2), whereas w/o TAP 

drops to 90.42% and 76.67%, respectively. The difference 

Table 3. Ablation study of time-assured active perception (TAP) under different perception initialization delays. For each variant, results are grouped by mission outcome (Succ: success or failure), and we report the number of successful or failed missions (Cnt), together with the median and minimum (Min) values of effective observation time ( Teff ) and time from first pose estimate to manipulation ( Tmani ).                                                         

> Variants Succ Cnt Teff (s)Tmani (s)
> Median Min Median Min
> w/o TAP(D1 ∗)✓217 3.28 0.00 2.40 0.00
> ✗23 1.03 0.00 0.00 0.00
> ✓239 5.42 3.25 4.23 1.83 Ours(D1 ∗)✗14.38 4.38 3.25 3.25 w/o TAP(D2 ∗)✓184 3.47 1.73 1.50 0.25
> ✗56 1.82 0.00 0.12 0.00
> ✓238 5.44 3.40 3.30 1.38 Ours(D2 ∗)✗26.11 5.78 3.98 3.62
> ∗D1 and D2 denote perception-module initialization delay of 1 s and 2 s, respectively.

in guaranteed observation time explains this performance gap. In our formulation, we set the minimum required observation time to 3.0 s during trajectory optimization. Correspondingly, the shortest effective observation time of our method observed in evaluation is 3.25 s (Fig. 22(a) and Tab. 3). In contrast, failures under w/o TAP are associated with severely short effective observation time (median: 1.03 s in D1 and 1.82 s in D2). This leaves insufficient time for the perception pipeline to estimate the target pose before manipulation. As a result, the time gap between obtaining the first pose estimate and manipulation becomes near zero (Fig. 22(b) and Tab. 3; median: 0.00 s in D1 and 0.12 s in D2). This failure mode arises from an efficiency–observability trade-off: enforcing observability only over a distance interval is inadequate, as it cannot ensure sufficient observation time to obtain a pose estimate. In contrast, by enforcing a time-guaranteed observation time in spatial-temporal trajectory optimization, our method eliminates this failure mode with only a modest 2.52% increase in average operation time, from 120.05 s for w/o TAP to 123.08 s for our method (Tab. 2 and Fig. 21). 

Impact of Compensation Margin Zone (CMZ). CMZ requires that, at manipulation timestamps, the manipulator’s base lies within a region from which the end-effector can reach a neighborhood of the task pose (rather than only the coarse initial pose), accounting for both manipulator configuration and joint limits, thereby preserving kinematic margin for correcting target displacements. To evaluate its contribution to reliability under target displacement, we disable CMZ ( w/o CMZ ). Besides, to highlight the role of CMZ and eliminate interference from other variables, both this w/o CMZ variant and our method ( Ours(N) ) keep the trajectory generator conditioned on the coarse initial pose. As shown in Tab. 2, enabling CMZ increases the success rate from 88.75% to 100.0%, confirming that CMZ is crucial when the actual object pose deviates from the planned trajectory. Fig. 23 further examines how post-compensation position error correlates with (i) joint-limit distance and (ii) manipulability, computed from 240 picking tasks. Here,  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 25  

> Figure 23. Scatter plots comparing position error against joint limit distance (left two) and manipulability (right two), evaluated along the global trajectory (“Trajectory”) and after compensation (“Post-compensation”) at the manipulation instant, comparing our method and the variant without compensation margin zone (CMZ).

post-compensation position error is defined as the difference between the target grasping pose of the object and the end-effector pose after online compensation. For each task, we compute these metrics from two manipulator configurations: (1) the configuration at the manipulation instant on the planned trajectory (”trajectory”) and (2) the configuration at the manipulation instant after applying online compensation (”post-compensation”). Here, joint-limit distance measures how close the manipulator configuration is to its joint limits, defined as the minimum distance between each joint angle and its limit (smaller values indicate closer proximity to joint limits). Manipulability quantifies the local dexterity of the end-effector motion Yoshikawa (1985), with larger values indicating more isotropic motion capacity and better conditioning. Across all four scatter plots, each point corresponds to a single grasping trial, with marker color/type indicating the success or failure of different variants. The results in Fig. 23 demonstrate that post-compensation position error is strongly correlated with joint-limit proximity. As shown in the left two panels in Fig. 23, failures and large errors in the w/o CMZ variant (red markers) predominantly occur when the manipulator is forced to operate near its joint limits during compensation. Notably, the right two panels in Fig. 23 show that high manipulability at the manipulation instant on the trajectory is not sufficient for successful compensation: several tasks exhibit high manipulability (e.g., > 0.03 ) on trajectory yet still leave large position errors (e.g., > 0.06 m )after compensation because the required corrective motion pushes the manipulator toward joint limits. This observation underscores a fundamental limitation of manipulability. As it is a local, velocity-based metric, it cannot determine whether the end-effector can reach a pose at a finite offset from the current state, given joint limit constraints and the current manipulator configuration. CMZ addresses this limitation by sampling possible grasp candidates around the grasp pose derived from the coarse initial pose and constraining the manipulator base to lie within the region that can reach these candidates, calculated based on the inverse reachability map Vahrenkamp et al. (2013) that accounts for both joint limits and configuration. This preserves the kinematic margin for corrective motion. Consequently, CMZ yields a substantially larger fraction of tasks with small error (94.17% below 0.02 m versus 67.08% without CMZ). The remaining outliers are mainly due to discretization in the sampling of grasp candidates and the resolution of the reachability map. Importantly, CMZ Success  

> Knock target down after placing
> Push target away before grasping
> Fail to reach target pose
> Other
> Figure 24. Stacked bar chart showing success count with failure modes across 240 missions for our method and three ablation variants.

achieves these gains with only a minor increase of 2.99% in the average operation time, from 119.97 s for w/o CMZ to 123.56 s for our method (Tab. 2 and Fig. 21). 

Ablation on Safe and Precise Motion Generation Next, we evaluate the framework’s ability to generate precise, safe motions. We ablate (i) Efficient Safe Interaction (ESI), (ii) Elastic Collision Spheres (ECS), and (iii) end-effector trajectory warping (WARP). For (i) and (ii), the experimental setting follows Sec. Evaluation of Efficiency and Reliability, except that we use ground-truth task information (i.e., 

d = 0 m ) and disable both task-error compensation and the perception module, so that the results reflect motion-generation quality rather than compensation performance or pose-estimation accuracy. To evaluate (iii), we reuse the experimental setting of Impact of Compensation Margin Zone : we inject an initial target displacement of d = 0 .1 m 

to induce task-error compensation, and keep the trajectory generator conditioned on the coarse initial pose to highlight the role of WARP. 

Impact of Efficient Safe Interaction (ESI). ESI produces interaction-aware end-effector motions during the pre-grasp and post-place phases, aiming to prevent unintended object disturbance (e.g., toppling) during approach and retraction while still allowing the timing to be optimized. We disable ESI ( w/o ESI ) so that the end-effector approaches the grasp pose and retracts from the placement pose without enforcing safe interaction motion. As shown in Fig. 24, removing ESI reduces the success rate from 100% to 88.34%. Failures are dominated by object toppling, with 20 failures in post-place and 8 failures in   

> Prepared using sagej.cls 26 Journal Title XX(X)

pre-grasp. This failure pattern is attributable to the lack of explicit interaction-safety constraints between the end-effector and the manipulated object during approach and retraction, leading to unintended contacts that can cause the object to topple. In contrast, ESI constrains the end-effector to follow an interaction-safe motion primitive with optimized timing, which effectively suppresses toppling failures. Importantly, the associated operation time cost is modest: Fig. 25 shows that ESI increases operation time by approximately 1.02 s per ESI-constrained motion on average (8.42 s total overhead across 12 tasks containing 8– 10 ESI-constrained motions in each scenario), demonstrating a favorable trade-off between safety and efficiency. Ours  w/o ESI  w/o ECS  w/o WARP  

> Figure 25. Distribution of operation time for four method configurations across four scenarios.

Impact of Elastic Collision Sphere (ECS). We disable ECS (w/o ECS ) by removing the elastic relaxation mechanism and performing collision checking using fixed-radius collision spheres only. As shown in Fig. 24, this variant exhibits a sharp drop in success rate to 32.5%, with 159 out of 240 trials failing because the end-effector cannot reach the task target pose. Fig. 26 further shows markedly increased pose error at the manipulation instant: the median position error increases from 0.000181 m (Ours) to 0.051491 m ( w/o ECS ), and the median orientation error increases from 0.079 rad to 0.120 rad.  

> Figure 26. Distribution of end-effector position (left) and angle (right) errors between the planned and target manipulation pose, comparing our method with a variant without elastic collision spheres.

These failures arise from a feasibility conflict near the supporting surfaces. Strict collision constraints tend to separate the object from the support surface, whereas the task requires contact with the surface (e.g., placing the object on the surface or grasping it from the surface). As a result, the desired task pose can become infeasible under purely fixed collision checking, preventing the end-effector from reaching it. ECS resolves this contact–safety conflict via state-dependent radius modulation, which (i) preserves reachability of intended-contact poses and (ii) biases subsequent motion toward increasing clearance through radius recovery to prevent unintended contacts between object and supporting surfaces. 

Impact of End-effector Trajectory Warping (WARP). 

WARP re-targets the end-effector trajectory to the latest pose estimate while explicitly preserving the pre- and post-task safety motions generated by the planner. In particular, by smoothly blending into a rigidly re-targeted safe interaction segment, WARP maintains the relative motion pattern that avoids unintended contacts (e.g., end-effector pushing the target away before grasping) during compensation. We disable WARP ( w/o WARP ), and the desired end-effector pose is directly switched to the updated task target from 1 s before manipulation until 0.5 s after manipulation, without the safety-preserving warping and blending around the task-critical phase. As shown in Fig. 24, removing WARP reduces the success rate to 85.84% (206/240), with failures dominated by the end effector pushing the target away before reaching the grasp pose (31/240). The failures occur because, without WARP, the end-effector is driven directly toward the latest pose estimate without explicitly accounting for contacts between the end-effector and the object. As a result, the end-effector often pushes the object away from its original pose just before grasping, leading to grasp failures. In contrast, enabling WARP preserves the pre- and post-task safety segments while smoothly re-targeting them to the latest pose estimate, which avoids these failures. 

## Conclusion 

Our results validate a unified solution to the long-standing trade-off between operational efficiency and execution reli-ability in mobile manipulation. Whereas efficiency demands aggressive, continuous motion, reliability typically requires conservative stop-and-verify behaviors. By explicitly cou-pling these objectives, our framework demonstrates that (i) continuous whole-body coordination is sustainable even in constrained, dynamic environments, and (ii) efficient execu-tion need not compromise robustness, even under dynamic disturbances, perception, and control errors. The observed performance advantage over state-of-the-art methods stems from the departure of our framework from traditional decoupled approaches, which typically separate base navigation from manipulation or optimize motion efficiency without regard for execution constraints. Purely efficiency-driven planners often fail because they push robots to the limits of their kinematics, shrink perception windows, and neglect interaction safety. In contrast, our reliability-aware trajectory generation treats reliability as a proactive objective rather than a reactive afterthought. By explicitly encoding sufficient observability (TAP), kinematic margin (CMZ), and interaction safety (ESI/ECS) in trajectory optimization, the planner generates motions that are not only efficient but also inherently correctable and interaction-safe during execution. Furthermore, our results highlight the need for ahierarchical architecture to address the frequency mismatch between whole-body planning and real-time compensation. The proposed high-frequency execution layer effectively converts the planner’s long-horizon structure into immediate physical responsiveness. By smoothly transitioning between global trajectory tracking and local task-error compensation,  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 27 

the system preserves the safe-interaction structure of the planned trajectory while adapting to disturbances and updated estimates online. Ultimately, this synergy allows the system to accommodate the large discrepancies between coarse priors and refined estimates (as seen in the domino experiments) without interrupting the continuous flow of successive tasks. Beyond immediate performance gains, our framework can serve as a robust physical grounding layer for high-level task generation modules. We complement such generators Huang et al. (2024); Hsu et al. (2025), which excel at semantic reasoning and predicating object-centric goals or desired end-effector motions, by translating the task output into safe and efficient whole-body motions. This capability bridges the critical gap between abstract task generation and physical reality, enabling efficient and reliable execution in complex 3D environments. Although our framework supports online replanning, its computational efficiency could be further improved via GPU acceleration for collision checking, inverse kinematics, and trajectory optimization Sundaralingam et al. (2023), which would accelerate trajectory generation by orders of magnitude compared to CPU-based approaches Schulman et al. (2014). Furthermore, although our framework can react to dynamic obstacles, our long-horizon whole-body optimization currently assumes a coarse prior map of the static environment for collision checking. This mirrors human behavior: efficient motions typically rely on a rough model of the surroundings, while perception handles local, transient changes. Operating in a completely unknown complex 3D environment would require an active mapping strategy Pilania and Gupta (2018) to actively resolve workspace occlusions and verify free space along the intended manipulation trajectory. To extend our framework to other platforms, one mainly needs to replace the platform-specific kinematic and dynamic models (e.g., forward kinematics and platform dynamic limits) used by the whole-body optimizer and controller. For platforms operating on uneven terrain, it should additionally incorporate terrain-aware reachability map Birr et al. (2022) and traversability representations Xu et al. (2023); Li et al. (2025) to identify feasible regions and constrain base motion accordingly. Overall, our framework demonstrates that reliability can be effectively embedded into efficient whole-body motion for continuous mobile manipulation. We hope this work will pave the way for robotic systems capable of seamlessly integrating efficiency and reliability for continuous mobile manipulation in the real world. 

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests 

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. 

References 

Abdi H and Williams LJ (2010) Principal component analysis. 

Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: computational statistics 2(4): 433–459. AgileX (2026) Tracer ros. URL https://github.com/ agilexrobotics/tracer_ros .Birr T, Pohl C and Asfour T (2022) Oriented surface reachability maps for robot placement. In: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 3357–3363. Burger B, Maffettone PM, Gusev VV, Aitchison CM, Bai Y, Wang X, Li X, Alston BM, Li B, Clowes R et al. (2020) A mobile robotic chemist. Nature 583(7815): 237–241. Burgess-Limerick B, Haviland J, Lehnert C and Corke P (2024) Reactive base control for on-the-move mobile manipulation in dynamic environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 

9(3): 2048–2055. Burgess-Limerick B, Lehnert C, Leitner J and Corke P (2023) An architecture for reactive mobile manipulation on-the-move. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 1623–1629. Dai T, Vijayakrishnan S, Szczypi´ nski FT, Ayme JF, Simaei E, Fellowes T, Clowes R, Kotopanov L, Shields CE, Zhou Z et al. (2024) Autonomous mobile robots for exploratory synthetic chemistry. Nature 635(8040): 890–897. Deng W, Chen H, Ye B, Chen H, Li Z and Lyu X (2025) Whole-body integrated motion planning for aerial manipulators. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 41: 6661–6679. Diankov R (2010) Automated construction of robotic manipulation programs . PhD Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Dijkstra EW (2022) A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. In: Edsger Wybe Dijkstra: his life, work, and legacy .pp. 287–290. Dolgov D, Thrun S, Montemerlo M and Diebel J (2010) Path planning for autonomous vehicles in unknown semi-structured environments. The international journal of robotics research 

29(5): 485–501. Du X, Zhou S and Schoellig AP (2023) Hierarchical task model predictive control for sequential mobile manipulation tasks. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 9(2): 1270–1277. Frison G and Diehl M (2020) Hpipm: a high-performance quadratic programming framework for model predictive control. IFAC-PapersOnLine 53(2): 6563–6569. Gao Y, Ji J, Wang Q, Jin R, Lin Y, Shang Z, Cao Y, Shen S, Xu C and Gao F (2023) Adaptive tracking and perching for quadrotor in dynamic scenarios. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 40: 499– 519. Haviland J, S¨ underhauf N and Corke P (2022) A holistic approach to reactive mobile manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7(2): 3122–3129. Heins A and Schoellig AP (2023) Keep it upright: Model predictive control for nonprehensile object transportation with obstacle avoidance on a mobile manipulator. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8(12): 7986–7993. Hsu CC, Wen B, Xu J, Narang Y, Wang X, Zhu Y, Biswas J and Birchfield S (2025) Spot: Se (3) pose trajectory diffusion for object-centric manipulation. In: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 4853–4860. Huang W, Wang C, Li Y, Zhang R and Fei-Fei L (2024) Rekep: Spatio-temporal reasoning of relational keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652 .Ichnowski J, Avigal Y, Satish V and Goldberg K (2020) Deep learning can accelerate grasp-optimized motion planning.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

28 Journal Title XX(X) 

Science Robotics 5(48): eabd7710. Jauhri S, Lueth S and Chalvatzaki G (2024) Active-perceptive motion generation for mobile manipulation. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, pp. 1413–1419. Johns RL, Wermelinger M, Mascaro R, Jud D, Hurkxkens I, Vasey L, Chli M, Gramazio F, Kohler M and Hutter M (2023) A framework for robotic excavation and dry stone construction using on-site materials. Science Robotics 8(84): eabp9758. Koide K (2024) small gicp: Efficient and parallel algorithms for point cloud registration. Journal of Open Source Software 

9(100): 6948. DOI:10.21105/joss.06948. Li X, Xu L, Huang X, Xue D, Zhang Z, Han Z, Xu C, Cao Y and Gao F (2025) Seb-naver: A se (2)-based local navigation framework for car-like robots on uneven terrain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02412 .Liang T, Zeng Y, Xie J and Zhou B (2025) Dynamicpose: Real-time and robust 6d object pose tracking for fast-moving cameras and objects. In: 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . pp. 2424–2431. DOI: 10.1109/IROS60139.2025.11247403. Livox (2026) Livox mid-360 user manual. URL https://www. livoxtech.com/mid-360 .Missura M, Roychoudhury A and Bennewitz M (2022) Fast-replanning motion control for non-holonomic vehicles with aborting a. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 10267– 10274. NVIDIA (2026) Nvidia isaac sim documentation. URL 

https://docs.isaacsim.omniverse.nvidia. com/4.2.0/index.html .Orbbec (2026) Orbbec femto bolt user manual. URL https: //www.orbbec.com/products/tof-camera/ femto-bolt .Pan M, Zhang J, Wu T, Zhao Y, Gao W and Dong H (2025) Omnimanip: Towards general robotic manipulation via object-centric interaction primitives as spatial constraints. In: 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . pp. 17359–17369. Pilania V and Gupta K (2015) A hierarchical and adaptive mobile manipulator planner with base pose uncertainty. Autonomous Robots 39(1): 65–85. Pilania V and Gupta K (2018) Mobile manipulator planning under uncertainty in unknown environments. The International Journal of Robotics Research 37(2-3): 316–339. Reister F, Grotz M and Asfour T (2022) Combining navigation and manipulation costs for time-efficient robot placement in mobile manipulation tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 

7(4): 9913–9920. Rockafellar RT (1974) Augmented lagrange multiplier functions and duality in nonconvex programming. SIAM Journal on Control 12(2): 268–285. Schulman J, Duan Y, Ho J, Lee A, Awwal I, Bradlow H, Pan J, Patil S, Goldberg K and Abbeel P (2014) Motion planning with sequential convex optimization and convex collision checking. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research 33(9): 1251– 1270. Shen W, Garrett CR, Kumar N, Goyal A, Hermans T, Kaelbling LP, Lozano-P´ erez T and Ramos F (2025) Differentiable GPU-Parallelized Task and Motion Planning. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems . Los Angeles, CA, USA. DOI: 10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.050. Spahn M, Brito B and Alonso-Mora J (2021) Coupled mobile manipulation via trajectory optimization with free space decomposition. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 12759–12765. Spahn M, Pezzato C, Salmi C, Dekker R, Wang C, Pek C, Kober J, Alonso-Mora J, Corbato CH and Wisse M(2024) Demonstrating adaptive mobile manipulation in retail environments. Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and System XX .Spahn M, Wisse M and Alonso-Mora J (2023) Dynamic optimization fabrics for motion generation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39(4): 2684–2699. Sundaralingam B, Hari SKS, Fishman A, Garrett C, Van Wyk K, Blukis V, Millane A, Oleynikova H, Handa A, Ramos F et al. (2023) Curobo: Parallelized collision-free robot motion generation. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 8112–8119. Thakar S, Fang L, Shah B and Gupta S (2018) Towards time-optimal trajectory planning for pick-and-transport operation with a mobile manipulator. In: 2018 IEEE 14th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) .IEEE, pp. 981–987. Thakar S, Rajendran P, Kabir AM and Gupta SK (2020a) Manipulator motion planning for part pickup and transport operations from a moving base. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 19(1): 191–206. Thakar S, Rajendran P, Kim H, Kabir AM and Gupta SK (2020b) Accelerating bi-directional sampling-based search for motion planning of non-holonomic mobile manipulators. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 6711–6717. Unitree (2026) Unitree z1 user manual. URL https://www. unitree.com/cn/z1 .Vahrenkamp N, Asfour T and Dillmann R (2013) Robot placement based on reachability inversion. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . IEEE, pp. 1970– 1975. Verschueren R, Frison G, Kouzoupis D, Frey J, van Duijkeren N, Zanelli A, Novoselnik B, Albin T, Quirynen R and Diehl M (2021) acados – a modular open-source framework for fast embedded optimal control. Mathematical Programming Computation .Vosylius V and Johns E (2025) Instant policy: In-context imitation learning via graph diffusion. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Wang J, Jin Y, Shi J, Li D, Sun F, Luo D, Fang B et al. (2025) Ehc-mm: Embodied holistic control for mobile manipulation. In: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 13330–13336. Wang Z, Jia Y, Shi L, Wang H, Zhao H, Li X, Zhou J, Ma J and Zhou G (2024) Arm-constrained curriculum learning for loco-manipulation of a wheel-legged robot. In: 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 10770–10776. Wang Z, Zhou X, Xu C and Gao F (2022) Geometrically constrained trajectory optimization for multicopters. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 38(5): 3259–3278. DOI:10.1109/ TRO.2022.3160022.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 29 

Wen B, Yang W, Kautz J and Birchfield S (2024) Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. In: 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . pp. 17868–17879. Wu C, Wang R, Song M, Gao F, Mei J and Zhou B(2024) Real-time whole-body motion planning for mobile manipulators using environment-adaptive search and spatial-temporal optimization. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 1369–1375. Wu J, Antonova R, Kan A, Lepert M, Zeng A, Song S, Bohg J, Rusinkiewicz S and Funkhouser T (2023) Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with large language models. 

Autonomous Robots 47(8): 1087–1102. Xu J, Domae Y, Ueshiba T, Wan W and Harada K (2021) Planning a minimum sequence of positions for picking parts from multiple trays using a mobile manipulator. IEEE Access 9: 165526– 165541. Xu J, Harada K, Wan W, Ueshiba T and Domae Y (2020) Planning an efficient and robust base sequence for a mobile manipulator performing multiple pick-and-place tasks. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, pp. 11018–11024. Xu L, Chai K, Han Z, Liu H, Xu C, Cao Y and Gao F (2023) An efficient trajectory planner for car-like robots on uneven terrain. In: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 2853–2860. Xu L, Wong C, Zhang M, Lin J, Hou J and Gao F (2025) Topay: Efficient trajectory planning for differential drive mobile manipulators via topological paths search and arc length-yaw parameterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02761 .Xu W, Cai Y, He D, Lin J and Zhang F (2022) Fast-lio2: Fast direct lidar-inertial odometry. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 38(4): 2053–2073. Yokoyama N, Ha S and Batra D (2021) Success weighted by completion time: A dynamics-aware evaluation criteria for embodied navigation. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, pp. 1562–1569. Yoshikawa T (1985) Manipulability of robotic mechanisms. The international journal of Robotics Research 4(2): 3–9. Zhang F and Demiris Y (2022) Learning garment manipulation policies toward robot-assisted dressing. Science robotics 7(65): eabm6010. Zhang J, Gireesh N, Wang J, Fang X, Xu C, Chen W, Dai L and Wang H (2024) Gamma: Graspability-aware mobile manipulation policy learning based on online grasping pose fusion. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 1399–1405. Zhou B, Gao F, Wang L, Liu C and Shen S (2019) Robust and efficient quadrotor trajectory generation for fast autonomous flight. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 4(4): 3529–3536. Zimmermann S, Poranne R and Coros S (2021) Go fetch!-dynamic grasps using boston dynamics spot with external robotic arm. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, pp. 4488–4494. Zucker M, Ratliff N, Dragan AD, Pivtoraiko M, Klingensmith M, Dellin CM, Bagnell JA and Srinivasa SS (2013) Chomp: Covariant hamiltonian optimization for motion planning. The International journal of robotics research 32(9-10): 1164– 1193. 

## Appendix A: Index to Multimedia Extensions 

The relevant extension videos associated with this paper are shown in Table 4. 

Table 4. Multimedia Extensions Extension Type Description 

1 Video Overview of the proposed system. 

2 Video Mobile manipulation in constrained and dynamic environments. 

3 Video Reliability validation in long-horizon continuous tasks. 

4 Video Base-arm coordination for complex tasks with diverse end-effector constraints. 

## Appendix B: Task, Feasibility and Safety Constraints 

## Task Satisfaction 

To ensure the end-effector follows each task trajectory, task constraints have to be introduced (Fig. 5(v)). For each task i, ∀i ∈ 1, · · · , N T , we constrain the end-effector pose 

fFK ,ee (x(¯ tκi, s + τ )) to match task end-effector trajectory 

¯P t,i (τ ) over the task duration τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ]:

Htp,i (q[s](t), T )= ∥[f −1

> FK ,ee

(x(¯ tκi, s + τ )) · ¯P t,i (τ )] p∥22,

∀τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ], ∀i ∈ { 1, · · · , N T }

(41) 

GtR,i (q[s](t), T )= fd, R([ ¯P t,i (τ )] R, [fFK ,ee (x(¯ tκi, s + τ ))] R) − do

∀τ ∈ [0 , T T ,i ], ∀i ∈ { 1, · · · , N T }

(42) where [·]p : SE (3) → R3 and [·]R : SE (3) → SO (3) extract the position and rotation component of the transformation matrix, respectively, and do is the orientation tolerance. Finally, to allocate sufficient time for task execution, we enforce: 

HTT ,i (q[s](t), T ) = 

> κi, e−1

X

> j=κi, s

Tj − TT ,i , ∀i. (43) Furthermore, for instant tasks (e.g., pick or place tasks) where the task start and end times coincide, i.e., ¯tκi, s = ¯ tκi, e ,it is crucial to constrain the end-effector’s instantaneous velocity to ensure stable grasping or placing. We enforce linear and angular velocity constraints at the specific time instance t = ¯ tκi, s :

Gv (q[s](t), T ) = ∥Jv (x(t)) vmm (t)∥2 − dee ,v ,

Gω (q[s](t), T ) = ∥Jω (x(t)) vmm (t)∥2 − dee ,ω ,

∀t = ¯ tκi, s , if ¯tκi, s = ¯ tκi, e , ∀i ∈ { 1, · · · , N T }

(44)  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

30 Journal Title XX(X) 

where Jv and Jω correspond to the linear and angular parts of the geometric Jacobian. vmm (t) denotes the generalized velocity vector of the mobile manipulator (including base and manipulator joints). The terms dee ,v and dee ,ω represent the tolerance for linear and angular velocities, respectively. 

## Dynamic Feasibility 

To ensure that the planned trajectory is dynamically feasible for the mobile manipulator, we impose wheel and joint constraints along the entire trajectory t ∈ [0 , ¯tM ] (Fig. 5(vi)). For the differential-drive base, we bound the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the left and right wheels: 

Gωl(r)

 q[s](t), T  = ω2

> l(r)

  ˙qb, ¨qb

 − ω2

> w, max

, (45a) 

Gαl(r)

 q[s](t), T  = α2

> l(r)

  ˙qb, ¨qb, ... 

q b

 − α2

> w, max

, (45b) where ωw, max and αw, max denote the maximum wheel’s angular velocity and acceleration, respectively. The wheel’s angular velocity and acceleration are given by 

ωl(r)( ˙ qb, ¨qb) = 12rw



2 ∥ ˙qb∥2 −

> (+)

dw ωb( ˙ qb, ¨qb)



, (46) 

αl(r)( ˙ qb, ¨qb, ... 

q b)= 12rw

2 ˙q⊤ 

> b

¨qb

∥ ˙qb∥2

−

> (+)

dw αb( ˙ qb, ¨qb, ... 

q b)

!

, (47) 

ωb( ˙ qb, ¨qb) = ¨q⊤ 

> b

B ˙qb

˙q⊤ 

> b

˙qb

, (48) 

αb( ˙ qb, ¨qb, ... 

q b)=

... 

q ⊤ 

> b

B ˙qb

˙q⊤ 

> b

˙qb

−

2



¨q⊤ 

> b

B ˙qb

  

¨q⊤ 

> b

˙qb



˙q⊤ 

> b

˙qb

2 , (49) with rw the wheel radius and dw the distance between the two wheels. In our experiments, rw = 0 .06 m and dw =0.2624 m. The operator −

> (+)

indicates that the minus sign is used for the left wheel l and the plus sign for the right wheel r.

B := 

0 −11 0



(50) is an auxiliary matrix introduced for notational convenience. Moreover, when ∥ ˙qb∥2 = 0 , the expressions for wheel angular velocity and acceleration become ill-defined, effectively leading to unbounded wheel rates. To avoid this singularity, we enforce a lower bound on the base translational velocity: 

G¯v

 q[s](t), T  = v2min − ˙q⊤ 

> b

˙qb, (51) where vmin ∈ R>0 is a small positive constant. For each joint l of the manipulator, where l ∈ { 1, . . . , L} ,we enforce joint position, velocity, and acceleration limits: 

Gqθ

 q[s](t), T  = ql − ql, max , (52a) 

Gq¯θ

 q[s](t), T  = ql, min − ql, (52b) 

Gqω

 q[s](t), T  = ˙ q2 

> l

− ω2

> l, max

, (52c) 

Gqα

 q[s](t), T  = ¨ q2 

> l

− α2

> l, max

, (52d) where ql, min and ql, max denote the minimum and maximum joint angles of joint l, and ωl, max and αl, max denote the maximum joint angular velocity and angular acceleration, respectively. 

## Collision Avoidance 

To ensure the safety of the mobile manipulator in complex 3D environments, we enforce collision avoidance constraints between the robot and obstacles (Fig. 5(vii)). We approximate the robot’s geometry by representing each link 

l ∈ { 0, . . . , L} (where link 0 denotes the mobile base) as a set of ml collision spheres. For the j-th sphere on link l

with radius rl, its center position pl,j (t) in the world frame is computed via forward kinematics: 

pl,j (t) = [ fFK ,l (x(t)) · lpl,j ]p, (53) where lpl,j is the position of the sphere center relative to the link frame l.The environmental safety is maintained using an ESDF map. To ensure safety, we impose a constraint requiring each collision sphere to maintain a minimum distance of ds from the environment: 

Gcol ,l,j (q[s](t), T ) = rl + ds − DESDF (pl,j (t)) ,

∀ l ∈ { 0, . . . , L} , ∀ j ∈ { 1, . . . , m l}, (54) To avoid collision with dynamic obstacles, we approx-imate each moving obstacle as a 2D cylinder with radius 

rdy . The obstacle’s future position, denoted as pdy ,i (t), is provided by the perception module as a predicted trajectory, where t represents the time elapsed relative to the start of the planned trajectory. Specifically, in this work, we estimate the obstacle’s initial position and velocity, and derive pdy ,i (t)

under the assumption of constant linear velocity. The colli-sion avoidance constraint is enforced as: 

Gdy ,l,j,i (q[s](t), T ) = rl + rdy + ds

− ∥ pl,j (t) 

> xy

− pdy ,i (t)∥2,

∀ l ∈ { 0, . . . , L} , ∀ j ∈ { 1, . . . , m l}, ∀ i. 

(55) 

## Self-Collision Avoidance 

To prevent self-collisions (Fig. 5(vii)), we impose constraints that maintain a minimum distance of dself between all pairs of collision spheres belonging to different links: 

Gself (q[s](t), T ) = rl′ + rl + dself 

− l′

pl′,i − l′

T l(qm) lpl,j 2

,

∀ l′ ∈ { 0, . . . , l − 1}, ∀ l ∈ { 1, . . . , L} ,

∀ i ∈ { 1, . . . , m l′ }, ∀ j ∈ { 1, . . . , m l},

(56) where l′

pl′,i is the i-th collision point on link l′ expressed in frame l′, lpl,j is the j-th collision point on link l expressed in frame l, and l′

T l(qm) is the homogeneous transform from frame l to frame l′ obtained from the mobile manipulator forward kinematics.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 31 

## Appendix C: Visibility Constraints 

In this section, we provide the detailed formulations for the visibility constraints Gg,i (q[s](t), T , T p) mentioned in the main text, where g ∈ { va, vd, vo}. For a task necessitating task pose estimation i ∈ I perc , let ptgt ,i := [ P t,i (0)] p ∈ R3

denote the position of the target to be observed. We define the camera center position pc(t) and the camera optical axis direction zc(t) using the forward kinematics function for camera pose fFK ,c(·) associated with the robot state x(t):

pc(t) := [ fFK ,c(x(t))] p, zc(t) := [ fFK ,c(x(t))] z .

The vector from the camera center to the target is defined as vct,i (t) := ptgt ,i − pc(t). The constraints below are enforced over the perception interval t ∈ [¯ tκi, s − Tp,i , ¯tκi, s ).

## Field-of-View (FOV) Constraint 

To ensure the target projects onto the camera image plane, we approximate the camera’s field of view as a cone with a half-angle of θfov (derived from the camera intrinsics with a safety margin). Consequently, the angle between the camera optical axis zc(t) and the target vector vct,i (t) must be within this limit. The constraint is formulated as: 

Gva,i (q[s](t), T , T p) = cos( θfov ) − zc(t)⊤vct,i (t)

∥vct,i (t)∥2

. (57) 

## Maximum Sensing Range Constraint 

To guarantee reliable depth measurement, the distance to the target must not exceed the maximum effective range, denoted by dmax . This is enforced by: 

Gvd,i (q[s](t), T , T p) = ∥vct,i (t)∥22 − d2max . (58) 

## Occlusion-free Constraint 

To ensure the line-of-sight (LoS) from the camera to the target is not occluded by obstacles, we approximate the viewing cone using a set of Kv spheres positioned along the target vector vct,i (t). For each k ∈ { 1, . . . , K v − 1}, the center of the k-th sphere is given by: 

pk,i (t) = pc(t) + kKv

vct,i (t). (59) The radius of the spheres increases linearly from the camera to the target to conservatively cover the LoS, defined as 

rk,i = kKv rtgt ,i , where rtgt ,i is the bounding radius of the target region. The occlusion-free requirement is enforced using the ESDF: 

Gvo,i,k (q[s](t), T , T p) = rk,i − DESDF (pk,i (t)) , ∀k. 

(60) This formulation ensures that every sphere along the LoS maintains a safe clearance from the environment. 

## Appendix D: Sampling Strategy for Pcmz ,i 

The set Pcmz ,i (τ ) is designed to approximate the local neighborhood of task-pose perturbations that may arise during execution due to uncertainty in perception, control, and target motion. Its role is to encode the desired compensation margin around the nominal task pose. The specific sampling scheme is not unique and can be adapted to different robots, tasks, or uncertainty models. Here we describe the sampling strategy used in our implementation. Given the nominal task end-effector pose ¯P t,i (τ ), with position ¯p ∈ R3 and orientation ¯R ∈ SO(3) , we construct 

Pcmz ,i (τ ) by sampling perturbations in both position and orientation. 

Position sampling. To model translational uncertainty, we sample positions on a sphere of radius rcmz centered at 

¯p. Using spherical coordinates, the sampled positions are defined as 

pj,k = ¯ p + rcmz 



cos θk sin ϕj

sin θk sin ϕj

cos ϕj

 ,j = 0 , . . . , N ϕ, k = 0 , . . . , N θ ,

(61) where 

ϕj = j∆ϕ, θk = k∆θ, 

and the index bounds are 

Nϕ =

 2π

∆ϕ



, Nθ =

j π

∆θ

k

.

Here, rcmz determines the translational compensation margin, while ∆ϕ and ∆θ control the angular sampling resolution. 

Orientation sampling. To capture practically relevant variations around the nominal task pose while keeping the sampling tractable, we first apply a fixed tilt offset δtilt about the local x-axis: 

R′ = ¯RR x(δtilt ), (62) where Rx(·) denotes the elemental rotation matrix about the 

x-axis. We then generate rotational variations by rotating R′

around the nominal approach axis 

zt = [ ¯R]z

using discrete angles ψm = m∆ψ:

Rm = Rot( zt, ψ m)R′, m = 0 , . . . , M, (63) where 

M =

 2π

∆ψ



,

and Rot( n, θ ) denotes the rotation matrix corresponding to a rotation of angle θ about axis n. The parameter δtilt specifies the magnitude of the nominal tilt perturbation, while ∆ψ

controls the resolution of rotational sampling about the approach direction. 

Valid CMZ samples. Each sampled pose is formed by combining a sampled position with a sampled orientation. Any sample that results in a collision with the environment is discarded. The remaining collision-free poses constitute the set Pcmz ,i (τ ).

Adaptive margin reduction. In some workspace con-figurations, the reachable-set intersection induced by the requested compensation margin may be empty. This indi-cates that the prescribed translational margin rcmz is too large to be supported kinematically at the current task pose. In such cases, we iteratively reduce rcmz and reconstruct  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

32 Journal Title XX(X) 

Pcmz ,i (τ ) until the corresponding intersection set becomes nonempty. The resulting radius can be interpreted as the largest feasible local compensation margin under the current workspace constraints. The parameters (rcmz , δ tilt , ∆ϕ, ∆θ, ∆ψ) determine the size and resolution of the sampled task-pose neighborhood, and therefore control the trade-off between robustness and conservativeness of the resulting Compensation Margin Zone. 

## Appendix E: Controller Formulation 

We adopt a cascaded MPC architecture (Fig. 9A) to achieve high-rate reactivity. At each control cycle, a mobile-base MPC first computes an optimal predicted base trajectory by minimizing the tracking error relative to the global trajectory, with collision avoidance constraints enforced. Building on this optimal predicted base trajectory, a manipulator MPC then optimizes the joint control input to track the global trajectory and compensate for task error during the task-critical phase while preserving safe interaction motion. Both MPC modules operate in a receding-horizon manner, where only the first control input from each optimized result is executed. 

## State and Input 

Define the whole-body control input as u = [ u⊤ 

> b

, u⊤

> m

]⊤,where ub = [ vb, ω b]⊤ denotes the mobile-base commands consisting of the linear velocity vb and the angular velocity 

ωb, and um = ˙ qm denotes the manipulator joint veloc-ity command. Despite the robot receiving velocity-level commands u, directly optimizing u in MPC typically yields piecewise-constant velocity profiles that abruptly change at each control cycle, leading to impulsive accel-erations and poor dynamic feasibility. To obtain contin-uous and dynamically feasible executable commands u

in the implementation of receding-horizon, we adopt an extended model by augmenting the nominal state x pre-sented in Sec. Trajectory Representation to ¯x = [¯ x⊤ 

> b

, ¯x⊤

> m

]⊤

Heins and Schoellig (2023), where ¯xb = [ qx, q y , ψ, v b, ω b]⊤

and ¯xm = [ q⊤

> m

, ˙q⊤

> m

]⊤. Accordingly, the MPC decision vari-able is defined as ¯u = [¯ u⊤ 

> b

, ¯u⊤

> m

]⊤, where ¯ub = [ ab, α b]⊤

consists of the linear acceleration ab and the angu-lar acceleration αb, and ¯um = ¨ qm. This dynamic exten-sion yields velocity-level commands u that are contin-uous, while enabling direct enforcement of acceleration bounds. Finally, define ¯xref (t) = [¯ xref  

> b

(t)⊤, ¯xref  

> m

(t)⊤]⊤ and 

¯uref (t) = [¯ uref  

> b

(t)⊤, ¯uref  

> m

(t)⊤]⊤ as the reference state and control input derived from trajectory x(t).

## Mobile Base MPC 

The mobile base MPC computes the optimal mobile base input to track the reference xref  

> b

(t) while avoiding dynamic obstacles. The optimal control problem is formulated as: 

min   

> ¯Ub
> N−1

X

> k=0

lb

 ¯xb,k , ¯ub,k 

 + lb,N 

 ¯xb,N 



s.t. ¯xb,0 = ¯ xmeas  

> b

,

¯xb,k +1 = f b

 ¯xb,k , ¯ub,k 

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N − 1,

X − 

> b

⩽ ¯xb,k ⩽ X + 

> b

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N, 

U− 

> b

⩽ ¯ub,k ⩽ U+ 

> b

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N − 1,

(64) where ¯xmeas  

> b

is the current measured state, ¯U b =

{¯ub,0, · · · , ¯ub,N −1} is the set of decision variables for the input of the mobile-base. f b represents the differential drive dynamics. The sets X ± 

> b

and U± 

> b

define admissible state and input bounds, respectively. The cost function is defined as: 

lb (¯ xb,k , ub,k ) = ¯xb,k − xref  

> b

(tk) Qb

+ ¯ub,k − uref  

> b

(tk) Rb

+ lb,dy (¯ xb,k ) ,

(65) 

lb,N 

 ¯xb,N 

 = ¯xb,N − xref  

> b

(tN ) Qb,N 

, (66) where Qb, Qb,N , Rb ⪰ 0 are weighting matrices. The term 

lb,dy enforces collision avoidance with dynamic obstacles. Each dynamic obstacle is modeled as 2D cylinders with position pdy ,i (t) ∈ R2 with radius rdy . The mobile base is modeled as Nb collision spheres with radius r0. p0,m (¯ xb)

returns the position of the m-th collision sphere when the mobile base at state ¯xb. ds,0 = r0 + rdy + ds as the required safe distance between the collision sphere and the dynamic obstacle. Define Ddy ,m,i (¯ xb) := ds,0 − p0,m (¯ xb) 

> xy

−

pdy ,i (tk) . lb,dy is defined as: 

lb,dy (¯ xb,k ) = ωdy 

X

> iNb

X

> m=1

max 



0, D dy ,m,i (¯ xb,k )

2

.

(67) Solving Eq. (64) yielded the optimal state trajectory for the mobile base, denoted as ¯X∗ 

> b

= {¯x∗

> b,0

, · · · , ¯x∗ 

> b,N

}.

## Manipulator MPC 

Conditioned on the optimal base motion ¯X∗

> b

, the manipu-lator MPC optimizes the best joint input. The manipulator MPC is formulated as: 

min   

> ¯Um
> N−1

X

> k=0

lm

 ¯x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k , ¯um,k 

 + lm,N 

 ¯x∗ 

> b,N

, ¯xm,N 



s.t. ¯xm,0 = ¯ xmeas  

> m

,

¯xm,k +1 = f m

 ¯xm,k , ¯um,k 

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N − 1,

X − 

> m

⩽ ¯xm,k ⩽ X + 

> m

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N 

U− 

> m

⩽ ¯um,k ⩽ U+ 

> m

, ∀k = 0 , . . . , N − 1.

(68) 

¯xmeas  

> m

is the measured current state. The function f m

represents the manipulator dynamics. The sets X ± 

> m

and U±

> m

impose manipulator state and input bounds. The manipulator MPC employs a hybrid cost function that integrates smooth switching between whole-body trajectory tracking and end-effector task error compensation with dynamic collision  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Wu et al. 33 

avoidance, expressed as: 

lm

 ¯x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k , um,k 

 =σs(tk) ltrack (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k , um,k )+ σee (tk) ltask (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k )+ lm,dy (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k ).

(69) 

ltrack (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k , um,k ) = ¯xm,k − ¯xref  

> m

(tk) Qm

+ ¯um,k − ¯uref  

> m

(tk) Rm . (70) penalizes deviations from the global trajectory, where 

Qm, Rm ⪰ 0 are weighting matrices. 

ltask (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k ) = [eee ,k ]p Qp

− ωR · tr  [eee ,k ]R

, (71) penalizes the error between the current end-effector pose 

P ee ,k = fFK ,ee (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k ) and the warped reference task trajectory P warp ee ,k = P warp ee (tk) (Eq. (34)), where eee ,k =

P −1ee ,k P warp ee ,k represents the pose error. Qp ⪰ 0 and ωR ≥ 0

are position and orientation weight. The smooth transition between ltrack and ltask is governed by complementary switching parameters σs, σ ee ∈ [0 , 1] (Eq. (35)). Similar to the base MPC, lm,dy penalizes the proximity of the manipulator links to dynamic obstacles. We approximate the collision model of the manipulator as a set of collision spheres with rj,m the radius of the 

m-th sphere on link j. pj,m (¯ xb, ¯xm) denotes the position of the m-th collision sphere on link j in world frame at state (¯ xb, ¯xm) using forward kinematics. Define 

ds,j,m = rj,m + rdy + ds, Ddy ,j,m,i (¯ x∗

> m,k

, ¯xb,k ) = 

ds,j,m − pj,m (¯ x∗

> b,k

, ¯xm,k ) 

> xy

− pdy ,i (tk) . lm,dy is defined as: 

lm,dy (¯ x∗

> m,k

, ¯xb,k )= ωdy 

X

> i
> L

X

> j=1
> Nj

X

> m=1

max 



0, D dy ,j,m,i (¯ x∗

> m,k

, ¯xb,k )

2

.

(72) 

## Appendix F: Task-trajectory Consistency 

When the search expands to a node corresponding to a subsequent keypoint pn within the same task (implying the existence of a predecessor pn−1 in the same task), we must verify that the transition does not deviate excessively from the nominal task trajectory (e.g., staying within a tolerance region around the linear path for drawer opening). Let Ncurr be the current node with the computed IK solution qend for keypoint pn with grasp pose oP C . Let 

Nprev be the ancestor node in the search tree corresponding to the previous keypoint pn−1, which stores a set of valid configurations Qvalid . The transition is considered feasible if there exists a starting configuration qstart ∈

Qvalid corresponding to the same grasp pose oP C that satisfies the constraints. The verification process for acandidate qstart proceeds as follows: 1. Path Reconstruction: We trace the mobile-base path segments from Ncurr back to Nprev within the Hybrid A* search tree. Let this discrete sequence of base poses be denoted as Pbase = {x(0)  

> b

, . . . , x(K) 

> b

}, where x(0) 

> b

corresponds to Nprev and x(K) 

> b

to Ncurr .2. Synchronized Sampling: We uniformly sample K

steps along the desired task trajectory between keypoints pn−1 and pn, and then calculate the task end-effector poses using oP C , denoted as {P (k)task }Kk=0 .Simultaneously, using the candidate qstart , we perform linear interpolation in the joint space to obtain a sequence of arm configurations {q(k)arm }Kk=0 , where 

q(k)arm = qstart + kK (qend − qstart ).3. Whole-Body Validation: For each step k, we compute the actual end-effector pose P (k)ee using forward kinematics based on the combined state of the base pose x(k) 

> b

and arm configuration q(k)arm .4. Constraint Check: We compute the deviation ek

between the actual end-effector pose P (k)ee and the target pose P (k)task . The deviation is defined as a weighted sum of translational and rotational errors: 

ek = ∥[P (k)ee ]p − [P (k)task ]p∥

+ λ · ∠([ P (k)ee ]R, [P (k)task ]R) (73) where ∠(·, ·) represents the geodesic distance (rotation angle) in SO (3) , and λ is a weighting factor. The transition is valid if max k(ek) < δ thresh .If a valid solution is found for qend , the IK solution qend is accepted; otherwise, it is discarded.