Title: SPREAD: Spatial-Physical REasoning via geometry Aware Diffusion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27573v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:17:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# SPREAD: Spatial-Physical REasoning via geometry Aware Diffusion 

# Minzhang Li ∗ Kuixiang Shao ∗ Xuebing Li Yuyang Jiao Yinuo Bai Hengan Zhou Sixian Shen Jiayuan Gu † Jingyi Yu †

# ShanghaiTech University 

{limzh2022, shaokx2025, lixb2025, jiaoyy2022, baiyn2022, zhouha2025, shensx2024, gujy1, yujingyi }@shanghaitech.edu.cn 

> ∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding authors. 

# Abstract 

Automated 3D scene generation is pivotal for applications spanning virtual reality, digital content creation, and Em-bodied AI. While computer graphics prioritizes aesthetic layouts, vision and robotics demand scenes that mirror real-world complexity which current data-driven methods strug-gle to achieve due to limited unstructured training data and insufficient spatial and physical modeling. We pro-pose SPREAD , a diffusion-based framework that jointly learns spatial and physical relationships through a graph transformer, explicitly conditioning on posed scene point clouds for geometric awareness. Moreover, our model inte-grates differentiable guidance for collision avoidance, rela-tional constraint, and gravity, ensuring physically coherent scenes without sacrificing relational context. Our experi-ments on 3D-FRONT and ProcTHOR datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in spatial-relational reason-ing and physical metrics. Moreover, SPREAD outperforms baselines in scene consistency and stability during pre- and post-physics simulation, proving its capability to generate simulation-ready environments for embodied AI agents. 1

# 1. Introduction 

Automated 3D scene generation is a critical task with appli-cations ranging from virtual reality [24, 39, 51] and digital content creation [17, 28, 55] to Embodied AI [5, 23, 36]. Different domains place distinct requirements on the gen-erated scenes. In computer graphics, the emphasis is often on geometry details, aesthetic object layouts and stylistic consistency, resulting in visually appealing and orderly en-vironments. In contrast, 3D scenes used for training mod-els in computer vision [9, 42, 47] and robotics [13, 57]  

> 1Our code and dataset are publicly available at https://github. com/L-avenir/SPREAD .

are expected to closely mirror the complexities of the real world. These scenes must accommodate cluttered arrange-ments, heavy occlusions, and diverse object poses to ensure the robustness of perception systems and embodied agents. Real-world environments can often appear ”chaotic”. For instance, a toy played by an infant may be placed in an ar-bitrary pose, without any discernible logic. Capturing such diversity and disorder remains a major challenge for cur-rent data-driven methods, primarily due to the lack of suffi-ciently varied and unstructured training data. Humans possess strong spatial and physical reasoning abilities that allow them to interpret and navigate the of-ten chaotic real world. For instance, people can infer the pose of an object based on its interactions and relationships with surrounding objects. A pencil, for example, is more likely to lie flat on the ground for stability, but it can also stand upright when supported by a holder. The same object can exhibit different stable poses depending on its physical context. Beyond these physical relationships, humans also leverage deeper layers of understanding—such as function-ality (e.g., a cup must remain upright to hold water) and cul-tural conventions (e.g., the placement of a knife and spoon to signal satisfaction with a meal). To generate truly re-alistic 3D scenes, a generative model must learn to reason about this foundational layer of physics: how objects sta-bly interact, support each other, and coexist spatially in a functionally and semantically coherent manner. Previous methods based on optimization [37, 58, 59] are capable of achieving physically plausible results for indi-vidual scenes but suffer from poor scalability. Procedural generation techniques employ handcrafted spatial rules, en-abling efficient large-scale generation but introducing artifi-cial biases that reduce real-world variability. Recent deep generative models learn scene distributions directly from data – some methods [27, 41, 52] incorporate spatial rela-tions as graph priors from text prompts or user specifica-tions, achieving controllability but often neglecting physi-          

> arXiv:2603.27573v1 [cs.GR] 29 Mar 2026 Figure 1. Illustration of SPREAD , a diffusion-based framework for generating physically plausible 3D scenes with rich object interac-tions. (A) SPREAD synthesizes detailed object-level layouts with natural spatial and physical interactions, going beyond coarse layout arrangements. (B) SPREAD faithfully adheres to provided spatial and physical graph priors, G. (C) SPREAD can provide simulation-ready environments for embodied AI agents.

cal constraints (leading to floating objects or penetration ar-tifacts). Alternative approaches [53] enforce physical plau-sibility through guidance mechanisms, but fail to maintain realistic relational context, resulting in physically stable yet layout-incoherent scenes. Furthermore, most methods rely on datasets like 3D-FRONT [11] that capture only coarse furniture arrangements, lacking the detailed object interac-tion data necessary for complex physical relationships. To this end, we introduce SPREAD , a guided diffusion framework that takes a foundational step toward reliable 3D scene generation by learning to reason about both spatial and physical relationships. These relationships are repre-sented as graphs and incorporated into the diffusion pro-cess via graph transformer. Unlike prior methods [41, 53] that rely on implicit shape embeddings, our framework con-ditions on the posed scene point cloud at each diffusion step with a geometry-aware perceiver module. Further-more, SPREAD systematically enforces fundamental phys-ical principles—such as mesh-level collision avoidance, sta-ble object support, and adherence to gravity—through a set of carefully designed differentiable guidance functions. This integrated design enables the generative process to satisfy key relational and physical constraints, effectively determining the placement and orientation of objects in a physically consistent manner. Our experiments demonstrate that SPREAD achieves state-of-the-art performance in spatial reasoning and physi-cal plausibility, notably exhibiting low mesh-level collision rates. The generated scenes are simulation-ready, requir-ing little to no post-processing to ensure physical stabil-ity. To highlight the model’s capability for fine-grained spa-tial modeling, we train and evaluate SPREAD on both 3D-Front and ProcTHOR [5], the latter offering a rich diversity of small objects. In summary, our main contributions are threefold: • We propose a novel diffusion model that jointly repre-sents spatial and physical relationships as differentiable graph priors, enabling scene synthesis that is both seman-tically coherent and physically plausible. • We formulate mesh-level collision avoidance, stable physical relations and gravity as differentiable guidance functions, ensuring generated scenes obey physical prin-ciples while preserving rich object interactions. • SPREAD achieves SOTA performance on physical plau-sibility metrics. Moreover, it demonstrates strong spatial and physical stability after simulations, validated on both furniture-scale and fine-grained interaction datasets. 

# 2. Related work 

2.1. 3D scene generation 

Procedural Scene Generation Procedural scene genera-tion relies on predefined rules and is widely used in indoor design [38]. Prior work used statistical methods to derive object-distribution rules for structurally sound scene gener-!! = {$"}#                  

> Scene Representa,on
> &$:
> c
> b
> a
> beneath
> Spa$al Graph &%:
> c
> b
> asupport
> Physical Graph up
> +!"~#(%,')
> diffuse
> Michelangelo
> Encoder ❄
> Objects
> Graph Block
> "
> Diffusion Graph Block
> Graph -
> A8en$on
> Graph Embedding
> &$,&%
> ℱ={*&}#
> MLP
> ×%
> "
> Perceiver Layer
> Cross -
> A8en6on
> ×"
> Self -A8en6on
> Collided Region
> &=0(&(+0)&)+0*&*
> Mul, -Guidance
> *training only
> Collision -Avoidance
> Gravity
> x
> zy
> y
> xz
> Rela,on
> ℱ
> &"
> &#
> &$
> c
> a
> b
> +'={,',-'}
> b
> ca
> ×b
> c
> a
> c
> c
> ++Cross -
> A8en$on
> Cross -
> A8en$on
> cb
> a

Figure 2. Overview of SPREAD. We propose SPREAD , a diffusion-based framework for generating physically plausible 3D scenes, which integrates relational constraints through spatial ( Gρ) and physical graphs ( Gκ) while leveraging geometric perception via Perceiver Layers. The model employs graph-attention guided diffusion to jointly optimize physical plausibility and spatial relations during genera-tion, producing realistic scenes with natural object interactions. 

ation [2, 3, 10]. Other works cast generation as an opti-mization problem with constraints embedded in cost func-tions [5, 58]. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have introduced text-guided paradigms [8, 29, 54]. These meth-ods rely on manual rules, limiting their use in complex scenes. Our learning-based approach models rules from data, enabling more complex scene generation. 

Graph-Driven Scene Generation Graph-driven meth-ods represent scenes as object–relationship graphs, cap-turing interactions and guiding construction. Semantic-spatial relation [46], dense relational [61], and hierarchi-cal graphs [25] have been explored to capture spatial de-pendencies. Recent works further introduce commonsense-enhanced [56] and language-guided scene graph [27] to incorporate high-level semantics. However, existing ap-proaches primarily focus on modeling spatial relations, of-ten neglecting the explicit incorporation of physical rela-tions like ”support”. To address this limitation, our method enhances scene priors by introducing a physical relation graph, enabling more comprehensive and physically plau-sible scene generation. 

Diffusion-Based Scene Generation Diffusion models are a leading generative paradigm, enabling high-quality and diverse synthesis via iterative noising-denoising [16, 40]. In 3D scene generation, diffusion models enable object-level shape editing [56] and occlusion-aware inpaint-ing [45], showing promising results. Recently, they have been applied to full-scene synthesis, modeling entire 3D scene distributions for greater flexibility and expressive-ness [1, 18, 27, 41, 53]. However, existing methods tend to focus on visual quality in 3D scenes, while paying less attention to both the consistency of object relationships and physical realism, leaving the joint modeling of these two as-pects relatively unexplored in diffusion-based approaches. 

2.2. Guided diffusion 

Guided diffusion models use external signals to steer gener-ation, enabling fine-grained control and alignment with ob-jectives [6, 15, 31, 35]. Recent 3D scene generation studies have adopted guided diffusion models. SceneDiffuser [21] conditions on physical constraints, while Physcene [53] in-tegrates physical and interaction cues. Unlike Physcene, which relies on bounding-box representations, our frame-work leverages mesh- and relation-level guidance to enable finer-grained, physically consistent control and to produce more realistic, structurally complex scenes. 

2.3. Physical constraints 

Physical constraints are physics-based rules (e.g. motion laws and object interactions) that ensure plausibility in sim-ulation. Simulation-based 3D modeling uses physics en-gines to enforce hard constraints for realism [30, 43, 49]. Motion capture uses physics-informed losses to enhance realism, plausibility, and temporal coherence [19, 22, 50]. In generative models, physical constraints are used as con-ditional signals [12] or latent embeddings [48] to enforce physical consistency. Our method guides scene generation with physical constraints, ensuring consistency and coher-ence for realistic, complex 3D scenes. 

# 3. Method 

To generate physically plausible scenes, we propose 

SPREAD , an integrated framework that combines our pro-posed geometric perceiver layers with guided diffusion. In section 3.1, we outline the compositional elements of our scene representation, especially geometric and relational priors. In section 3.2 and section 3.3, we detail our model architecture which integrates Perceiver Layer - a dedicated geometric perception module that enables the network to learn geometric constraints during training. In section 3.4, for posterior optimization during inference, we propose a novel combination of diffusion guidance mechanism that si-multaneously addresses physical plausibility and relational constraints. 

3.1. Scene representation 

To enable comprehensive modeling and generation of phys-ically plausible scenes, our framework relies on structured representations that precisely capture objects and their spa-tial interactions as priors. As illustrated in Fig 2, the scene Si contains objects oij

each defined by a tuple ⟨pij , r ij , f ij , ρ ij , κ ij ⟩, where 3D trans-lation pij ∈ R3 stands for the centroid position of oij , ori-entation rij ∈ SO (3) . Moreover, the geometric features 

f ij ∈ Rd provide a d-dimensional shape descriptor. The spatial relations ρij model pairwise relative directions. For example, ρ(oik, o il ) indicates if oil is left, right, front, or back of oik. Similarly, the physical interactions κij (oik, o il )

describe support, contact, or attachment relation between objects, which enables the generation with more compre-hensive modeling and additional controllability. Notably, instead of using images as visual references [4, 26], we employ explicitly structured graph representations to sepa-rately model spatial relationships Gρ ∈ { 0, ..., m }N ×N and physical interactions Gκ ∈ { 0, 1, ..., q }N ×N as latent con-straints, where m and q represent the number of spatial rela-tions and physical interactions respectively.Technically, we utilize a continuous representation [14] to parameterize ro-tation r, where r ∈ R6.

3.2. Geometry-aware diffusion modeling 

Here, we introduce SPREAD , our graph-based diffusion for scene generation with geometric awareness. As illus-trated in Fig 2, SPREAD differs from existing scene gen-eration methods by explicitly modeling physical and spatial relations between denoised meshes at each denoising step, while incorporating additional geometric inputs through a geometry-aware perceiver module. Furthermore, we em-ploy a graph transformer with cross-attention blocks to pa-rameterize ϵθ (xt, t, f , Gρ, Gκ), where t denotes time embed-dings, f denotes geometric features for collections of ob-jects in the scene, Gρ and Gκ represent spatial and interac-tion relation graph, respectively. The diffusion process operates on a structured scene rep-resentation Si = {oij }Nj=1 , where each object is parameter-ized as ⟨pij , r ij , f ij , ρ ij , κ ij ⟩. We construct a joint state space by concatenating scene representations across all objects, 

x0 =

> N

M

> j=1

[pij ∥rij ] ∈ RN ×(3+6)  (1) forming the basis for the diffusion process. The forward process follows a Markov chain that gradually perturbs the data through Gaussian transitions, preserving the topologi-cal structure while adding noise 

q(xt|xt−1) = N (xt; p1 − βtxt−1, β tI) (2) where βt stands for the variance of the Gaussian noise added at each step of the forward (diffusion) process. For reversal process, we model the spatial relations Gρ

and physical relations Gκ between objects as graph struc-tures, where each graph is represented by an adjacency ma-trix of shape (N, N ), with elements indicating K possible relation types. These graph structures are first mapped to a continuous latent space through embedding layers, 

E = MLP (Embedding (G))  (3) where edge embeddings E ∈ RN ×N ×de . These embed-dings are then injected as bias terms into the graph attention layers. At each denoising step t, the graph structures con-dition the generation process through the diffusion graph block 

Htl+1 = GraphBlock l(Htl, Gρ, Gκ) (4) while simultaneously processing both types of relational in-formation. By enabling relational modeling in continuous feature space through MLP projection, SPREAD achieves joint op-timization of spatial relations and physical constraints in each graph block layer. 

3.3. Model architecture 

Our geometry-aware diffusion network jointly models ob-ject orientation, geometry, and inter-object relations as mul-timodal priors to transform a random layout into a phys-ically plausible, semantically coherent 3D scene. As de-scribed in section 3.2, each object node is represented by a 9-dimensional state vector xi. This vector is then augmented with fixed sinusoidal positional encodings and projected into the attention dimension through a linear layer. Concurrently, each object is encoded by a pretrained Michelangelo encoder [60] into 256 64-dimensional tokens, which are then linearly projected to the attention dimension. These shape tokens remain constant during diffusion, pro-viding a stable shape prior. At each diffusion timestep  t, dynamic geometric interac-tions are captured by sampling  M points  pMi on the noisy mesh of object  i and computing the one-way Chamfer dis-tance [7] to all other objects’ point clouds P¬i. We assign a Table 1. Quantitative comparison. Our method matches baseline FID on 3D-FRONT while setting new state-of-the-art on ProcTHOR: it dramatically reduces mesh collisions, achieves the highest graph recall (GRecall), minimizes average support distance (ASD), and delivers the greatest scene stability under Isaac Sim.                                                  

> Method 3D-FRONT ProcTHOR Col mesh ↓
> FID ↓GRecall ↑Col mesh ↓ASD ↓Stability ↑FID ↓
> Bedroom Livingroom Diningroom ATISS 0.275 0.451 0.428 68.0 /0.174 0.510 0.813 33.9 DiffuScene 0.298 0.359 0.376 61.6 /0.360 0.071 0.886 21.4 InstructScene 0.285 0.350 0.331 61.3 0.964 0.260 0.021 0.876 20.0 Ours 0.097 0.185 0.183 64.7 0.979 0.121 0.007 0.950 18.8 ATISS DiffuScene InstructScene Ours

Figure 3. Comparative Generation and Simulation Results. Visual comparison of scene layouts produced by our method versus three baseline approaches, shown before (left) and after (right) physics simulation. 

sign to each distance via the nearest neighbor’s normal  nnn ,thereby approximating a signed distance field: 

dscd (p) = min 

> q∈P ¬i

∥p − q∥2 · sign  n⊤

> nn

(p − q) (5) This procedure yields a feature tensor of shape 

(B, N, M, 4) , where the first three channels encode global coordinates and the fourth channel encodes  dscd .A Perceiver [20] module then distills these sparse, high-dimensional features into n  d-dimensional tokens  f geo  via cross-attention, enabling the network to perceive collisions and penetrations. Discrete spatial and physical relations (e.g., “left of,” “supports”) are embedded and concatenated as edge fea-tures  eρκ , together with node features forming an explicit scene graph. We stack  L multimodal graph layers to itera-tively fuse and propagate information: within each block, node features first attend to static shape tokens and then to dynamic geometric embeddings via sequential cross-attention, producing shape- and geometry-aware fused rep-resentations; these representations and the edge features are subsequently processed by a graph attention block, in which multi-head graph attention propagates signals along explicit edges. All normalization layers condition on the timestep embedding temb via AdaLayerNorm [33, 34], making the denoising process time-aware. Finally, the refined node fea-tures are projected by a MLP to predict the noise  ˆϵ, and training minimizes the mean squared error  ∥ˆϵ − ϵ∥2. By deeply integrating static shape priors, dynamic Chamfer-based geometry, and explicit relational structure, our frame-work achieves high-fidelity, physically consistent 3D scene generation. 

3.4. Multi-guidance framework 

The proposed diffusion guidance framework incorporates physically-grounded constraints through differentiable op-erators that modify the score function of the diffusion pro-cess. Formally, given a diffusion model with learned score function sθ (xt, t ), the guided reverse process follows: 

∇xt log pγ (xt) = sθ (xt, t ) + γ∇xt G(xt) (6) where G(xt) represents our composite guidance signal combining three key components: collision guidance, grav-Rela%onal Matrix Top -down View Rendered Scene Figure 4. Scene & Relation Visualization. For two generated scenes, we show the final render (left), the top-down layout (mid-dle), and the pairwise relation evaluation matrix (right). The ma-trix encodes every object-pair’s spatial relation: green entries de-note correct relations (w.r.t. the ground truth), and red entries de-note incorrect ones. 

ity guidance, and relation guidance. With the weight of each guidance, the overall guidance is defined via: 

G = λC GC + λH GH + λRGR (7) Together, these guidance terms enforce consistency with real-world physical laws and foster the generation of stable, contact-rich 3D scenes. 

Collision Guidance We introduce a collision-avoidance objective function based on intersecting triangles from dif-ferent meshes. Unlike approaches like Physcene [53] which take predicted bounding boxes as approximation, our method directly quantifies collision relationships based on mesh triangles, which proves more efficient and accurate. Specifically, we use a and b to represent any two distinguish objects in the scene. And we use tia and tjb to denote the i-th triangle of a and the j-th triangle of b. We use CoDF [44] to evaluate the mesh-based collision-free guidance via: 

GC = 1

|C|

X

> a,b,a ̸=b

X

> (i,j )∈C

CoDF (tia, t jb) (8) where C represents collision triangle pairs found with BVH, and CoDF represents the conical distance field. The overall penalty is obtained by summing the penalties with all collision pairs of surface patches from different objects. 

Gravity Guidance To ensure physically plausible sup-port relationships, we model gravity constraints by comput-ing vertical distances between objects and their supporters. For each object, we compute the vertical offset ri = di − ϵ,                   

> Table 2. Ablation on ProcTHOR. starting from our base model, adding the geometry module and then the full multi-guidance framework yields consistent improvements in all physical metrics.
> Method GRecall ↑Col mesh ↓ASD ↓Stability ↑
> Ours 0.963 0.241 0.014 0.934 +Geometry 0.965 0.225 0.012 0.938 +Guidance 0.979 0.121 0.007 0.950

where di is the distance from the object to its supporter, and ϵ is an empirical minimal threshold preventing ob-jects from potential intersection caused by gravity guidance. This formulation naturally penalizes both excessive floating (ri > θ H ) and interpenetration ( ri < 0) while allowing small deviations within tolerance θH .

GH = X  

> ri>θ H∨ri<0

|ri| (9) 

Relation Guidance In reality, objects exhibit complex in-terrelations. To model these, we introduce a score func-tion based on the extent of overlap between their projections onto the XZ-plane. This approach is both effective and ef-ficient, since we approximate each object by its projection convex hull. Instead of calculating the exact overlap area, we estimate a penalty by measuring the distances from all the object vertices lying outside their supporting object to the supporting hull. To be more specific, we denote a di-rected pair (i, j ) to indicate that the object i is supported by the object j, and we use E to represent the set of all such relations. Additionally, we denote Vi,j to represent all the vertices of the i-th object’s projection outside the convex hull of the j-th object. Thus, we further define the guidance as follows: 

GR = X

> (i,j )∈E

X

> α∈Vi,j

s(α, j )

|Vi,j || E| (10) where s(α, j ) represents the minimal Euclidean distance between a point α to the convex hull of supporter j.

# 4. Experiments 

Datasets We evaluate our model on two large-scale in-door datasets: (1) 3D-FRONT [11] and (2) ProcTHOR [5], which together capture both aesthetic layouts and rich physical interactions. 3D-FRONT provides high-quality, designer-curated scenes; we adopt the InstructScene [27] preprocessing pipeline, augmenting each scene with ex-plicit relative-position annotations (e.g., ”left-of”, ”above”) to form structured scene graphs. To better model complex object interactions, we utilize ProcTHOR’s procedurally generated indoor scenes, excluding non-supportive meshes (e.g., wall hangings). We then apply physics-based cor-rections to resolve interpenetration and remove floating ob-jects, while annotating spatial relationships using the same scheme as in 3D-FRONT. 

Baselines We compare SPREAD against three baselines: (1) ATISS [32], a permutation-invariant transformer that models scene generation as an autoregressive process over an unordered set of objects. (2) DiffuScene [41], a model that adopts a denoising diffusion probabilistic model to generate scenes in a non-autoregressive manner. (3) In-structScene, which introduces a two-stage, graph-based framework designed for instruction-driven synthesis. These baselines provide a robust benchmark covering autore-gressive, diffusion-based, and graph-structured generative methodologies. We refer the reader to the Supplementary Material for more information. 

Metrics To ensure a comprehensive evaluation of our model, we assess visual quality, physical plausibility, and structural fidelity. For visual fidelity and diversity, we use the Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID). Physical plausibility is measured via the Mesh Collision Rate , which quantifies object intersections. For the ProcTHOR dataset, we intro-duce three specialized metrics: Graph Recall (GRecall) to evaluate structural accuracy by comparing inferred spatial relationships, Average Support Distance (ASD) to assess contact surface quality through signed distance functions, and Stability , which is measured by simulating scenes in NVIDIA Isaac Sim [30] and verifying object relationship consistency. Metric details are attached in the supplemen-tary material. 

4.1. Results on scene generation 

Our framework’s advantages become especially clear when evaluated on the interaction-rich ProcTHOR dataset. As Table 1 shows, although we match baseline FID on 3D-FRONT, we surpass all existing approaches on every phys-ically grounded metric in ProcTHOR. In particular, our method dramatically reduces Col mesh and achieves a GRe-call of 0.979—demonstrating faithful adherence to the true scene layout (Figure 4). It yields an Average Support Dis-tance of just 0.007, indicating virtually gap-free contact. 

4.2. Ablation study 

Our ablation study on the ProcTHOR dataset evaluates the separate contributions of the geometry-aware perceiver module and multi-guidance framework (Table 2). The base-line vanilla diffusion model shows substantial improvement when augmented with the geometry-aware perceiver (+Ge-ometry), evidenced by reduced collision rate and ASD met-rics. The complete multi-guidance framework (+Guidance) combined with geometry-aware diffusion achieves the most           

> Table 3. Comparison of inference times (in seconds) across dif-ferent scene generation methods.
> Method SPREAD ATISS InstructScene DiffuScene Inference Time (s) 14.72 0.02 2.58 10.25

significant gains, reaching state-of-the-art physical plausi-bility. As Figure 5 illustrates: collision guidance effec-tively removes interpenetrations, gravity guidance elimi-nates floating artifacts, and relational guidance maintains proper support structures - collectively achieving the lowest ASD, highest GRecall, and best simulation stability. 

4.3. Scene consistency in pre-post simulation 

To rigorously evaluate physical plausibility, we measure scene stability under NVIDIA Isaac Sim. As Table 1 shows, our method achieves an Isaac Stability score of 0.950, meaning the vast majority of pairwise object relationships remain intact after simulation. Figure 3 offers a side-by-side comparison: while baseline layouts frequently suffer object displacement and structural drift under physical forces, ours remain virtually unchanged, underscoring the practical ben-efit of integrating physical reasoning directly into the gen-eration process. 

4.4. User study 

We have conducted a user study focusing on physical con-sistency, assessing adherence to physical laws, and scene ra-tionality, evaluating high-level semantic and commonsense coherence. We randomly selected five scenes, each con-taining a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 22 objects. A total of 57 valid responses were collected, each evalu-ating randomly selected three scenes to determine the pre-ferred method. As illustrated in Figure 6, our method gar-nered 88.6% of votes, thus underscoring its superiority over ATISS(0.9%), DiffuScene(6.1%) and InstructScene(4.4%). This finding suggests that our method generates scenes that are more physically consistent, scene-rational, and show greater consistency with human preferences. 

4.5. Inference speed comparison 

In this section, we analyze the computational efficiency of state-of-the-art methods. The average inference latency per scene is as follows: ATISS (0.02s), InstructScene (2.58s), Diffuscene (10.25s), and SPREAD (14.72s). The higher la-tency of our method is an inherent trade-off of its gener-ative architecture, deliberately designed to model complex object relationships and generate coherent scenes, prioritiz-ing quality and structural integrity over inference speed. Collison -Free Guidance 

Gravity Guidance 

Relational Guidance 

w/o 

w

w

w/o 

w/o 

wFigure 5. Guidance Ablation. Results showing effect of different guidance terms. Each major row compares results before (top) and after (bottom) adding a specific guidance. Columns show different scenes. Red circles highlight issues such as collisions, floating, or incorrect spatial relations before guidance; green circles show improvements after applying guidance, with zoom-in views for clarity.   

> Figure 6. User Study. Our method dominated with 88.6% of the votes, above ATISS with 0.9%, InstructScene with 4.4%, and Dif-fuScene with 6.1%, indicating that our method better preserves physical consistency and scene rationality.

# 5. Conclusion 

We present SPREAD , a guided diffusion framework that jointly models object spatial and physical relationships through differentiable graph priors and multi-guidance mechanism. Our method synthesizes physically plausible and simulation-ready scenes. Experiments demonstrate su-perior performance in spatial reasoning and physical met-rics, with robustness validated under simulations. 

Future work While effective at preserving physical con-straints, our method is currently limited to indoor scenes due to dataset availability. Future work will extend to outdoor generation by leveraging image-conditioned paradigms [29, 55]. To address the computational cost in-herent in our iterative diffusion process, we will explore ef-ficient alternatives like flow matching. Furthermore, we will investigate formulating the diffusion directly on the SE(3) manifold to better leverage its geometric prior for more principled scene synthesis. Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by the National Natu-ral Science Foundation of China under Grant W2431046, National Key R&D Program of China 2025YFA1309603, Central Guided Local Science and Technology Foundation of China YDZX20253100001001, and by MoE Key Lab of Intelligent Perceptionand Human-Machine Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University), the Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence. The ex-periments of this work were supported by the SIST comput-ing Platform and HPC, ShanghaiTech University. 

# References 

[1] Miguel Angel Bautista, Pengsheng Guo, Samira Abnar, Wal-ter Talbott, Alexander Toshev, Zhuoyuan Chen, Laurent Dinh, Shuangfei Zhai, Hanlin Goh, Daniel Ulbricht, et al. Gaudi: A neural architect for immersive 3d scene genera-tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,35:25102–25116, 2022. 3 [2] Angel Chang, Manolis Savva, and Christopher D Manning. Learning spatial knowledge for text to 3d scene generation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 2028–2038, 2014. 3 [3] Angel X Chang, Mihail Eric, Manolis Savva, and Christo-pher D Manning. Sceneseer: 3d scene design with natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00050 , 2017. 3 [4] Jit Chatterjee and Maria Torres Vega. 3d-scene-former: 3d scene generation from a single rgb image using transformers. 

The Visual Computer , 41(4):2875–2889, 2025. 4 [5] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural generation. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:5982– 5994, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 6 [6] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021. 3 [7] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. A point set generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 605–613, 2017. 4 [8] Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Ar-jun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual plan-ning and generation with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:18225–18250, 2023. 3 [9] Michael Fischer, Iliyan Georgiev, Thibault Groueix, Vladimir G Kim, Tobias Ritschel, and Valentin Deschaintre. Sama: Material-aware 3d selection and segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19322 , 2024. 1 [10] Matthew Fisher and Pat Hanrahan. Context-based search for 3d models. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2010 papers , pages 1–10. 2010. 3 [11] Huan Fu, Bowen Cai, Lin Gao, Ling-Xiao Zhang, Jiaming Wang, Cao Li, Qixun Zeng, Chengyue Sun, Rongfei Jia, Bin-qiang Zhao, et al. 3d-front: 3d furnished rooms with layouts and semantics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 10933–10942, 2021. 2, 6, 1 [12] Nate Gillman, Charles Herrmann, Michael Freeman, Daksh Aggarwal, Evan Luo, Deqing Sun, and Chen Sun. Force prompting: Video generation models can learn and gen-eralize physics-based control signals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19386 , 2025. 3 [13] Jiayuan Gu, Fanbo Xiang, Xuanlin Li, Zhan Ling, Xiqiang Liu, Tongzhou Mu, Yihe Tang, Stone Tao, Xinyue Wei, Yunchao Yao, et al. Maniskill2: A unified bench-mark for generalizable manipulation skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04659 , 2023. 1 [14] Thorsten Hempel, Ahmed A Abdelrahman, and Ayoub Al-Hamadi. 6d rotation representation for unconstrained head pose estimation. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 2496–2500. IEEE, 2022. 4 [15] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. 3 [16] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 3 [17] Lukas H¨ ollein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2room: Extracting textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 7909–7920, 2023. 1 [18] Siyi Hu, Diego Mart´ ın Arroyo, Stephanie Debats, Fabian Manhardt, Luca Carlone, and Federico Tombari. Mixed dif-fusion for 3d indoor scene synthesis. ArXiv , abs/2405.21066, 2024. 3 [19] Buzhen Huang, Liang Pan, Yuan Yang, Jingyi Ju, and Yan-gang Wang. Neural mocon: Neural motion control for phys-ically plausible human motion capture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 6417–6426, 2022. 3 [20] Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira. Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 4651–4664. PMLR, 2021. 5[21] Max Jiang, Yijing Bai, Andre Cornman, Christopher Davis, Xiukun Huang, Hong Jeon, Sakshum Kulshrestha, John Lambert, Shuangyu Li, Xuanyu Zhou, et al. Scenediffuser: Efficient and controllable driving simulation initialization and rollout. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 37:55729–55760, 2024. 3 [22] Jingyi Ju, Buzhen Huang, Chen Zhu, Zhihao Li, and Yan-gang Wang. Physics-guided human motion capture with pose probability modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09910 ,2023. 3 [23] Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gok-men, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Wensi Ai, Benjamin Martinez, et al. Behavior-1k: A human-centered, embodied ai benchmark with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09227 , 2024. 1 [24] Ke Li, Tim Rolff, Susanne Schmidt, Reinhard Bacher, Simone Frintrop, Wim Leemans, and Frank Steinicke. Immersive neural graphics primitives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13494 , 2022. 1 [25] Manyi Li, Akshay Gadi Patil, Kai Xu, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Owais Khan, Ariel Shamir, Changhe Tu, Baoquan Chen, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Hao Zhang. Grains: Generative re-cursive autoencoders for indoor scenes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 38(2):1–16, 2019. 3 [26] Ming-Feng Li, Yueh-Feng Ku, Hong-Xuan Yen, Chi Liu, Yu-Lun Liu, Albert YC Chen, Cheng-Hao Kuo, and Min Sun. Genrc: Generative 3d room completion from sparse image collections. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 146–163. Springer, 2024. 4 [27] Chenguo Lin and Yadong Mu. Instructscene: Instruction-driven 3d indoor scene synthesis with semantic graph prior. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04717 , 2024. 1, 3, 6 [28] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 300–309, 2023. 1 [29] Lu Ling, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yifan Ding, Yu Zeng, Yichen Sheng, Yunhao Ge, Ming-Yu Liu, Aniket Bera, and Zhaoshuo Li. Scenethesis: A language and vision agentic framework for 3d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02836 , 2025. 3, 8 [30] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin, David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470 , 2021. 3, 7 [31] Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741 , 2021. 3 [32] Despoina Paschalidou, Amlan Kar, Maria Shugrina, Karsten Kreis, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fidler. Atiss: Autoregres-sive transformers for indoor scene synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:12013–12026, 2021. 7, 3 [33] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-national conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. 5 [34] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI con-ference on artificial intelligence , 2018. 5 [35] Nicholas Ezra Pfaff, Hongkai Dai, Sergey Zakharov, Shun Iwase, and Russ Tedrake. Steerable scene generation with post training and inference-time search. In 9th Annual Con-ference on Robot Learning , 2025. 3 [36] Xavier Puig, Eric Undersander, Andrew Szot, Mikael Dal-laire Cote, Tsung-Yen Yang, Ruslan Partsey, Ruta Desai, Alexander William Clegg, Michal Hlavac, So Yeon Min, et al. Habitat 3.0: A co-habitat for humans, avatars and robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13724 , 2023. 1 [37] Siyuan Qi, Yixin Zhu, Siyuan Huang, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Song-Chun Zhu. Human-centric indoor scene synthesis us-ing stochastic grammar. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5899–5908, 2018. 1 [38] Alexander Raistrick, Lingjie Mei, Karhan Kayan, David Yan, Yiming Zuo, Beining Han, Hongyu Wen, Meenal Parakh, Stamatis Alexandropoulos, Lahav Lipson, et al. In-finigen indoors: Photorealistic indoor scenes using procedu-ral generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 21783– 21794, 2024. 2 [39] Anton Ratnarajah and Dinesh Manocha. Listen2scene: Inter-active material-aware binaural sound propagation for recon-structed 3d scenes. In 2024 IEEE Conference Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) , pages 254–264. IEEE, 2024. 1 [40] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj¨ orn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022. 3 [41] Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner. Diffuscene: Denoising diffu-sion models for generative indoor scene synthesis. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 20507–20518, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 7[42] Anh Thai, Weiyao Wang, Hao Tang, Stefan Stojanov, James M Rehg, and Matt Feiszli. 3 × 2: 3d object part seg-mentation by 2d semantic correspondences. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 149–166. Springer, 2024. 1 [43] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems ,pages 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. 3 [44] Dimitrios Tzionas, Luca Ballan, Abhilash Srikantha, Pablo Aponte, Marc Pollefeys, and Juergen Gall. Capturing hands in action using discriminative salient points and physics sim-ulation. International Journal of Computer Vision , 118(2): 172–193, 2016. 6 [45] Guangcong Wang, Peng Wang, Zhaoxi Chen, Wenping Wang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Perf: Panoramic neural radiance field from a single panorama. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(10): 6905–6918, 2024. 3 [46] Kai Wang, Yu-An Lin, Ben Weissmann, Manolis Savva, An-gel X Chang, and Daniel Ritchie. Planit: Planning and in-stantiating indoor scenes with relation graph and spatial prior networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 38(4):1– 15, 2019. 3 [47] Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking of novel objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17868– 17879, 2024. 1 [48] Qianyang Wu, Ye Shi, Xiaoshui Huang, Jingyi Yu, Lan Xu, and Jingya Wang. Thor: Text to human-object inter-action diffusion via relation intervention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11208 , 2024. 3 [49] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11097– 11107, 2020. 3 [50] Kevin Xie, Tingwu Wang, Umar Iqbal, Yunrong Guo, Sanja Fidler, and Florian Shkurti. Physics-based human motion es-timation and synthesis from videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 11532–11541, 2021. 3 [51] Linning Xu, Vasu Agrawal, William Laney, Tony Garcia, Aayush Bansal, Changil Kim, Samuel Rota Bul` o, Lorenzo Porzi, Peter Kontschieder, Aljaˇ z Boˇ ziˇ c, et al. Vr-nerf: High-fidelity virtualized walkable spaces. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2023. 1 [52] Xiuyu Yang, Yunze Man, Junkun Chen, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Scenecraft: Layout-guided 3d scene generation. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 82060–82084, 2024. 1 [53] Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Peiyuan Zhi, and Siyuan Huang. Physcene: Physically interactable 3d scene synthe-sis for embodied ai. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16262–16272, 2024. 2, 3, 6 [54] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Al-varo Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, et al. Holodeck: Language guided gen-eration of 3d embodied ai environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16227–16237, 2024. 3 [55] Kaixin Yao, Longwen Zhang, Xinhao Yan, Yan Zeng, Qix-uan Zhang, Lan Xu, Wei Yang, Jiayuan Gu, and Jingyi Yu. Cast: Component-aligned 3d scene reconstruction from an rgb image. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 44(4): 1–19, 2025. 1, 8 [56] Guangyao Zhai, Evin Pınar ¨Ornek, Shun-Cheng Wu, Yan Di, Federico Tombari, Nassir Navab, and Benjamin Busam. Commonscenes: Generating commonsense 3d indoor scenes with scene graph diffusion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:30026–30038, 2023. 3 [57] Jialiang Zhang, Haoran Liu, Danshi Li, XinQiang Yu, Hao-ran Geng, Yufei Ding, Jiayi Chen, and He Wang. Dexgrasp-net 2.0: Learning generative dexterous grasping in large-scale synthetic cluttered scenes. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. 1 [58] Shao-Kui Zhang, Yi-Xiao Li, Yu He, Yong-Liang Yang, and Song-Hai Zhang. Mageadd: Real-time interaction simula-tion for scene synthesis. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM in-ternational conference on multimedia , pages 965–973, 2021. 1, 3 [59] Yizhou Zhao, Kaixiang Lin, Zhiwei Jia, Qiaozi Gao, Govind Thattai, Jesse Thomason, and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Lumi-nous: Indoor scene generation for embodied ai challenges. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05527 , 2021. 1 [60] Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xin Chen, Xianfang Zeng, Rui Wang, Pei Cheng, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, Gang Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Michelangelo: Conditional 3d shape generation based on shape-image-text aligned latent representation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:73969–73982, 2023. 4, 1 [61] Yang Zhou, Zachary While, and Evangelos Kalogerakis. Scenegraphnet: Neural message passing for 3d indoor scene augmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 7384–7392, 2019. 3 SPREAD: Spatial-Physical REasoning via geometry Aware Diffusion 

# Supplementary Material 

# 6. Implementation details 

6.1. Hyper parameters 

All experiments were conducted on NVIDIA H20 GPUs. The model was trained for 2, 000 epochs with a batch size of 16 , taking approximately 50 GPU hours. We employ the AdamW optimize with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4

and a weight decay of 1 × 10 −4. Our diffusion back-bone adopts the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) framework. We utilize squaredcos cap v2 

noise schedule, operating over a total of 1,000 denoising timesteps. As mentioned in Section 3, we sample M points from mesh faces with noisy rotation and translation to com-pute the signed chamfer distance, which yields feature vec-tors during training. This strategy significantly enhances the model’s capacity to capture geometric details and con-tributes to spatial-physically reasoning and scene genera-tion. Here we empirically set M to be 2,000. During sam-pling, we integrate three distinct guidance terms to steer the generation towards physically plausible and relationally consistent scenes. We empirically set our guidance weights 

λC ,λR, λH for collision, relation, gravity guidance to be 

7.5 × 10 −3, 1.0 × 10 −3, 1.0 × 10 −3, respectively. During the quantitative evaluation, we compute the Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID) on CLIP features using the Clean-FID 2 library. We employ Nvidia Isaac Sim with version 5.1.0 to evaluate simulation stability. 

6.2. Shape Encoder 

We leverage the pre-trained shape encoder, Michelan-gelo [60], to extract latent shape codes for CAD mod-els from 3D-FRONT [11] dataset and the processed Proc-THOR [5] dataset. It functions as an image-text-aligned 3D shape Variational Auto-Encoder. Here we briefly introduce the forward process of the encoder. First, we initially sam-ple a point cloud P ∈ RN ×3 from the surface of the 3D shape. Then the points are fed into the SITA-VAE module of Michelangelo , which captures both low-level geomet-ric information via L query tokens and high-level semantic information via a single global head token. Finally, multi-ple self-attention layers iteratively refine the representation and obtain the final embeddings f ∈ RN ×L×D . The em-beddings are used directly for the following diffusion train-ing, serving as a compressed and semantically rich geome-try representation of shapes. 

> 2https://pypi.org/project/clean-fid/

6.3. Geometry-aware module in diffusion 

In the main paper, we introduced a novel training strategy that endows diffusion models with explicit awareness of ge-ometry and inter-relationship between paired objects in the scene. During the diffusion training process, we aim at en-abling the model to perceive collisions and penetrations in the scene. To achieve this, we sample M =2,000 points from the surface for each noisy-posed object and compute the one-way Chamfer distance to all other objects’ point clouds. This procedure divides the points into two subsets: the col-lided points and the remains. Rather than relying on a bi-nary collision indicator {0, 1 }, we preserve the signed dis-tance value as a continuous feature. Consequently, a feature tensor of shape (N, M, 4) is obtained, which represents the collision information (referred to as relational information) for the scene at timestep t. Then a lightweight yet effec-tive perceiver-based transformer is employed to convey the explicit geometric information of the scene at timestep t.

# 7. Dataset 

7.1. The insufficiency of public dataset 

While existing 3D scene datasets such as 3D-FRONT and ProcTHOR have made significant strides in scale and qual-ity, they share a fundamental limitation: a pronounced lack of rich, fine-grained object-to-object relations. The 3D-FRONT dataset primarily consists of designer-curated in-door scenes, where layouts are often aesthetically oriented and orderly. This results in oversimplified spatial rela-tionships (e.g., ”against a wall” or ”centered in a room”) and fails to capture the complex, unstructured interactions commonly found in real-world environments, such as ob-ject stacking, partial occlusion, or casual support. Al-though the ProcTHOR dataset offers greater environmental diversity through procedural generation and includes more small-scale objects, its automated process does not explic-itly or comprehensively annotate crucial physical support relations or precise spatial relations. This inherent spar-sity of relational data makes it difficult for models trained directly on these datasets to learn and reason about the complex spatial and physical interactions characteristic of real-world scenes. Consequently, models frequently exhibit fine-grained physical inconsistencies, such as floating ob-jects, inter-penetrations, and implausible support structures. This critical shortcoming motivates our work to not only rely on raw data but also to introduce a comprehensive pre-processing pipeline (detailed in Section 7.2) that explicitly derives these missing relations, thereby compensating for the inherent limitations of the source data and providing a foundation for learning robust spatial-physical reasoning. Here we present the comparison of our preprocessed dataset and the original 3D-FRONT dataset in Fig.7. 

7.2. Preprocessing 

We conduct experiments on the ProcTHOR-10K dataset, a large-scale collection of 10,000 procedurally generated 3D indoor environments developed by the Allen Institute for AI. We implement a comprehensive, parallelized prepro-cessing pipeline using Blender for geometric operations. The pipeline executes the following automated steps for each scene. First, the full house layout is deconstructed into individual rooms based on architectural boundaries. Within each room, non-supporting objects such as wall art and small decorative items are filtered out, while functional furniture such as tables, shelves, and countertops are re-tained. To ensure physical plausibility, the pipeline au-tomatically rectifies geometric issues, including resolving mesh intersections between objects and grounding floating objects onto their nearest underlying supporting surfaces. Subsequently, supported objects are identified and paired with their corresponding supporting objects (e.g., a Mug 

on a Table ). Relative spatial relationships (e.g., left ,

right ) are computed and annotated for all object pairs. Finally, the structured data, including object poses, meshes, and their annotated relationships, is serialized into 

.npz format for efficient loading during training.              

> Table 4. Dataset Statistics. Summary of the processed ProcTHOR-10K dataset, detailing the scale of rooms, splits, and object diversity.
> Metric Value Total Processed Rooms 23,472 Training Set Size (rooms) 22,472 Test Set Size (rooms) 1,000 Unique Object Categories 108 Objects per Room (range) 2 - 52

# 8. Explanation for metrics 

To provide a multifaceted evaluation of our method, we em-ploy a suite of metrics assessing visual fidelity, physical plausibility, and relational accuracy. 

Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID ↓). We assess the visual quality and diversity of our generated scenes by rendering top-down 2D views and calculating the FID score against rendered images from the ground-truth test set. This mea-sures the distributional similarity between generated and real scene layouts. However, this metric is limited in its applicability to our method, as our approach focuses more on physical plausibility, which the FID score cannot reflect. 

Mesh Collision Rate (Col mesh ↓). This metric quantifies the degree of inter-penetration between objects. For each scene, we use trimesh.CollisionManager to identify all intersecting mesh pairs. We consider a collision significant if the penetration depth exceeds a threshold of 0.01 units, ignoring minor surface contacts. The final score reports the percentage of objects involved in at least one significant col-lision across the entire test set. A lower score indicates su-perior physical plausibility. 

Graph Recall (GRecall ↑). To measure structural accuracy, we evaluate the adherence of generated scenes to the input spatial-relation graph. For each generated scene, we de-rive the pairwise relative spatial relationships between all objects based on their final poses. GRecall measures the proportion of relationships in the ground-truth input graph that are correctly realized in the generated scene. 

Average Support Distance (ASD ↓). This metric evaluates the physical quality of support relationships. For each sup-ported object, we compute the signed distances from its vertices to the supporting object. The absolute value of the minimum signed distance—representing the minimum gap or largest penetration—is taken as the support distance. ASD is the average of these distances over all support pairs. A lower value signifies more precise, high-quality contact. 

Isaac Stability (Stability ↑). To rigorously test physical ro-bustness, we perform ten 100-step physics simulations for each generated scene in NVIDIA Isaac Sim. We record the poses of all objects before and after the simulation. Stability is measured as the percentage of pairwise spatial relation-ships that remain unchanged after the simulation concludes. A high stability score indicates that the generated layout is physically sound and resilient to gravity-induced collapse. 

# 9. Ablation studies 

In the main paper, we discussed the effectiveness of each design in SPREAD , covering model architecture and guid-ance choice. Here, we present further methodological de-tails and ablation analysis. 

What is the effect of choosing Michelangelo encoder? 

While conventional encoders, such as those based on open-shape or trained on small datasets, can characterize shape, they often only offer simple image-text alignment semantic features or object identifiers specific to their small dataset. When selecting a shape encoder to extract geometric fea-tures, we consider not only the compatibility between the shape embedding and the relational input embeddings but also its capacity for capturing complex underlying geomet-ric information. The heightened requirements prompt us to employ a special encoder capable of both aligning the shape latent space with semantic modalities and capturing under-lying geometric information. Our early experiments re-vealed modest improvement compared with the plain shape encoder in performance metrics like the rate of mesh colli-Figure 7. Comparison of relational complexity between our pre-processed dataset (left) and the original 3D-FRONT dataset (right). 

> The sample from our dataset (left) contains a richer variety of indoor objects and exhibits complex, fine-grained spatial-physical relation-ships. In contrast, the sample from 3D-FRONT (right) lacks such fine-grained object interactions, particularly with small objects, high-lighting the relational sparsity inherent in the original dataset that our preprocessing pipeline aims to address

sion in a scene. 

What is the effect of geometry-aware module in scene diffusion? In this paper, we posit that geometry-aware dif-fusion is central to enabling generative models to under-stand and generate spatially and physically plausible scenes. Without the explicit integration of geometric information, conventional scene generation merely learns the statistical distribution of the dataset, a process inherently limited by the dataset’s scale and quality. However, the dataset dis-tribution is insufficient to capture complex inter-object re-lationships and therefore fails to address object intersec-tions within a scene. This relatively unexplored problem motivates us to integrate explicit awareness of the geo-metric state into the scene generation process at the cur-rent timestep. To evaluate our method’s performance with-out geometry feature diffusion, we remove the geometry-aware module. Consequently, the ablated model produces scenes with higher colliding rates and floating artifacts. This validates the effectiveness of geometry-aware module in achieving understanding and generating spatial and phys-ically plausible results. 

What is the effect of perceiver-based transformer as geometry-aware module? We advocate the use of perceiver-based transformer as our geometry-aware net-work. The architecture allows for processing large-scale point cloud inputs without structural modification, effec-tively reducing complexity of model without compromis-ing performance. An alternative is to employ plain trans-former. However, we observe it achieves equal performance at higher computational cost and deeper network structure. 

# 10. Baselines 

ATISS [32] generates indoor scenes by autoregressively adding objects. At each step, the model encodes the set of previously placed objects. It subsequently predicts the attributes including 3D location, size, orientation, and se-mantic category. 

DiffuScene . DiffuScene represents each scene as a fixed-size set of objects, where each object is characterized by a concatenation of properties including 3D location, size, ori-entation, semantic category, and geometric feature. During the generation, the model iteratively denoises a randomly initialized set of object attributes using a UNet-1D archi-tecture with attention mechanisms. After denoising, object geometries are retrieved from a 3D database using the pre-dicted shape codes and semantic labels. 

InstructScene . InstructScene synthesizes 3D indoor scenes through a two-stage generative framework. In the first stage, the model learns a semantic graph prior capturing high-level object relationships and appearance features conditioned on natural language instructions. In the second stage, a layout decoder generates precise 3D layout attributes-including lo-cation, size, and orientation—for each object by denoising a noisy latent representation derived from the semantic graph. However, it relies on object retrieval from a predefined asset library, which inherently introduces limitations. 

# 11. Additional results 

In Fig.8, we provide additional qualitative results and zoom-in visualization, demonstrating our work’s capability to generate physically plausible and meaningful relational re-sults. 

# 12. User study 

We conducted a perceptual user study to evaluate the phys-ical and semantic plausibility of our method in comparison to ATISS, DiffuScene and InstructScene on the scene gen-eration task. Fig.9 displays the scenes generated by the four methods alongside their corresponding post-physics simu-lation states. For each pair of results, participants were asked to select the scene exhibiting greater physical con-sistency and scene rationality. We collected 57 valid re-sponses and calculate the statistics. Our method secured 88.6% of the votes, demonstrating a substantial advantage over ATISS (0.9%), InstructScene (4.4%), and DiffuScene (6.1%). Figure 8. Additional Qualitative results . The gallery displays 8 randomly selected samples, demonstrating the diversity and physical plausibility of the generated 3D scenes. Figure 9. User Study UI. Based on the generated scene and the scene after physical simulation, which were available for detailed inspection via a zoom function, participants were asked to choose the pair exhibiting greater physical consistency and scene rationality.