Title: SCRAMPPI: Efficient Contingency Planning for Mobile Robot Navigation via Hamilton-Jacobi Reachability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26995v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:21:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# SCRAMPPI: Efficient Contingency Planning for Mobile Robot Navigation via Hamilton-Jacobi Reachability 

Raj Harshit Srirangam, Leonard Jung, Rohith Poola, and Michael Everett 

Abstract — Autonomous robots commonly aim to complete a nominal behavior while minimizing a cost; this leaves them vulnerable to failure or unplanned scenarios, where a backup or contingency plan to a safe set is needed to avoid a total mission failure. This is formalized as a trajectory optimization problem over the nominal cost with a safety constraint: from any point along the nominal plan, a feasible trajectory to a designated safe set must exist. Previous methods either relax this hard constraint, or use an expensive sampling-based strategy to optimize for this constraint. Instead, we formalize this requirement as a reach-avoid problem and leverage Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability analysis to certify contingency fea-sibility. By computing the value function of our safe-set’s backward reachable set online as the environment is revealed and integrating it with a sampling based planner (MPPI) via resampling based rollouts, we guarantee satisfaction of the hard constraint while greatly increasing sampling efficiency. Finally, we present simulated and hardware experiments demonstrating our algorithm generating nominal and contingency plans in real time on a mobile robot in an adversarial evasion task. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous mobile robots deployed in inspection, search-and-rescue, or surveillance tasks routinely face situations where the current mission must be abandoned. A sensor fault, a low-battery warning, or an operator abort command may require the robot to retreat to a designated safe location such as a charging station, a landing zone, or a communication relay point. Unlike emergency stopping or local obstacle avoidance, this contingency maneuver requires the robot to actively navigate to a specific set of states while avoiding obstacles. Crucially, it must be feasible at every point along the nominal trajectory: if the robot ever enters a state from which no obstacle-free path to a safe location exists within a bounded time horizon, the contingency guarantee is lost and recovery may be impossible. Existing contingency planning methods focus on safety-type contingencies: the robot must avoid a hazard, come to a stop, or execute a collision-free braking maneuver [1], [2], [3], [4]. However, many tasks require a liveness-type contingency: the robot must reach a designated set of states, such as returning to a charging station or retreating to a sheltered position. This type of contingency-constrained planning is fundamentally difficult for several reasons. First, the contingency requirement is not a pointwise state con-straint like obstacle avoidance; it is a functional constraint requiring that a dynamically feasible path to a target set exists from each candidate state. Every point along the          

> All authors are with Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA

{srirangam.r, jung.le, poola.r, m.everett }@northeastern.edu 

Fig. 1: To ensure safe planning, we require the existence of backup plans. For example, in hide-and-seek, the robot must always be able to reach a safe (occluded) region within a fixed time. We enforce this by constraining the robot to remain within the finite-time reachable set of safe regions (i.e., outside the unsafe set). .nominal plan becomes an independent reachability query—a nested optimization within an already constrained trajectory optimization. Second, the nominal planner cannot operate freely in the obstacle-free space; it is restricted to the subset of states from which a contingency is possible. This subset is not defined by simple geometric boundaries, it depends on the robot’s dynamics, control authority, obstacle geom-etry, and time horizon, and must be characterized through reachability analysis. Third, in unknown environments with a limited sensing horizon, this feasible set evolves as new obstacles are sensed. Contingency-MPPI [5] is the first method to explicitly constrain nominal plans to maintain backup feasibility, but it verifies it through sampling. This inherits a fundamental asymmetry: finding a contingency plan certifies feasibility, but failing to find one does not certify infeasibility. No finite amount of additional sampling resolves this ambiguity. While Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability has been combined with sampling-based control for obstacle avoidance [6], [7], no existing method uses HJ reach-avoid analysis to certify backup feasibility. The key insight in this paper is that the safe set retreat requirement is a reach-avoid problem. HJ reachability analysis solves this class of problems exactly: the sub-zero level set of the reach-avoid value function, 

{x : V (x) ≤ 0}, characterizes the set of all states from which a safe set is reachable while avoiding obstacles [8]. Evaluating V (x) ≤ 0 indicates that a contingency plan exists from state x, and the gradient ∇V yields the optimal controller guaranteed to execute it. Traditionally computed by discretizing the state space, it is well known that V (x)

> arXiv:2603.26995v1 [cs.RO] 27 Mar 2026

is computationally expensive to compute; however, it only needs to be recomputed whenever a new part of the environ-ment is sensed. In addition, for lower-dimensional systems, it can be computed extremely quickly via GPU-accelerated solvers. We present Safe Contingency Reach-Avoid MPPI (SCRAMPPI), a planning framework that integrates the HJ reach-avoid value function into MPPI for contingency-constrained navigation. The value function is computed on-line over the robot’s evolving occupancy grid using a GPU-accelerated solver and serves two roles: it defines the survival criterion for resampling-based MPPI rollouts [9], and yields the contingency controller when a contingency is triggered. Our contributions are as follows: 1) We formalize the contingency planning problem as a reach-avoid problem and show that the HJ reach-avoid value function characterizes the exact set of contingency-feasible states, providing a formal certifi-cate as opposed to sampling-based reachability. 2) We propose an algorithm that maintains contingency feasibility during nominal planning by using the con-tingency value function as a survival criterion in mul-timodal resampling-based MPPI rollouts 3) We validate SCRAMPPI in simulation on a unicycle and on a physical mobile robot navigating a partially unknown environment with designated safe zones in an adversarial evasion task. The value function is recomputed online as obstacles are discovered, and the framework runs in real time. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Contingency Planning 

Contingency planning methods maintain backup maneu-vers alongside a nominal plan so that the robot can respond to sudden changes. The type of guarantee varies across methods. Several approaches guarantee collision avoidance or emer-gency stopping. Contingency-MPC [1], [10] optimizes a nominal and backup trajectory as weighted cost terms, cou-pled at the first control action; the backup is a collision avoidance maneuver for a single pre-identified hazard such as a pop-out obstacle or loss of traction. FASTER [2] maintains a committed backup trajectory guaranteed to lie in known-free space and terminate at rest, providing a provable stop-in-place guarantee for UAVs in unknown environments. However, none of these methods can guarantee that the robot is reachable to a specific safe location. A second class of methods handles multi-agent interaction but provides only probabilistic safety. Branch MPC [3] and its extensions [11] constructs scenario trees over possible agent behaviors and optimizes over all branches using CVaR risk measures. These methods produce interactive, risk-aware plans but do not target a specific backup destination and offer no hard feasibility guarantees. Contingency-MPPI [5] is the most closely related work and the first to explicitly target a designated safe set. It nests a backup MPPI planner inside a nominal MPPI planner: for every candidate nominal trajectory, an inner MPPI checks whether a feasible path to a safe set exists from every state along it, and trajectories lacking a feasible backup are discarded. However, backup feasibility is assessed through sampling. If the inner planner fails to find a path due to insufficient samples or difficult geometry, the method cannot distinguish between a truly infeasible state and a sampling failure. No existing contingency planning method provides a formal certificate that a dynamically feasible path to a designated safe set exists. 

B. Hamilton-Jacobi Reachability in Planning 

Several methods build on HJ reachability for safe robot navigation. Most methods, such as FaSTrack [12] and HJ-Patch [13] consider only obstacle avoidance and have not been applied to the contingency setting. DeepReach [14] and HJRNO [15] use neural networks to approximate Hamilton–Jacobi (HJ) value functions, enabling scalability to higher-dimensional systems; however, because these value functions are learned from data, their accuracy and reliability are not guaranteed outside the training distribution, and they may fail to faithfully satisfy the underlying PDE constraints or safety guarantees. Bajcsy et al. [7] and Herbert et al. [16] proposed methods for speeding up the value function calculation, allowing for online use. However, both methods only guarantee overap-proximations of the reachable set. While overapproximating the obstacle set is sufficient for the avoidance problem that [7], [16] consider, it is problematic for our contingency reach-avoid formulation: a state flagged as reachable within the contingency horizon may not be truly reachable. Addi-tionally, [16] addresses the infinite-horizon case, whereas our contingency constraint requires a finite horizon. 

C. Safe Sampling-Based MPC 

MPPI [17], [18] is a sampling-based model predictive control method that optimizes control sequences by forward-simulating many trajectories and computing a weighted av-erage based on trajectory costs. Several methods incorporate safety into MPPI via control barrier functions [19], [20], [21], or filtering [6], [22]. Most relevant to our integration strategy is the resampling-based rollout (RBR) method of Yin et al. [9]. During MPPI rollouts, trajectories that violate a safety condition are terminated and rewired to the state of a surviving safe trajectory. The remaining controls are mutated with noise to maintain sample diversity, avoiding wasted computation on trajectories that have already failed. Yin et al. use discrete-time neural control barrier functions as the survival criterion. In our work, we replace this with the HJ reach-avoid value function, which provides continuous-time formal guarantees on reachability to the target set rather than learned safety approximations. 

Placement of this work. Existing contingency planners either target collision avoidance or stopping rather than a designated safe set [1], [2], provide only probabilistic guar-antees [3], [11], or verify backup feasibility through sam-Fig. 2: SCRAMPPI Architecture : (From left-to-right) We compute a finite-time reach-avoid value function from the safe set, occupancy map, and robot dynamics. These, along with the goal state, are passed to our planner, which uses MPC to seed an MPPI trajectory optimizer with rollout-based resampling. The robot executes the optimized trajectory during nominal operation, but switches to value-function control during contingencies to optimally drive the system to a safe zone. pling without formal certificates [5]. HJ reachability methods provide formal guarantees but have only been applied to obstacle avoidance [7], [16], [6], not liveness constraints such as contingency feasibility. SCRAMPPI is, to our knowledge, the first method to provide a formal contingency-feasibility certificate to a designated safe set while operating in partially unknown environments. The proposed framework for solving this problem is outlined in Fig. 2. III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Hamilton-Jacobi Reach-Avoid Analysis 

Consider a system with state x ∈ Rn and dynamics ˙x =

f (x, u), u ∈ U . Given a target set T and a constraint set O,the reach-avoid problem asks: from which initial states can the system be driven to T within a time horizon T while remaining outside O?Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability analysis [23], [24], [8] answers this by computing a value function V (x) via a Hamilton-Jacobi variational inequality solved backward in time from T over the horizon T . The sub-zero level set of 

V characterizes the exact set of states from which the target is reachable while avoiding constraints: 

V (x) ≤ 0 ⇐⇒ ∃ π s.t. ∃ τ ∈ [0 , T ] : ξπ 

> x

(τ ) ∈ T 

and ξπ 

> x

(s) /∈ O ∀ s ∈ [0 , τ ] (1) where ξπ 

> x

(τ ) is the state at time τ under policy π starting from x.Intuitively, V (x) measures how reachable the target set is from state x. Negative values indicate states from which a feasible path to T exists, with more negative values indicating greater margin V (x) = 0 is the boundary of the feasible set, and V (x) > 0 indicates states from which no feasible path exists within the horizon T .The analysis also yields the optimal controller: 

u∗(x) = arg min  

> u∈U

∇V (x) · f (x, u) (2) which drives the state toward T at the maximum rate. For control-affine dynamics ˙x = f0(x)+ g(x)u, the Hamiltonian is linear in u and the optimal control takes values at the vertices of U. If V (x) ≤ 0, applying u∗ is guaranteed to reach T within time T while avoiding O [8]. 

B. Model Predictive Path Integral Control 

Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control [17], [18] is a sampling-based model predictive control method that optimizes a control sequence without requiring gradients of the cost or dynamics. At each planning step, M control sequences {u(i)0: N −1}Mi=1 are sampled by adding Gaussian noise to a mean sequence ¯u0: N −1. Each sequence is rolled out through the dynamics to produce a state trajectory x(i)0: N

and evaluated under a cost function J(x(i)0: N , u(i)0: N −1). The mean is then updated as a cost-weighted average: 

¯ut ← ¯ut +

PMi=1 wi (u(i) 

> t

− ¯ut)

PMi=1 wi

(3) where wi = exp   − 1 

> λ

(J(i) − Jmin ) and λ > 0 is a temperature parameter. Only the first control ¯u0 is executed, and the process repeats at the next timestep in a receding-horizon fashion. The cost function is arbitrary: safety con-straints can be encoded as large penalties without requiring differentiability or convexity. However, MPPI provides no mechanism to guarantee that the executed trajectory satisfies hard constraints. IV. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

A. System and Environment 

Consider a robot with state x ∈ X ⊆ Rn and dynamics 

˙x = f (x, u), u ∈ U. The robot operates in a static environment that is not fully known a priori, and has a limited sensing horizon. It builds an occupancy grid M online from onboard sensing, where each cell is classified as free or occupied; unknown cells are assumed to be occupied. We denote the set of obstacle states derived from M at time t

as O(t) ⊂ X . The environment contains a set of pre-defined safe sets known by the robot S = {S 1, . . . , SK } ⊂ X to which the robot can retreat in the event of a contingency, and a goal region G ⊂ X defining the robot’s primary objective. 

B. Contingency-Constrained Planning 

The robot must navigate toward G while ensuring that a contingency maneuver to a safe set is always feasible. Let N denote the nominal planning horizon, u0: N −1 =(u0, . . . , uN −1) the nominal control sequence, x0: N =(x0, . . . , xN ) the resulting state trajectory under discrete-time dynamics xk+1 = fd(xk, uk, ∆t) with timestep ∆t, and 

Tc the contingency time horizon. Following [5], we formulate this as a constrained trajectory optimization: 

min  

> u0: N−1

Jgoal (x0: N , u0: N −1) (4a) s.t. xk+1 = fd(xk, uk, ∆t) (4b) 

∀k ∈ { 0, . . . , N }, ∃ πk s.t. ∃ τ ∈ [0 , T c] : 

ξπk 

> xk

(τ ) ∈ S and ξπk 

> xk

(s) /∈ O ∀ s ∈ [0 , τ ] (4c) where Jgoal is the goal-reaching cost, πk : [0 , T c] → U is a contingency control policy initiated from xk, and ξπk 

> xk

(τ )

is the state at time τ under πk. Constraint (4c) requires that from every state along the nominal plan, there exists a trajectory that drives the robot to some Si ∈ S within Tc

while avoiding O.

C. Contingency Feasibility via Reach-Avoid Analysis 

Enforcing (4c) directly is expensive: it requires solving a reachability query at every state along every candidate trajectory. Contingency-MPPI [5] approximates this by run-ning a nested MPPI planner at each state, but cannot certify feasibility when the inner planner fails to find a path. We observe that (4c) is exactly the reach-avoid condition from Section III-A, with target set T = SKi=1 Si and constraint set O. Computing the reach-avoid value function 

V over T and O with horizon Tc, the contingency-feasible set is: 

C = {x : V (x) ≤ 0} (5) and the constraint (4c) reduces to: 

xk ∈ C , ∀k ∈ { 0, . . . , N } (6) This replaces the nested optimization with a pointwise eval-uation of V (xk). The certificate V (x) ≤ 0 is exact: it holds if and only if a dynamically feasible contingency plan exists from x.Because V is computed over the union of safe sets, the optimal controller u∗(x) from (2) implicitly selects the most reachable safe set at every state via ∇V , without requiring a discrete assignment. If a contingency is triggered at any 

x ∈ C , applying u∗ is guaranteed to reach a safe set within 

Tc [8]. The challenge now shifts from verifying contingency feasi-bility to two operational problems: (1) computing V online as the environment evolves, and (2) maintaining the robot within C during nominal planning. Section V addresses both. V. A PPROACH 

A. Framework Overview 

Algorithm 1: SCRAMPPI  

> 1

Input: x0, u0: N −1, {¯u(g)0: N −1}Ma

> g=0

, S, O 

> 2

Output: Nominal Control Sequence  

> 3

Parameters: M, T ; f, ∆t, J goal ; Σ ∈ Rn×n, λ, α, δ  

> 4

u′  

> 0: N−1

← u0: N −1 

> 5

V (x) ← FindValueFunction (f, S, O) 

> 6

for m = 0 to M − 1 do  

> 7

Choose proposal mean 

μ(m) ∼ { u, ¯u(1) , . . . , ¯u(Ma)} 

> 8

xm, 0 ← x0, Sm ← 0 

> 9

for i = 0 to T − 1 do  

> 10

for m = 0 to M − 1 do  

> 11

Em,i ∼ N (0 , Σ)  

> 12

um,i ← μ(m) 

> i

+ Em,i  

> 13

xm,i +1 ← xm,i + f (xm,i , um,i )∆ t 

> 14

for each group g = 0 , . . . , M a do  

> 15

Kgi ← { m ∈ group( g) : V (xm,i +1 ) < −δ};

for m ∈ group( g) \ K gi do  

> 16

Resample um,i from Kgi and update 

xm,i +1  

> 17

for m = 0 to M − 1 do  

> 18

Sm += Jgoal (xm,i , um,i ) + ∞ · 

1V (xm,i )≥− δ + λ(1 − α)ETm,i Σ−1Em,i  

> 19

ρ ← min m Sm, wm ← exp  − 1 

> λ

(Sm − ρ) 

> 20

u′  

> 0: N−1

+=    

> P
> mwmEm, :
> P
> mwm
> 21

return u′ 

> 0: N−1

SCRAMPPI operates in two modes. In nominal mode, MPPI plans toward the goal G while the reach-avoid value function V keeps the robot within the contingency-feasible set C. In contingency mode, triggered by an external signal, the robot switches to the HJ optimal controller u∗ (2) and navigates to a safe state. The value function V serves three roles. First, it defines the survival criterion for multimodal resampling-based rollouts during MPPI planning (Section V-D). Second, it provides the feasibility check in the control selection hierarchy that determines which control is executed (Section V-D.2). Third, its gradient yields the contingency controller u∗ used both as the terminal fallback during nominal planning and as the active controller during contingency execution (Section V-D.3). 

B. Reach-Avoid Value Function 1) Online Computation: The value function V is computed over the robot’s evolving occupancy grid 

M using a GPU-accelerated HJ solver based on the 

hj reachability library [25], which uses JAX. The target set is the union of all safe zones, represented via a pointwise minimum of signed distance functions. Recompu-tation is triggered when the number of changed cells in M

exceeds a threshold Ncell , or at a fixed interval of ∆trecomp 

seconds. Unknown cells in M are treated as occupied (pessimistic). Under this assumption, the obstacle set can only shrink as the robot senses its environment: if Oold ⊇ O new , then 

Vold (x) ≥ Vnew (x) for all x, and {x : Vold (x) ≤ 0} ⊆ {x : Vnew (x) ≤ 0}. The old value function therefore remains a conservative certificate during the recomputation window, and the contingency-feasible set C grows monotonically as the environment is revealed. We perform full recomputation rather than warm-starting from the previous solution. Existing warm-starting meth-ods [7], [16] produce overapproximations of the backward reachable set, which is unsafe in the reach-avoid setting (see Section II). Full recomputation is tractable for our low-dimensional system; the GPU-accelerated solver computes 

V over a 400 × 160 × 60 grid in approximately 43 ms. 

2) Safety Margin: In practice, zero-order hold execution and grid interpolation introduce small errors between the continuous-time value function and its discrete evaluation. To maintain the contingency certificate under discrete execution, all value function queries enforce a tightened condition 

V (x) < −δ with an empirically chosen margin δ > 0.A formal bound can be derived by considering how much 

V can change due to (1) unmonitored state drift between planning steps, scaled by the Lipschitz constant LV of V , and (2) the interpolation error from querying V on a finite grid with spacing ∆x. This gives δ ≥ LV · ϵZOH + LV ∆x√n/ 2,where ϵZOH is the per-step ZOH drift. For typical parameters, 

δ ≈ ∆x suffices. 

C. Ancillary Controller Generation 

Following [5], we use adaptive importance sampling with ancillary controllers to improve the sampling efficiency of MPPI. A topological PRM planner finds multiple homotopi-cally distinct paths to the goal, and a nonlinear MPC solver generates a dynamically feasible control sequence along each path. These control sequences serve as ancillary means for the MPPI sampling distribution, spreading samples across multiple homotopy classes rather than concentrating them around a single mode. The path planner operates on a grid where regions with V (x) > 0 are masked as occupied, ensuring that all ancillary paths lie within C before MPPI begins sampling. 

D. Contingency-Constrained MPPI 1) Multimodal Resampling-Based Rollouts: During nom-inal operation, MPPI generates candidate control sequences by sampling perturbations around a mean, rolling each out through the dynamics, and computing a cost-weighted aver-age [17], [18]. The challenge is ensuring that the resulting trajectory remains within C = {x : V (x) ≤ 0}. Simply penalizing or rejecting trajectories that leave C wastes sam-ples and, for nonholonomic systems, causes the surviving population to collapse onto a narrow band of controls. We instead adopt the Resampling-Based Rollout (RBR) frame-work of Yin et al. [9], which rewires unsafe samples at each timestep to the state of a surviving trajectory and mutates their future controls, preserving both sample efficiency and diversity. We make two modifications: the survival criterion is the HJ reach-avoid value function rather than a learned neural DCBF, and resampling is restricted to within each ancillary group. 

Survival criterion: At each rollout timestep, all sam-ples are propagated forward and evaluated against the contingency-feasibility condition V (x(m)

> t+1

) < −δ. The reach-avoid value function provides a formal certificate: V (x) ≤ 0

holds if and only if a dynamically feasible contingency plan exists. The variance reduction and unbiasedness guarantees of RBR [9, Theorems 3–5] are independent of the choice of survival criterion and carry over directly. 

Group-local resampling: The total sample budget M is partitioned into Ma + 1 groups, one per ancillary mean (Section V-C) plus the previous MPPI mean. In standard RBR, any unsafe sample may clone from any survivor. In our multimodal setting, this causes mode collapse: if one homotopy class passes through a region with uniformly negative V , all its samples survive, while a class threading a narrow corridor loses most of its population. Under global resampling, the corridor group’s dead samples are replaced by clones from the easy group, and after several timesteps the planner loses coverage of the alternative route entirely. We prevent this by restricting resampling to within each ancillary group: sample m may only clone from a survivor that shares the same proposal mean. Each group maintains its own survivor pool, and groups whose homotopy class is entirely infeasible are reset independently. This trades a reduction in per-group effective sample size—groups with few survivors have higher variance—for the preservation of multi-modal coverage, which is critical when the lowest-cost homotopy class changes as new obstacles are sensed. The unbiasedness result of [9, Theorem 3] holds within each group since the resampling operation is identical—it is simply applied to a smaller pool. After the RBR phase, all evolved control sequences undergo a clean re-evaluation TABLE I: Quantitative comparison of contingency planners across 100 randomly generated environments. SCRAM de-notes the proposed SCRAMPPI method. C-MPPI-N denotes Contingency-MPPI with N contingency samples. Best results are in bold (excluding vanilla MPPI, which does not enforce contingency feasibility).                                     

> Metric MPPI CMPPI-100 CMPPI-1000 SCRAM(noRBR) SCRAM
> Success Rate (%) 100.0 44.0 84.0 92.0 100.0
> Avg. Steps 80 126 119 106 102
> Avg. ESS 0.202 0.144 0.253 0.321 0.446
> Valid Cont. (%) -96.3 98.5 100 100
> Avg. Unsafe States 15.4 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.0
> MPPI Time (ms) 2.6 17.2 126.4 43.8 44.4 VRAM (MB) 22.0 102.7 1159.7 33.6 33.6

from x0 following [9], with an infinite cost penalty on any state satisfying V (x) ≥ − δ.

2) Control Selection: The MPPI weighted mean may violate the contingency constraint because the safe control set is non-convex. After computing the weighted-mean sequence 

¯u′  

> 0: N−1

via (3), the planner simulates one step and checks 

V (fd(x0, ¯u′

> 0

, ∆t)) < −δ. If satisfied, ¯u′ 

> 0

is executed. Other-wise, the first control of the lowest-cost trajectory satisfying 

V < −δ at every step is executed. If no safe trajectory exists, the planner falls back to the HJ optimal controller u∗(x0)

from (2), which is guaranteed to drive the robot toward a safe set within Tc whenever V (x0) ≤ 0 [8]. 

3) Contingency Execution: When a contingency is trig-gered by an external signal, the robot switches from MPPI to the HJ optimal controller u∗ (2). Because V is computed over the union of all safe zones, the gradient at each state points toward whichever safe zone is most reachable. The robot follows u∗ until it enters a safe set Si. If V (x) ≤ 0 at the time of the trigger, u∗ is guaranteed to reach S within 

Tc while avoiding O [8], [24]; the safety margin δ described in Section V-B.2 ensures this guarantee holds under discrete-time execution. VI. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Simulation Results 

We evaluate SCRAMPPI in simulation on a unicycle robot across 100 randomly generated cluttered environments with sparse safe zones and a short contingency like Fig. 3. The robot navigates to a goal while dynamically updating its oc-cupancy grid using a limited sensing radius and maintaining a valid contingency path to a designated safe set at every timestep. We compare against:  

> •

MPPI: Standard goal-reaching with no contingency awareness.  

> •

C-MPPI-100 and C-MPPI-1000: Contingency-MPPI [5] with 100 and 1000 inner samples for backup feasibility verification.  

> •

SCRAMPPI (no RBR): The HJ reach-avoid value function used as a cost penalty without resampling-based rollouts.  

> •

SCRAMPPI: The full method with HJ value function and multimodal RBR. Results are summarized in Table I. SCRAMPPI and SCRAMPPI (no RBR) both achieve 100% valid contingen-cies with zero unsafe states, as both directly enforce the value function certificate. C-MPPI reports a small number of unsafe states because we validate all methods against the HJ value function, which C-MPPI does not have access to—states near the boundary of C may pass C-MPPI’s tolerance-based check while being classified as infeasible by the exact reachable set. More significantly, C-MPPI’s valid contingency rate remains below 100% even with 1000 inner samples, meaning its inner planner sometimes fails to find a backup path entirely, leading to lower success rates. The benefit of RBR is visible in sample efficiency. SCRAMPPI achieves the highest ESS (0.446 vs 0.321 for SCRAMPPI (no RBR)) because RBR recycles samples that would otherwise be discarded for violating the contingency constraint. This translates directly into planning quality: SCRAMPPI consistently reaches goals in under 110 steps even with as few as 20 samples, whereas SCRAMPPI (no RBR) begins to struggle at 50. The computational advantage of the value function ap-proach is substantial. SCRAMPPI’s MPPI sampling time is approximately 2 ms per step—comparable to vanilla MPPI— since the contingency check is a pointwise V lookup rather than a nested rollout. The 44.4 ms reported in Table I includes the HJ value function recomputation, which is triggered only when the map changes; in steady state, SCRAMPPI runs at the same speed as unconstrained MPPI. By con-trast, C-MPPI-1000 requires 126 ms per step regardless of whether the environment has changed, and its cost scales with the nominal horizon, contingency horizon, number of outer samples, and number of inner samples—all of which multiply. VRAM usage is 33.6 MB vs 1159.7 MB, a 34 ×

reduction. This gap grows with the planning horizon: in-creasing the MPPI horizon from 30 to 60 steps raises C-MPPI-1000’s VRAM from 1159.7 MB to 2514.4 MB, and doubling the contingency horizon pushes it to 5397 MB, while SCRAMPPI remains at 33.6 MB in all configurations since the value function grid size is independent of the planning and contingency horizons. The HJ value function solve (approximately 42 ms per recomputation) is a fixed cost triggered only by map changes, amortized across all samples and timesteps. 

B. Hardware Experiments 

For hardware validation, we deployed SCRAMPPI on an AgileX Scout Mini platform with a ROG NUC (NVIDIA RTX 4070) in an adversarial evasion scenario. Given an adversary, the robot must navigate to a goal while ensuring a contingency plan to a state occluded from the adversary by obstacles. A lidar sensor onboard was used for localization and obstacle/occlusion map creation via ray tracing, enabling autonomous detection of obstacles and safe sets. The value function was recomputed at every planning step to reflect the current sensed environment. The planner ran onboard at 15 Hz and consistently reached the goal while maintaining valid contingency plans across Fig. 3: Simulation result of SCRAMPPI in a randomly generated environment. The background heatmap shows the reach-avoid value function V (x) minimum over θ, with the zero level set (dashed red) delineating the contingency-feasible region ( V ≤ 0, blue) from infeasible states ( V > 0,red). Light blue traces show multimodal, safe MPPI rollout samples. 

Fig. 4: Snapshot from hardware deployment comparing MPPI and SCRAMPPI in an adversarial evasion scenario. (Left) MPPI selects the shortest path to the goal without maintaining backup feasibility. (Right) SCRAMPPI selects the longer path that preserves contingency feasibility to occluded safe sets all trials. During several runs, we manually triggered contin-gency execution, simulating an adversary alert. In each case, the robot successfully followed u∗ to a safe set occluded from the adversary. As shown in Fig. 4, SCRAMPPI takes the longer route that preserves contingency feasibility, while vanilla MPPI takes the direct route through the region where no backup to a safe set exists. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented SCRAMPPI, a contingency-constrained nav-igation framework that replaces sampling-based contingency checks with an exact reach-avoid certificate from Hamilton– Jacobi reachability. By integrating the HJ value function into MPPI through multimodal resampling-based rollouts, the planner enforces the hard requirement that every state along the nominal plan admits a feasible backup to a designated safe set without the ambiguity inherent in finite sampling. Group-local resampling preserves exploration across homo-topically distinct routes, and a simple fallback hierarchy ensures that a safe control is always executed. In simulation over 100 random environments, SCRAMPPI achieved 100% valid contingencies with MPPI sampling times comparable to unconstrained MPPI, while Contingency-MPPI could not guarantee feasibility regardless of inner sample count. Hard-ware experiments on a mobile robot confirmed real-time operation at 15 Hz with successful contingency execution. Several limitations point toward future work. Grid-based HJ solvers scale exponentially with state dimension, restrict-ing the current implementation to systems with three or four continuous states. Learned value function approximations such as DeepReach [14] or neural operator methods [15] could extend the approach to higher-dimensional systems, though the loss of the exact certificate must be carefully managed. Finally, the current formulation assumes a static environment; extending the reach-avoid analysis to account for dynamic obstacles or moving agents would require either higher-dimensional value functions or time-varying constraint sets, both of which remain open challenges. REFERENCES [1] J. P. Alsterda, M. Brown, and J. C. Gerdes, “Contingency model predictive control for automated vehicles,” in Proc. Amer. Control Conf. (ACC) , Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2019, pp. 717–722. [2] J. Tordesillas, B. T. Lopez, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “FASTER: Fast and safe trajectory planner for navigation in unknown environments,” 

IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 922–938, 2022. [3] Y. Chen, U. Rosolia, W. Ubellacker, N. Csomay-Shanklin, and A. D. Ames, “Interactive multi-modal motion planning with branch model predictive control,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5365– 5372, 2022. [4] C. Pek and M. Althoff, “Fail-safe motion planning for online verifica-tion of autonomous vehicles using convex optimization,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 37, no. 3, 2021. [5] L. Jung, A. Estornell, and M. Everett, “Contingency constrained planning with MPPI within MPPI,” in Proc. 7th Annu. Learn. for Dyn. & Control Conf. (L4DC) , ser. Proc. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 283, 2025, pp. 869–880. [6] J. Borquez, L. Raus, Y. U. Ciftci, and S. Bansal, “DualGuard MPPI: Safe and performant optimal control by combining sampling-based MPC and Hamilton-Jacobi reachability,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. ,2025. [7] A. Bajcsy, S. Bansal, E. Bronstein, V. Tolani, and C. J. Tomlin, “An efficient reachability-based framework for provably safe autonomous navigation in unknown environments,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC) , Nice, France, 2019, pp. 1758–1765. [8] S. Bansal, M. Chen, S. Herbert, and C. J. Tomlin, “Hamilton-Jacobi reachability: A brief overview and recent advances,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC) , Melbourne, Australia, 2017, pp. 2242–2253. [9] J. Yin, O. So, E. Y. Yu, C. Fan, and P. Tsiotras, “Safe beyond the horizon: Efficient sampling-based MPC with neural control barrier functions,” in Proc. Robot.: Sci. and Syst. (RSS) , 2025. [10] J. P. Alsterda and J. C. Gerdes, “Contingency model predictive control for linear time-varying systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12045 ,2021. [11] T. Li, L. Zhang, S. Liu, and S. Shen, “MARC: Multipolicy and risk-aware contingency planning for autonomous driving,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 6587–6594, 2023. [12] S. L. Herbert, M. Chen, S. Han, S. Bansal, J. F. Fisac, and C. J. Tomlin, “FaSTrack: A modular framework for fast and guaranteed safe motion planning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC) ,Melbourne, Australia, 2017, pp. 1517–1522. [13] S. Tonkens, A. Toofanian, Z. Qin, S. Gao, and S. Herbert, “Patching approximately safe value functions leveraging local Hamilton-Jacobi reachability analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC) , Milan, Italy, 2024. [14] S. Bansal and C. J. Tomlin, “DeepReach: A deep learning approach to high-dimensional reachability,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , Xi’an, China, 2021, pp. 1817–1824. [15] Y. Li and M. Chen, “HJRNO: Hamilton-Jacobi reachability with neural operators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19989 , 2025. [16] S. L. Herbert, S. Ghosh, S. Bansal, and C. J. Tomlin, “Reachability-based safety guarantees using efficient initializations,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC) , Nice, France, 2019. [17] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou, “Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , Stockholm, Sweden, 2016, pp. 1433–1440. [18] ——, “Information-theoretic model predictive control: Theory and applications to autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1603–1622, 2018. [19] J. Yin, C. Dawson, C. Fan, and P. Tsiotras, “Shield model predictive path integral: A computationally efficient robust MPC method using control barrier functions,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , 2023. [20] M. S. Gandhi, H. Almubarak, and E. A. Theodorou, “Safe importance sampling in model predictive path integral control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03441 , 2023. [21] P. Rabiee and J. B. Hoagg, “Guaranteed-safe MPPI through composite control barrier functions for efficient sampling in multi-constrained robotic systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02154 , 2024. [22] J. Borquez, K. Chakraborty, H. Wang, and S. Bansal, “On safety and liveness filtering using Hamilton-Jacobi reachability analysis,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , 2024. [23] I. M. Mitchell, A. M. Bayen, and C. J. Tomlin, “A time-dependent Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of reachable sets for continuous dynamic games,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 947–957, Jul. 2005. [24] K. Margellos and J. Lygeros, “Hamilton–Jacobi formulation for reach– avoid differential games,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 1849–1861, Aug. 2011. [25] E. Schmerling, “hj reachability: Hamilton-Jacobi reachability analysis in JAX,” Stanford Autonomous Systems Lab, software library. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/StanfordASL/hj reachability