Title: Learning Smooth and Robust Space Robotic Manipulation of Dynamic Target via Inter-frame Correlation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27537v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:13:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Learning Smooth and Robust Space Robotic Manipulation of Dynamic Target via Inter-frame Correlation 

Siyi Lang 1, Hongyi Gao 1, Yingxin Zhang 1, Zihao Liu 1, Hanlin Dong 2,Zhaoke Ning 3, Zhiqiang Ma 1, and Panfeng Huang 1

Abstract —On-orbit servicing represents a critical frontier in future aerospace engineering, with the manipulation of dynamic non-cooperative targets serving as a key technology. In micro-gravity environments, objects are typically free-floating, lacking the support and frictional constraints found on Earth, which significantly increases the complexity of tasks involving space robotic manipulation. Conventional planning and control-based methods are primarily limited to known, static scenarios and lack real-time responsiveness. To achieve precise robotic manipulation of dynamic targets in unknown unstructured space environments, this letter proposes a data-driven space robotic manipulation approach that integrates historical temporal information and inter-frame correlation mechanisms. By exploiting the temporal correlation between historical and current frames, the system can effectively capture motion features within the scene, thereby pro-ducing stable and smooth manipulation trajectories for dynamic targets. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we developed a ground-based experimental platform consisting of a PIPER X robotic arm and a dual-axis linear stage, which accurately simulates microgravity free-floating motion in a 2D plane. 

I. INTRODUCTION Conventional methods for space robotic manipulation pri-marily rely on planning and control strategies based on dy-namic models and human experience [1], [2]. These model-based methods require pre-designed task workflows and lack autonomy, making them unsuitable for high-dynamic scenarios that need real-time responses as humans do [1], [2]. A possible solution is to use data-driven intelligent robotic manipulation methods [3]. By training on a large number of task trajectories, high-precision, reliable, and stable policies can be built [4]. This approach does not rely on high-accuracy dynamic models or precise target information. It offers certain generalization and multi-task capabilities, representing a promising path for future space robotic manipulation. Data-driven methods for intelligent robotic manipulation can be mainly divided into two technical paths: Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) based and Diffusion Policy (DP) based methods [5], [6], [7]. CVAE-based approaches generate predicted trajectories through action encoding and          

> *This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62422316, 62373305, and 62403387, the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China JYB2025XDXM207. (Corresponding authors: Zhiqiang Ma).
> 1S. Lang, H. Gao, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Ma and P. Huang are with Re-search Center for Intelligent Robotics, School of Astronautics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China .
> 2H. Dong is with School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China .
> 3Z. Ning is with School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sichuan Univer-sity, Chengdu 610065, China.

conditional decoding, and the inclusion of latent variables provides these methods with good generalization and helps mitigate covariate shift issues. Meanwhile, DP models employ active noise addition and conditional denoising to generate a precise motion sequence with strong robustness and high pre-diction accuracy. Another prominent technical path is Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [8], [9], [10], [11], which have demonstrated excellent performance in various complex tasks, and these models typically possess a massive number of parameters, making them unsuitable for onboard devices with limited computing power. Existing methods succeed in various tasks, yet conventional models mentioned above, relying on single-frame observa-tions, struggle to capture scene motion features, limiting future state prediction. In imitation learning, one-to-many mapping from branching trajectories induces a multi-modal action dis-tribution [12]. As shown in Fig. 1, when a robotic manipulator is grasping a moving target, without temporal consistency, the trained agent may randomly select different grasp points at consecutive time steps, leading to unstable manipulation actions. Connecting the first steps of these inconsistent plans results in severe oscillations and saw-tooth trajectories. Such high-frequency jitter not only reduces the success rate but also compromises the robotic manipulator base’s attitude stability through dy-namic coupling [13]. Given that target dynamics are crucial for successful manipulation, we propose an imitation learning method that explicitly captures inter-frame motion features to enable robust manipulation of dynamic targets. 

Fig. 1: Illustration of trajectory oscillation. To address the challenge of learning smooth and robust space robotic manipulation of dynamic targets, we propose 

> arXiv:2603.27537v1 [cs.RO] 29 Mar 2026

a manipulation method based on imitation learning that in-tegrates an Inter-frame Correlation Network. The core inno-vation of this method is the introduction of an inter-frame correlation mechanism to capture spatio-temporal correlation information within continuous visual streams. By constructing a cost volume [14], [15], the model transforms pixel-level displacement cues between two consecutive frames into high-dimensional action tokens for a Transformer-based action generation network [16], [17]. This allows the model to learn the representation of the target’s motion trends. This design enables the system to predict the trajectory evolution of the target, thereby achieving precise and stable proactive interception manipulation of dynamic targets. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Robotic Manipulation of Dynamic targets 

Unlike explicit planning, learning-based systems map ob-servations of dynamic targets directly to actions of robotic manipulation. GA-DDPG [18] and the teacher-student frame-work designed by Christen et al. [19] demonstrate the fea-sibility of using 3D point clouds for policy learning, though they often rely on extra instance segmentation. Alternatively, some methods integrate grasp detection by encoding graspable points into the policy. For instance, GAMMA [20] utilizes 9D features for online fusion, while EARL [21] and GAP-RL [22] leverage key points or stochastic Gaussian points to guide tracking and grasping. Generally, these approaches rely on high-speed inference to achieve passive-responsive tracking of moving targets. However, instance segmentation models impose significant computational overhead, making them difficult to deploy on power-limited satellite platforms. Methods relying solely on tracking-and-approaching face challenges due to high-dynamic requirements and the need for extreme inference efficiency. In this letter, by extracting motion information through dual-frame correlation, our system enables target trend prediction and generates proactive manipulating actions without high computational costs and excessive hardware reliance. 

B. Imitation learning in robotic manipulation 

Imitation learning is a data-driven approach to robotic manipulation that learns policies directly from expert demon-strations [23]. By eliminating the need for precise environ-mental models or accurate reward function engineering, it offers significant advantages in complex and unstructured scenarios [24]. Imitation learning encompasses various technical ap-proaches, including Behavior Cloning (BC) [25], Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [26], Generative Adversar-ial Imitation Learning (GAIL) [27], and Diffusion Pol-icy (DP) [28]. Among these, Action Chunking with Trans-formers (ACT) [29], as a state-of-the-art method, BC and DP have emerged as focal points of current research due to their exceptional performance in robotic manipulation tasks. Although DP offers superior precision and generalization, its lengthy inference time makes it difficult to meet the demands of high-dynamic scenarios. This letter adopts ACT as a foundation and integrates an inter-frame correlation network to design an autonomous manipulation approach. The main contributions of this work are as follows. First, we propose a novel imitation learning architecture that captures spatio-temporal dependencies from continuous visual streams, effectively addressing the stability issues inherent in single-frame policies. Second, through ex-tensive physical experiments, we validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, demonstrating significant improvements in both manipulation success rates and trajectory smoothness compared to baseline models. Finally, we developed a ground-based experimental platform capable of simulating 2D micro-gravity free-floating motion and single-axis rotation. Based on the platform, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the energy dissipation and dynamic processes during the manipulation of moving targets, providing a reliable physical basis for verifying autonomous manipulation strategies in space-like environments. III. M ETHOD 

To achieve precise manipulation of non-cooperative targets in complex and high-dynamic orbital environments, this chap-ter proposes an imitation learning architecture that integrates an Inter-frame correlation network. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the system first extracts feature maps from two consecu-tive frames of a specific camera. An inter-frame correlation layer then computes the relationship between these maps and transforms the resulting spatio-temporal cues into high-dimensional tokens. These tokens, along with environmental representations, are fed into a downstream Transformer action prediction network, enabling the model to perceive motion trends and generate continuous joint control sequences [30]. This design bypasses complex dynamic parameter estimation and significantly enhances the system’s proactive interception capabilities in unstructured scenarios. 

A. Inter-frame Correlation Network 

We employ a 4D cost volume to model the relationships between two images, which is a widely used approach for measuring the similarity between various regions across image pairs [31]. In this approach, when region A in Image 1 is found to be highly similar to region B in Image 2, it suggests that the object originally located at region A has moved to region B in the subsequent frame [14], [16]. The process mentioned above illustrates how the cost volume serves as an effective tool for representing motion information within a scene, and the main structure of the inter-frame correlation network is shown in Fig. 3. The structure of the inter-frame correlation network consists of two main stages. In the first stage, a ResNet-18 [32] is employed as the backbone to extract deep features from the current image It ∈ RH′×W ′×C and the previous image 

It−1 ∈ RH′×W ′×C . By applying a 32 × downsampling factor, the backbone transforms these input images into high-level Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed network architecture. The top-left portion displays the CVAE encoder, which predicts the style latent variable z representing task characteristics. The bottom-left portion integrates an inter-frame correlation network to extract key motion tokens by comparing consecutive visual frames. The right portion shows the CVAE decoder, which maps the current multi-modal perception data and latent variables into the final robotic action sequences. feature representations, ultimately yielding two feature tensors 

Ft ∈ RH×W ×D and Ft−1 ∈ RH×W ×D , where H, W , and D

denote the height, width, and channel depth of the feature maps, respectively. In this method, the image resolution is set to H′ = 480 and 

W ′ = 640 , while C represents the number of channels, the typical value being 3. The ResNet-18 backbone performs fea-ture extraction with a 32 × downsampling factor, resulting in feature tensors Ft, F t−1 ∈ R15 ×20 ×512 . Using these features, a 4D cost volume C is constructed by computing the all-pairs correlation between the two frames. This 15 × 20 × 15 × 20 

volume exhaustively captures the matching confidence across all spatial regions and serves as the fundamental representation for motion information extraction. Each entry of the cost volume is computed via the dot product of feature vectors at their respective spatial locations, as shown in Eq. (1): 

C(i, j, k, l ) = Ft(i, j )⊤Ft−1(k, l ) (1) In the second stage, the 4D cost volume C is reshaped into a set of 15 × 20 correlation matrices, each with a spatial dimension of 15 × 20 . Each matrix represents the similarity distribution between a specific location in the current frame and the entire search space in the reference frame. To extract high-level representations from these distributions, a multi-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is employed to generate cost volume embeddings, the details of which are detailed in Table I and Eq. 2. 

Si,j = CNN (Ci,j ) (2) Through a series of strided convolutions, the CNN reduces the spatial resolution of each correlation matrix from 15 × 20 

TABLE I: Architecture of the CNN for cost volume Embed-ding.                             

> Layer Input Size Kernel Stride Channel Conv1 + ReLU 15 ×20 6×62dembed /4
> Conv2 + ReLU 7×10 6×62dembed /2
> Conv3 3×56×62dembed

to 2 × 3, which is then flattened to form a semantic feature vector of length 6. This results in a semantic representation 

S ∈ R15 ×20 ×6×dembed .Given the inherent information redundancy in this represen-tation, a Transformer cross-attention mechanism for feature compression is introduced to explore the interactions between different spatial locations. Each Si,j ∈ R6×dembed is treated as Key and Value, while two dembed -dimensional trainable latent queries serve as the Query. This mechanism refines and compresses the information into a compact cost volume encoding of size 15 ×20 ×2×dembed , providing a more efficient input for downstream motion estimation tasks. Subsequently, a spatial self-attention mechanism is intro-duced to capture the intra-token relationships and spatial dependencies within the cost volume tokens, where the 15 ×

20 × 2 × 512 cost volume encoding is first interpreted as 300 

local vectors of size 2 × 512 , performing self-attention within each vector. To further capture global spatial contexts, the encoding is then rearranged into two separate sequences of size 15 × 20 × 512 . For each sequence, inspired by the axial decomposition strategy in Swin Transformer [33], [34], we treat it as 15 horizontal sequences of length 20 and 20 ver-tical sequences of length 15 , performing self-attention along Fig. 3: Schematic of the Inter-frame Correlation Network. The network processes spatio-temporal correlation information through two primary stages: the first stage involves cost volume calculation, encoding, and compression, transforming consecutive image features into cost volume semantic representations. The second stage implements a Spatial Self-Attention mechanism, utilizing intra-token, vertical, and horizontal self-attention blocks to enhance the network’s ability to capture global spatial dependencies within the cost maps. each axis sequentially. These operations collectively consti-tute one spatial self-attention block, which is repeated three times. This hierarchical and decomposed attention mechanism enables the model to efficiently integrate local correlations and global topological information with significantly reduced computational complexity. Finally, the cost volume encoding is flattened into 600 cost volume tokens, each with a feature dimension of 512 , and fed into the policy network. 

B. Policy Training 

The backbone of the proposed model is a CVAE-Transformer architecture, and during training, the CLS token, proprioception, and the target action sequence are embedded into a common dimension dm via linear layers and concate-nated to form the non-visual observation ˜Ot. This input is processed by a 4-layer Transformer encoder q(z| ˜Ot) to yield the latent variable z. In the VAE context, z represents the latent distribution, while in the imitation learning setting, it serves as a style variable characterizing the specific action style. Regarding the decoder, three camera views, containing two global and one hand-eye, are processed by independent pre-trained ResNet-18 backbones to extract features, yielding three 

15 × 20 × 512 feature tensors. These features are flattened into a sequence of 900 visual tokens. These are concatenated with the proprioception, the style variable z, projected to dimension dm via linear layers, and 600 cost volume tokens, which characterize scene motion, to form the environment observation Ot, consisting of 1502 tokens in total. The decoder is defined as π(at:t+k|Ot), comprising a 4-layer Transformer encoder and a 7-layer Transformer decoder. The transformer decoder’s Query uses fixed positional embeddings, while its Key and Value are derived from the transformer encoder’s output. The model predicts a sequence of actions for the next 

k steps. As formulated in Eq. (3), the network is trained using a weighted combination of L1 loss and KL divergence, optimized via the AdamW optimizer. 

L = 17k

> t+k

X

> i=t

∥ˆai − ai∥1 + βD KL (q(z| ˜Ot) ∥ N (0 , I )) (3) 

C. Policy Evaluation 

Once training is completed, the CVAE encoder is removed, and the style variable z is set to a zero matrix. The remaining CVAE decoder serves as the policy network π(at:t+k|Ot).During inference, the environment observation Ot is formed by concatenating z, proprioception, image features from the three camera views, and the cost volume tokens derived from the image stream of one specific camera via the temporal correlation described in Section III-A. The policy then predicts a sequence of k future actions in a single forward pass. To en-sure smooth motion, we employ temporal aggregation, which calculates a weighted sum of overlapping action sequences using an exponential weighting scheme wi = exp( −k × i),while i = 0 represents the weight w0 for the most recently predicted action. In this manner, the network not only produces smooth action sequences but also demonstrates enhanced robustness in dynamic environments by prioritizing the most recent predictions. IV. E XPERIMENT 

This chapter provides a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed strategy through seven core experiments. Beyond the baseline task, we simulate complex orbital conditions via low-light, random camera occlusion, and random target occlusion tests. To assess dynamic adaptability, we designed a target maneuver test to observe responses to sudden motion changes. Furthermore, a Monte Carlo experiment was conducted to quantify the model’s sensitivity to initial positions, while a grayscale vision test evaluated the system’s reliance on geometric features and temporal correlations in the absence of color information. Together, these experiments analyze the model’s smoothness, proactivity, and robustness under diverse sensing interferences and dynamic scenarios. 

A. Experimental Platform 

Fig. 4: Overview of the ground-based experimental platform. To evaluate the proposed algorithm’s capability in per-ceiving and manipulating dynamic targets in a ground-based environment, an experimental platform was developed. The platform primarily consists of three components: the execution unit, the motion simulation unit, and a multi-view perception system, as shown in Fig. 4. The core execution unit is a 

6-DOF PIPER X lightweight robotic arm. To replicate the microgravity free-floating characteristics of orbital targets, the workpiece is mounted on a dual-axis linear stage via a 6-axis force sensor and a low-friction bearing, allowing for translation in the X-Y plane and free rotation. Based on an active compliance strategy, the system captures interaction forces F in real-time upon contact. It then calculates velocity increments using the momentum theorem, F∆t = m∆v,and drives the stage to execute compensatory movements, effectively simulating microgravity behaviors such as inertial gliding and collision rebound. At the beginning of each experiment, the target moves toward the robotic arm with a random velocity, which is between 0.6 cm/s and 1.2 cm/s with a random direction. The robotic arm must autonomously grasp the moving object and bring it to a stop without any prior knowledge, as shown in Fig. 5. To evaluate how robotic arm oscillations affect the attitude stability of the spacecraft, we set up a space robotic manipulation scenario and used a simplified dynamic model to analyze the relationship between joint vibration and spacecraft disturbance. In this study, we use Mean Absolute Second Difference (MASD) to measure the oscillation level and set a maximum allowable MASD threshold for each joint. A task is judged as successful only if the robotic arm successfully grasps the target, stops it, and keeps the MASD within the threshold throughout the process. 

Fig. 5: Workflow of the experiment. For environmental perception, the setup employs a multi-view visual feedback system, including two fixed-field cameras and a hand-eye fisheye camera, as illustrated in Fig. 6. The hand-eye camera provides a close-up view of the target and the end-effector, while the two global cameras offer broader perspectives of the workspace. This multi-view configuration allows the system to capture comprehensive visual informa-tion, enabling robust perception and accurate manipulation of dynamic targets under various conditions. 

Fig. 6: This figure illustrates the multi-view visual feedback during manipulation. From left to right are the hand-eye camera view and two global field camera views. 

B. Experiment Results 

To measure how robotic arm motion affects the base atti-tude, we built a dynamic model of capture, with the simulation conditions as follows. It is assumed that this model consists of a 300 kg micro-satellite and a PIPER X robotic arm. To keep the satellite’s attitude stable, the system uses reaction wheels with a maximum torque of 0.1 Nm. Based on the law of conservation of momentum, the reaction torque τreact created by joint motion must be smaller than the maximum torque of the wheels to avoid attitude instability. Based on the angular momentum equations of the system, the reaction torque of joint j can be written as τreact ,j = Ieq,j (θ) · αj , where Ieq,j is the equivalent moment of inertia of joint j in a fully extended state, and αj is the joint angular acceleration. By calculating the inertia of each joint under the worst conditions, we obtained the maximum allowable acceleration limits. In this study, we use these physical constraints directly as the MASD thresholds for task success. The base joint (J1) and the shoulder joint (J2) are the most restricted, with maxi-mum allowable accelerations of 0.178 rad/s 2 and 0.255 rad/s 2,respectively. In contrast, starting from the elbow joint (J3), no additional safety limits are set because the disturbance is far below the wheel compensation limit due to the significant drop in equivalent inertia. During experiments, if the oscillations of J1 or J2 exceed these limits, the task is judged as a failure because the disturbance goes beyond the compensation range of the reaction wheels [35]. We evaluated our proposed method against several baselines across five scenarios: Standard, Low-light, Camera Occlusion, Target Occlusion, and Target Maneuver. As shown in the experimental results, our method achieved success rates of 96%, 82%, 90%, 71.4%, and 51.4%, respectively. In contrast, the vanilla ACT exhibited a noticeable decline in performance across these scenarios, particularly under challenging con-ditions such as occlusions. When the safety constraints for manipulation smoothness were applied, its success rates were recorded at 60%, 54%, 19%, 26.1%, and 33.3%, respectively. A comprehensive performance comparison across these di-mensions is illustrated in the radar chart in Fig. 7. 

Fig. 7: Radar chart comparing the performance of our method, the vanilla ACT, and DP across five scenarios. Upon successful capture, the robotic arm increases torque to establish a rigid constraint, bringing the target to a halt, and the corresponding motor torque profiles are shown in Fig. 8. To analyze how capturing motion features reduces oscil-lations, we visualized the trajectory clusters, the set of all predicted action horizons generated at each time step, for both our method and the vanilla ACT shown in Fig. 9. We quantified cluster divergence by calculating the time-averaged 

Fig. 8: Motor torque profiles during a successful manipulation task. The gray dashed line indicates the moment of end-effector closure. It is observed that the motor torque increases immediately at this instant to provide the necessary constraint to bring the target to a halt. 

Fig. 9: Comparison of trajectory clusters and divergence between the vanilla ACT (left) and our method (right). The bottom plot displays the real-time “average distance” curves, with the legend indicating the time-averaged mean distance for each method to quantify overall cluster divergence. distance of all predicted points from the mean trajectory across the task duration. As illustrated, our method achieves significantly higher trajectory concentration, with predicted paths tightly clustered around the mean. We also evaluated the DP method. However, due to its slow inference speed, DP cannot utilize real-time inference or temporal aggregation. This leads to extreme policy oscillations. Consequently, we calculated a “relaxed” success rate for DP that ignores the oscillation criteria, resulting in scores of 51%, 42%, 33%, 33%, and 23%. Given experimental results, our method satisfied the manip-ulation smoothness requirements, demonstrating the reliability of our method in fundamental tasks. Table II provides the TABLE II: Quantitative comparison of policy oscillations. 

Method Normal Camera Occlusion Target Occlusion Target Maneuver Low-light 

MASD( ↓) Jerk( ↓) MASD( ↓) Jerk( ↓) MASD( ↓) Jerk( ↓) MASD( ↓) Jerk( ↓) MASD( ↓) Jerk( ↓)DP 13.73 37.99 14.22 36.86 16.07 37.98 14.79 36.21 15.88 38.04 Vanilla ACT 0.231 8.87 0.236 9.26 0.269 11.03 0.241 8.26 0.259 10.42 

Ours 0.167 5.71 0.199 6.48 0.181 6.33 0.167 5.86 0.204 7.64 

MASD and RMS Jerk of the actions generated by different methods in typical scenarios, where these metrics are calcu-lated as the average across all joints. In the previous test, the initial position of the target was fixed, and its velocity was set to be higher than 1.35 cm/s. To evaluate the robustness of our method in a challenging environment, we performed a Monte Carlo experiment, which requires the robotic arm to perform autonomous manipulation starting from various initial positions near its default starting point and recorded the success rates for each position. 

Fig. 10: Monte Carlo experiment results showing the success rates of the robotic arm from various initial positions. As shown in Fig. 10, the system can manipulate the target with a very high success rate across almost the entire range. Only at a few positions too far from the target was the robotic arm unable to respond in time due to physical reach limits. These results quantify that the model has low sensitivity to changes in initial positions and shows excellent stability. Finally, we designed and performed a grayscale testing experiment. This experiment aims to simulate scenarios with significant visual information loss, such as extreme lighting conditions in space shadows, by converting real-time images into grayscale before feeding them into the network trained exclusively on color data. Experimental results show that in this challenging scenario, both our method and the vanilla ACT experienced a signif-icant decrease in success rate, specifically manifesting as a shrinkage of the effective manipulation workspace relative to the target’s initial position. To intuitively compare the perfor-mance of the two methods, we plotted heatmaps illustrating the relationship between the target’s initial position offset, 

Fig. 11: Heat map illustrating the success rates of the robotic manipulation across different initial target positions in the grayscale testing. which is relative to the robotic arm’s axis, velocity, and the manipulation success rate, as shown in Fig. 11. It can be clearly observed from the heatmaps that our method maintains a significantly larger manipulation workspace than ACT under these conditions. V. CONCLUSIONS This paper proposes a robust imitation learning method for autonomous grasping in dynamic space environments by integrating an Inter-frame Correlation Network. By explicitly modeling temporal motion features, the proposed framework effectively resolves the action ambiguity inherent in single-frame observations when encountering multi-modal distribu-tions. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared to the vanilla ACT, our method significantly suppresses policy oscillations and enhances trajectory concentration and tem-poral consistency. Crucially, under stringent dynamic safety constraints, which are the acceleration limits of the base joint (J1), our method maintains high success rates across diverse scenarios, including low-light, occlusions, and target maneuvers. In contrast, baseline methods are susceptible to attitude instability of the spacecraft due to dynamic coupling. Furthermore, our method exhibits superior robustness under various disturbance conditions. Specifically, in both the Monte Carlo and grayscale experiments, the system inputs were out-of-distribution relative to the training data. The performance of our method in these experiments involving distribution shifts demonstrates its excellent generalization capability. In future work, we will further explore the potential of this high-performance architecture by extending its application to diverse spacecraft platforms, such as planetary surface robots. Additionally, as advancements in space microelectron-ics lead to increased computational power for on-board satel-lite devices, we plan to incorporate Large Language Models (LLMs) to evolve the framework into a Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model, striving to enable space robots to perform intelligent, long-horizon, and multi-task manipulation. REFERENCES [1] X. Shao, L. Xu et al. , “Practical finite-time motion planning for spacecraft-mounted soft manipulators under dynamic obstacles,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems (TAES) , vol. 62, pp. 2603–2620, 2026. [2] Y. Wang, “Regret-Based Automated Decision-Making Aids for Domain Search Tasks Using Human-Agent Collaborative Teams,” IEEE Trans-actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems (TAES) , vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1680–1695, 2016. [3] Y. Chen, T. Ren et al. , “AI-empowered intelligence in industrial robotics: technologies, challenges, and emerging trends,” Intelligence & Robotics ,vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Jan. 2026. [4] S. Levine, P. Pastor et al. , “Learning hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping with deep learning and large-scale data collection,” The Inter-national Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 37, no. 4-5, pp. 421–436, 2016. [5] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , Apr. 2014. [6] D. P. Kingma, D. J. Rezende et al. , “Semi-supervised Learning with Deep Generative Models,” in Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 27, Dec. 2014. [7] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss et al. , “Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in International Conference on Ma-chine Learning (ICML) , July 2015, pp. 2256–2265. [8] A. Brohan, N. Brown et al. , “RT-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , July 2023. [9] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu et al. , “RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , vol. 229, Nov. 2023, pp. 2165–2183. [10] K. Black, N. Brown et al. , “ π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,June 2025. [11] S. Liu, L. Wu et al. , “RDT-1B: a Diffusion Foundation Model for Bimanual Manipulation,” in International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations (ICLR) , Jan. 2025. [12] Y. Huang, P. Jin et al. , “PIDiff: Integrating a high-performance trans-former into diffusion models for robust and efficient imitation learning,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1626–1633, Feb. 2026. [13] L. Chen and Y. Guo, “Adaptive control of dual-arm space robot system in joint space,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, Oct. 2006, pp. 5096–5099. [14] A. Kendall, H. Martirosyan et al. , “End-to-end learning of geometry and context for deep stereo regression,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Oct. 2017, pp. 66–75. [15] J. Xu, R. Ranftl et al. , “Accurate optical flow via direct cost volume processing,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2017, pp. 5807–5815. [16] D. Sun, X. Yang et al. , “PWC-Net: CNNs for optical flow using pyramid, warping, and cost volume,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2018, pp. 8934–8943. [17] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “RAFT: Recurrent all-pairs field iterative networks for optical flow,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,Aug. 2020, pp. 402–419. [18] L. Wang, Y. Xiang et al. , “Goal-auxiliary actor-critic for 6D robotic grasping with point clouds,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) ,vol. 164, Nov. 2022, pp. 70–80. [19] S. Christen, W. Yang et al. , “Learning human-to-robot handovers from point clouds,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2023, pp. 9654–9664. [20] J. Zhang, N. Gireesh et al. , “Gamma: Graspability-aware mobile ma-nipulation policy learning based on online grasping pose fusion,” in 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,May. 2024, pp. 1399–1405. [21] B. Huang, J. Yu et al. , “EARL: Eye-on-hand reinforcement learner for dynamic grasping with active pose estimation,” in IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, Oct. 2023, pp. 2963–2970. [22] P. Xie, S. Chen et al. , “GAP-RL: Grasps as points for RL towards dynamic object grasping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 40–47, 2024. [23] M. Zare, P. M. Kebria et al. , “A survey of imitation learning: Algorithms, recent developments, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernet-ics , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7173–7186, Dec. 2024. [24] J. Urain, A. Mandlekar et al. , “A survey on deep generative models for robot learning from multimodal demonstrations,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 42, pp. 60–79, 2026. [25] D. A. Pomerleau, “ALVINN: An autonomous land vehicle in a neu-ral network,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 1, 1988, pp. 305–313. [26] A. Y. Ng and S. Russell, “Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learn-ing,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , July 2000, pp. 663–670. [27] J. Ho and S. Ermon, “Generative adversarial imitation learning,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , Dec. 2016, pp. 4572–4580. [28] C. Chi, S. Feng et al. , “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , July 2023. [29] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar et al. , “Learning fine-grained bimanual manipula-tion with low-cost hardware,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,July 2023. [30] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer et al. , “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 30, Dec. 2017, pp. 6000–6010. [31] Z. Huang, X. Shi et al. , “FlowFormer: A transformer architecture for optical flow,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,Aug. 2022, pp. 668–685. [32] K. He, X. Zhang et al. , “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2016, pp. 770–778. [33] Z. Liu, Y. Lin et al. , “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10 002. [34] X. Chu, Z. Tian et al. , “Twins: Revisiting spatial attention design in vision transformers,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 9355–9366. [35] M. Oda, “Experiences and lessons learned from the ETS-VII robot satellite,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2000, pp. 914–919.