Title: Learning When to See and When to Feel: Adaptive Vision-Torque Fusion for Contact-Aware Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01414v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:15:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Learning When to See and When to Feel: Adaptive Vision-Torque Fusion for Contact-Aware Manipulation 

Jiuzhou Lei 1, Chang Liu 1, Yu She 2, Xiao Liang 3, and Minghui Zheng 1

Abstract — Vision-based policies have achieved a good per-formance in robotic manipulation due to the accessibility and richness of visual observations. However, purely visual sensing becomes insufficient in contact-rich and force-sensitive tasks where force/torque (F/T) signals provide critical infor-mation about contact dynamics, alignment, and interaction quality. Although various strategies have been proposed to integrate vision and F/T signals, including auxiliary prediction objectives, mixture-of-experts architectures, and contact-aware gating mechanisms, a comparison of these approaches remains lacking. In this work, we provide a comparison study of dif-ferent F/T–vision integration strategies within diffusion-based manipulation policies. In addition, we propose an adaptive integration strategy that ignores F/T signals during non-contact phases while adaptively leveraging both vision and torque information during contact. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the strongest baseline by 14% in success rate, highlighting the importance of contact-aware multimodal fusion for robotic manipulation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Visual data is relatively easy to acquire and contains rich information, robot learning for manipulation has relied predominantly on image-based sensing [1]–[4]. However, purely visual observations are insufficient in contact-rich and force-aware tasks [5], [6]. In these scenarios, external force signals at the end effector or joint torque measurements provide critical information about contact dynamics that vision alone cannot capture. For example, in tasks such as connector plug-in/pull-out [7] or cable manipulation [8], force/torque (F/T) feedback is often more informative. In those tasks, the invisible or minimal visual changes before and after insertion makes it difficult for a vision-only system to determine alignment quality, insertion depth, or contact state. In contrast, F/T signals clearly reflect contact events, misalignment, friction, and successful seating. Moreover, F/T sensing or extra sensing modality help bridge gaps when visual information is compromised by self-occlusion. During assembly or disassembly tasks, the robotic gripper could frequently block the camera’s view of the workpiece [9]– [12]. In such cases, F/T feedback provides reliable contact 

This work was supported by the USA National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2422826 and 2527316.  

> 1

Jiuzhou lei, Chang Liu, and Minghui Zheng are with the J. Mike Walker ’66 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA. Emails: {jiuzl, changliu.chris, mhzheng }@tamu.edu.  

> 2

Yu She is with the Edwardson School of Industrial Engi-neering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA. Email: yushe@purdue.edu  

> 3

Xiao Liang is with the Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA. 

Email: xliang@tamu.edu. Lack of F/T Information 

> Naively Concatenate F/T and Visual Features
> Tasks
> Other Baselines
> contact-aware
> higher accuracy
> interpretability

Fig. 1: Contact-Aware Manipulation Challenges. The top row shows that relying solely on visual input leaves the policy contact-unaware, causing failures in relevant tasks. The middle row demon-strates that while naively fusing F/T signals with visual features could degrade the policy accuracy during free-space motion. The bottom-left panel shows that the predicted force guidance weight varies interpretably over inference steps, rising during contact phases and falling during free-space motion. We evaluate across three contact-rich tasks (right), and our method achieves 82% average success rate, outperforming all baselines by a substantial margin (bottom). 

information even when visual observations are partially or fully obstructed. Beyond perception, many real-world ma-nipulation tasks require hybrid force and position control. Tasks such as wiping [13] or polishing a surface [14] demand precise spatial trajectory tracking (position control) while simultaneously maintaining a consistent and regulated 

> arXiv:2604.01414v1 [cs.RO] 1 Apr 2026

contact force. Proper force is required to prevent damage to the surface or the tool. However, the effective integration of F/T signals into manipulation policy faces some challenges. Directly con-catenating F/T features with visual features is often subopti-mal, typically resulting in modality collapse as observed in [15], [16]. Furthermore, integrating F/T data throughout the entire manipulation process risks introducing sensor noise and inertia-induced F/T measurements during free-motion phases, which can degrade the policy’s performance. Several force/torque–vision integration strategies have been proposed. FACTR [15] mitigates modality collapse by applying a curriculum of visual corruption to encourage stronger reliance on force inputs. FoAR [17] introduces a future contact predictor to modulate the contribution of force features, enabling selective haptic utilization during interaction while maintaining stable free-motion behavior. Routing and expert-based methods further explore dynamic fusion. Chen et al. [18] performs policy-level composition by taking a weighted combination of diffusion noise pre-dictions from modality-specific models, while ForceVLA [19] employs a force-aware mixture-of-experts module that routes tokens to specialized subnetworks conditioned on both task context and interaction feedback. In parallel, auxiliary prediction strategies strengthen multimodal representations through additional supervision. TA-VLA [7] injects torque into the decoder and jointly predicts torque signals, while ImplicitRDP [16] aligns visual and force encoders via a shared latent target. The Adaptive Compliance Policy [20] further predicts stiffness and virtual target poses to maintain appropriate compliance during contact-rich tasks. Despite these advancements, most existing studies evaluate their methods only against vision-only policies or simple feature concatenation baselines. It remains unclear which integration strategy is most effective in practice. We address this gap through the following contributions:  

> •

Benchmarking: We provide a comparative evaluation of various F/T and vision integration strategies, evaluating their performance in force-aware tasks to identify the most effective choice.  

> •

Algorithm Improvement: We propose an adaptive in-tegration strategy that suppresses force/torque signals during free motion and dynamically incorporates them during contact. This design reduces noise interference while preserving stable visual planning. The resulting policy achieves higher success rates compared to all the baseline fusion strategies. II. R ELATED WORK 

Multi-sensory inputs, including force/torque (F/T) signals, have been widely utilized in recent works [21]–[27] and shown to improve sampling efficiency for reinforcement learning and overall performance compared to vision-only methods. For example, Lee et al. [22] proposed a self-supervised framework to learn multimodal representations from images, F/T measurements, and proprioceptive states. Their method fuses modalities by jointly predicting optical flow, contact status, and temporal alignment, demonstrating that multimodal inputs significantly improve reinforcement learning sample efficiency in tasks such as peg insertion. Although not relying on wrist- or joint-mounted F/T sensors, Fazeli et al. [23] presented a hierarchical learning framework integrating vision and tactile sensing for complex manipu-lation, demonstrated on robotic Jenga. The robot builds a probabilistic generative model that fuses visual and force observations to infer latent physical states and adapt its actions accordingly. By combining multisensory feedback in a structured model, their system achieves more reliable manipulation than vision-only approaches. Recent studies have shown that na¨ ıvely concatenating image features with force/torque (F/T) features can lead to modality collapse and degraded performance due to force sensor noise. Modality collapse refers to the phenomenon in which policies over-rely on high-fidelity visual inputs while ignoring sparse but critical force signals. To mitigate this imbalance, Liu et al. introduced FACTR [15], which applies a curriculum of visual corruption (e.g., Gaussian blur) during training to encourage greater reliance on force inputs. This strategy yields up to a 40% improvement in success rates on unseen objects in tasks such as dough rolling and box lifting. Other works explicitly model modality-balancing mech-anisms. FoAR [17] incorporates a future contact predictor to dynamically regulate force utilization, enabling precise control during contact phases while maintaining strong per-formance in free motion. Chen et al. [18] propose a router network to dynamically weight modality-specific experts rather than relying on simple feature-level concatenation, performing policy-level composition by blending noise or score predictions from modality-conditioned diffusion mod-els. Similarly, ForceVLA [19] introduces a force-aware Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) fusion module that dynamically combines pretrained visual–language representations with real-time 6-axis force-torque feedback during action gener-ation. Its gating network routes tokens to specialized expert subnetworks based on both high-level task instructions and low-level interaction feedback. Meanwhile, several approaches strengthen force integra-tion through auxiliary objectives. TA-VLA [7] investigates torque integration strategies and finds that injecting torque into the decoder—along with torque prediction as an auxil-iary task—leads to more physically grounded representations of interaction dynamics. For tasks requiring explicit force control, controller parameters such as stiffness are predicted jointly with actions. The Adaptive Compliance Policy [20] further learns to predict a reference pose, a virtual target pose, and a scalar stiffness magnitude to maintain appropriate compliance profiles, demonstrating improved performance in tasks such as pivoting an object against a fixture and wiping a vase. ImplicitRDP [16] introduces a virtual-target representation regularization strategy, where both visual and force encoders are trained to align with a shared modality-agnostic latent target. This auxiliary constraint encourages adaptive modality weighting depending on task conditions and mitigates modality collapse. Vision Encoder  

> Torque Encoder
> Contact Detaction
> Concatenation
> Scale Predictor
> UNet (Torque Noise Predictor)
> toque feature gated feature
> concat. feature
> Gated Feature Processing
> vision feature
> vision feature
> CFG-Style Fusion
> torque noise
> vision noise
> scale
> UNet (Vision Noise Predictor) Agentview RGB
> Wristview RGB
> Robot States
> Joint Torques
> Input
> Observation
> gated feature
> noise
> Noisy Action
> Denoised Action
> Ouput
> Action Chunk

Fig. 2: Overview of the Proposed Method. RGB images are encoded using ResNet, with each camera view processed by a separate encoder. Torque signals are encoded using an MLP (the robot state encoder is omitted from the figure for clarity). The resulting torque features are then passed through a contact-gated module, which modulates them based on contact status to produce contact-gated torque features. A scale predictor takes the concatenated vision and torque features as input and outputs a scalar weight that determines the relative influence of torque information when combining the noise predictions from the two modality-specific noise predictors in the diffusion process. The final denoising noise ˆϵ is obtained by blending these two predictions according to the predicted scale. 

Overall, prior strategies for fusing F/T measurements with vision can be broadly categorized into three classes: (1) 

Auxiliary prediction methods , which learn additional objec-tives to regularize multimodal representations [7], [16], [22]; (2) Mixture-of-experts (MoE) or routing-based fusion , which dynamically combine modality-specific experts [18], [19]; (3) Gating mechanisms , which regulate force usage based on inferred interaction status [17]. However, these methods are typically evaluated only against simple baselines such as vision-only policies or na¨ ıve feature concatenation. It remains unclear which fusion strategy is most effective in practice. To address this gap, this work provides a comparative evaluation of representative strategies across these categories. In addition, we propose an adaptive approach that integrates both contact-gating and classifier-free guidance (CFG) style fusion to enhance policy effectiveness in force/torque-aware tasks. III. P ROPOSED APPROACH 

In this section, we explain the core idea of the proposed contact-gated and CFG-style vision–torque fusion. We utilize joint torque measurements as the primary source of force-torque (F/T) information. These torques offer a hardware-efficient and accessible alternative to external sensors, as they are readily available in some robot platforms like Franka Research 3. Built upon the diffusion policy [1] framework, the archi-tecture utilizes a ResNet-18 [28] as the vision encoder and a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) as the torque encoder, with a U-Net [29] serving as the noise prediction model. The ResNet18 will take in 224 × 224 × 3 RGB images from both agentview camera and eye-in-hand view camera. The MLP will take a 7 × 10 vector, which is the joint torque measurements from the past 10 observation steps, and output a 64-d feature vector. The joint positions are also encoded using a MLP and output a 64-d feature vector. We chose a history of 10 torque measurements based on the task horizon. This 10-step window is sufficient for the model to perceive both the magnitude and the rate of change in external joint torques. These encoded features are concatenated to form the conditioning context for the iterative denoising process of the diffusion policy [1]. Specifically, the noise prediction model takes the current noisy action trajectory and the fused conditioning features as input to estimate the added noise at each diffusion timestep. During inference, the policy generates a sequence of future actions by iteratively refining a trajectory initialized from Gaussian noise over a fixed number of steps. At each denoising step, the CFG-style fusion dynamically weights the contribution of the torque-specialized expert, allowing the model to adapt its action predictions based on the perceived contact state. In the process, two key components play a vital role to effective fuse torque and vision information. First, a contact-gating strategy filters out the inertia-induced interference on the torque data during free-space motion. Then a CFG-style vision–torque fusion mechanism allows the policy to learn how to adaptively combine visual and torque modalities based on the current interaction state. The data flow of this approach is visualized in Fig. 1. Contact Gating. Following the methodology described in [17], we detail the gating mechanism here to ensure the self-containment and readability. The mechanism extends the standard diffusion policy by introducing a contact-aware gate that selectively includes torque information. If any of the joints experience external torques larger than a predefined magnitude, it’s considered to have contact. The final force representation is computed as: 

ftorque −gated = ϕ · ftorque + (1 − ϕ) · f ∗ (1) where ftorque is the output of the torque encoder, and f ∗ is a learnable parameter to represent encoded torque features during free-space movement. When contact is detected ( ϕ =1), the encoded force features are used directly. When no contact is detected ( ϕ = 0 ), the force channel is replaced by the learnable parameters f ∗. The gated torque feature is then concatenated with image features for the noise prediction model to condition on. 

CFG-Style Adaptive Vision-Torque Fusion Rather than employing a single monolithic denoiser, we train two modality-specialized U-Nets. The first, a vision-specialized U-Net, is conditioned on visual and proprioceptive features; the second, a torque-specialized U-Net, is conditioned on gated torque features and proprioceptive features. Inspired by the classifier-free-guidance diffusion [30], we inject the noise predicted from the torque-specialized UNet into the noise predicted by the vision-specialized UNet. The final noise term used for denoising is combined using the classifier-free-guidance-style formulation: 

ˆϵfinal = ˆ ϵvision + wtorque (ˆ ϵtorque − ˆϵvision ) . (2) When wtorque = 0 , the output reduces to the pure vision prediction. wscale , the guidance scale, is predicted by a scale predictor implemented as three-layer MLP. The scale predic-tor will take the gated torque features and image features as input. wtorque itself is modulated by the contact status: 

wtorque = ϕ · σ(wscale ), (3) where σ(·) denotes the softplus function. Consequently, the policy exhibits the following behavior:  

> •

No contact ( ϕ = 0 ): wforce = 0 , yielding ˆϵfinal = ˆ ϵvision 

and purely vision-driven actions.  

> •

Contact ( ϕ = 1 ): wforce ∈ (0 , ∞), enabling a learned blend of the vision and torque experts. This design enforces clean separation between free-space and contact regimes while allowing flexible, learned torque amplification during interaction. During training, the two modality-specialized UNets and the scale predictor are optimized together using the standard noise prediction objective, 

L = MSE(ˆ ϵfinal , ϵ ), (4) where ϵ is the sampled ground truth Gaussian noise. For ref-erence, Fig. 1 visualizes the modal flow within our proposed architecture. To better understand the comparison results in section IV, we also describe the baseline methods in the following subsections. Since the contact-gating strategy is described already. We will only explain the auxiliary goal and MoE strategies. 

A. Auxiliary Goals 

Following the methods in [7], predicting future torques are used as the auxiliary goal. This strategy augments the standard Diffusion Policy with an auxiliary prediction task on joint torque signals by jointly diffusing robot actions and future torque measurements. The total training loss is computed in noise-prediction space as 

L = MSE(ˆ ϵaction , ϵ action ) + α MSE(ˆ ϵtorque , ϵ torque ), (5) where ϵaction and ϵtorque denote the Gaussian noise slices corresponding to action and future torque dimensions. ˆϵaction 

and ˆϵtorque are the corresponding UNet predictions, and α

is the weighting coefficient set during training. At inference time, denoising is still performed over both action and future torque space initialized from Gaussian noise, but only the action slice is extracted and executed on the robot while the torque predictions are discarded. The auxiliary objective therefore functions purely as a training-time regularizer by requiring the UNet to predict plausible future torques. 

B. Mixture of Modality-Specific Experts (MoE) 

Following the methodology in [18], we implement a sim-ilar Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) baseline for benchmarking; however, we simplify the architecture by employing a single U-Net, referred to as a ”sub-policy” in [18], for each sensory modality. Two independent UNets are trained in parallel and their noise predictions are blended at each denoising step via a learned routing network. Instead of conditioning a single UNet on a combined observation, the observation are split into two groups: an image group (RGB images and low-dimensional states such as joint positions) and a torque group. A small MLP is used as the routing network to take the concatenated features from both the image and torque encoders and output two logits that are passed through a softmax to obtain blending weights (wimg , w tor ) that satisfy 

wimg + wtor = 1 .During training and inference, the same noisy action trajectory is fed to both UNets. Their predicted noise terms are blended element-wise, 

ˆϵ = wvision · ˆϵvision + wtor · ˆϵtorque , (6) IV. R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

For the experiment section, we will first describe the train-ing, implementation, and used robot platform. Then, the tasks for evaluation will be explained. In addition, the performance of each strategy will be evaluated using success rate per task. Last, we will analyze and discuss the performance of those baselines and our method. Task Description: the robot needs to lift the bottle and place it on the red (if it’s empty) or blue (if it’s filled with water) plates based on it weight 

> Task Description: the robot needs to rotate the upper part of the connector counterclockwise until the end, then grasp and lift the upper part
> Task Description: the robot needs to first grasp the handle, twist it counterclockwise and lift the lid

Fig. 3: Visualization of the Three Tasks. First row: egg boiler lid opening, second row: weight-based bottle placement, and third row: twisty connector pull out. Wrist Camera Agentview Camera 

Fig. 4: Experiment Setup 

A. Training and Implementation 

All the algorithms are implemented on top of Robomimic [31] in which the original diffusion policy [1] is implemented and it also provides code interface for the diffusion policy to take multimodal inputs. The policy is trained with the default setting in Robomimic: optimized with AdamW at an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 with a small L2 weight decay 

(1 × 10 −6) for regularization. The diffusion process [32] uses 100 timesteps for both training (forward noising) and inference (denoising). The policy is trained on multimodal data sampled at 10 Hz, incorporating RGB images from both agent-view and wrist-mounted cameras ( 224 × 224 × 3), a 70-dimensional vector of joint external torque measurements from multiple observation steps, and a 7-dimensional joint position vector. We collect data from and deploy the trained policy on a Franka Research 3 robot, which provides readily available joint external torque measurements. An agentview realsense camera is placed on the left side of the robot arm. An OAK-D camera is used as the wrist camera. Refer to Fig. 4 for the experiment setup. TABLE I: Success rates across three manipulation tasks. The best performance in each column is highlighted in bold, and the second-best performance is shown in gray.                                 

> Method Bottle Connector Lid Average
> Vision-only 8/20 0/10 7/20 30.0% Feature Concatenation 3/20 0/10 12/20 30.0% Torque Gating 14/20 5/10 15/20 68.0% Auxiliary Goals 6/20 1/10 7/20 28.0% MoE 5/20 1/10 7/20 24.0% MoE w/o torque encoding 15/20 1/10 11/20 54.0% Ours 16/20 7/10 18/20 82.0%

B. Task Design 

To evaluate the effectiveness of different fusion strategies, we design three real-world manipulation tasks that require varying degrees of contact sensitivity and F/T reasoning:  

> •

Egg Boiler Lid Opening. The robot twists and lifts the lid of an egg boiler, requiring detection of resistance changes to avoid early lifting before the twisting phase is completed.  

> •

Weight-Based Bottle Placement. The robot must place a visually identical water bottle onto one of two plates depending on its weight, requiring force-based discrim-ination. The empty bottle should be placed on the red plate, while the full bottle should be placed on the blue plate.  

> •

Twisty Connector Pull Out. The robot must pull out a twist-lock connector that requires axial pulling force after rotating the upper part to its limit. The task evaluates whether the policy can sense the end of rotation through resistance and switch to the pull-out stage accordingly. Refer to Fig. 3 for a visualization of the designed tasks. We collected 110 demonstrations for the weight-based bottle placement task, 250 demonstrations for the twisty connector pull out task, and 150 demonstrations for the egg boiler lid opening task. A task is considered to be failed if it results in robot motion abortion due to collision or running out of time. 

C. Quantitative Results and Analysis 

In Table. I, the task success rate for each task over 10 or 20 trials is reported. Among all the methods, the proposed approach has the highest average success rate. The success rate is improved by 14% in comparison to the best baseline method. The proposed approach also achieves the highest success rate for each single task. Among all the baselines, the simple yet effective strategy is to apply a contact gating mechanism. It is noteworthy that even in the absence of torque infor-mation, the vision-only baseline has a success rate of 8/20 in the water bottle placement task. This task consists of placing an empty bottle and a full bottle. We observe that the vision-only policy exhibits a bias toward placing the bottle on the red plate, despite the training dataset containing an equal distribution of demonstrations for both conditions. For the completeness of the results, Table. II reports the success rates of different strategies in the water bottle placement task under both full and empty bottle conditions.                         

> TABLE II: Success rates of placing empty and full water bottles.
> Method Empty Full Total
> Vision-only 8/10 0/10 8/20 Feature Concatenation 1/10 2/10 3/20 Torque Gating 7/10 7/10 14/20 Auxiliary Goals 4/10 2/10 6/20 MoE 5/10 0/10 5/20 MoE w/o torque encoding 9/10 6/10 15/20 Ours 9/10 7/10 16/20

In the rest of the section, we will analyze the success and failure reasons for each of the baselines and our method. 

Filtering out torque measurements during free-space motion accounts for the majority of the improvement in success rate. Unlike dedicated tactile sensors, external joint torques measured during free-space motion are corrupted not only by noise but also by inertial effects. As illustrated in Fig. 5, which tracks torque fluctuations throughout the entire task execution, these non-contact signals lack a reli-able, learnable pattern without an extensively large dataset. Integrating torque features without filtering would distract the effect of image features which the policy relies on for visual planning. This could be why feature concatenation method would not give a good performance. Though it has a fairly good performance in the task of opening the lid of the eff boiler, it is because the task can tolerate the the inaccuracy of grasp pose. It won’t lead to motion abortion even the pose to grasp the handle of the lid deviates from expected poses (the handle is in the middle of the gripper). In Fig. 6, we show the failure cases of those baselines which does not use contact-gating. As shown in Fig. 6, the failure cases result from inaccurate grasp pose, ignorance of torque information, and deviant trajectory. The auxiliary goal strategy exhibits suboptimal perfor-mance, which can be partially attributed to the presence of patternless joint torque measurements during free-space movement. While the work in [7] also employs future torque prediction, it utilizes commanded motor torques rather than external torques, which likely provides a cleaner supervisory signal. Furthermore, as noted in [16], directly predicting future torque sequences may be a difficult auxiliary task given limited amount of data to train a diffusion policy. 

Learned adaptive scaling of the torque-specialized U-Net significantly enhances manipulation precision. While the contact-gating baseline achieves competitive success rates across most tasks, it often lacks single-attempt reliability. Observations during experiments indicate that this baseline frequently requires a second trial within the allotted task hori-zon to achieve the goal. As shown in Table. III, the success rate of opening the lid of the egg boiler in the first attempt along with the average task execution steps are reported. Our approach demonstrates higher single attempt success rates compared to the contact-gating baseline, highlighting its increased efficiency and precision. TABLE III: Comparison of Single-Shot Success Rates 

Method Success Rate (%) Avg. Task Horizon 

Torque Gating 20.0 110.7 

Ours 60.0 87.1    

> Higher success and lower horizon indicate better performance. Static Approaching Contact Lifting

Fig. 5: External Joint Torque vs. Time During a Task Execution. 

The torque measurements at different phases of a task. During the approaching and lifting stage, the torques measurements are patternless and fluctuating. Different colors represent the torque measurement at different joints. 

Learning adaptive scaling in CFG-style vs. Weighted Average MoE. Given that both CFG-style fusion and the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) baseline integrate vision and torque information at the noise-prediction level in a similar way, we conducted an ablation study to compare their perfor-mance on the water bottle placement task. In this experiment, the MoE routing network was modified to receive contact-gated torque features and the torque-specialize UNet is also conditioning on the contact-gated torque features, mirroring the input structure of our proposed method. Despite the addition of this gating mechanism, the MoE-based method underperforms. An analysis of the routing weights reveals that the model assigns nearly identical im-portance regardless of the interaction state: during the non-contact phase, the average weights for wvision and wtorque are 0.7634 and 0.2366, respectively. During contact, these values remain nearly unchanged at 0.7714 and 0.2286. In contrast, 

TABLE IV: Ablation Study 

Method Success Rate 

Torque-Gated MoE 12/20 

Ours 16/20 

> Higher success indicates better performance.

our proposed approach explicitly regulates the guidance weight wtorque in the scale predictor (Eq. (3)) based on contact status. As illustrated in Fig. 7, while the MoE weights exhibit increase during contact, they are indistinguishable from values during free-space motion (represented using blue lines in the figure). Conversely, our approach demon-Inaccurate Grasp Pose 

> Trajectory Deviation
> Ignorance of Torque Info

Fig. 6: Failure Cases Due to Distracting Torque Features     

> (a) wtorque values from our approach
> (b) wtorque values from torque-gated MoE

Fig. 7: Ablation Study. A comparison between the predicted weights associated with torque by our approach(top) and by MoE(bottom) in the ablation study. The orange dots in the figures represent the values of the weights when there is contact. 

strates high interpretability; the weights vary dynamically and contribute to the policy only when contact is detected (indicated by the orange markers). This ensures that torque information is utilized selectively during physical interaction. Without regulating wtorque at the noise prediction level based on contact status, the learned torque features are actually detrimental to the policy because they fail to distinguish between noise and signal, whereas a “raw” or “no-encoder” approach might work even better shown in Table. I. V. C ONCLUSION AND LIMITATION 

We evaluated different torque–vision integration strate-gies for diffusion-based manipulation and identified key limitations of those methods. To address these issues, we introduced a contact-aware adaptive approach that selectively leverages torque signals during interaction. Experiments show a 14% improvement in success rate over the strongest baseline, demonstrating the importance of dynamic, contact-aware multimodal fusion for robust robotic manipulation. Though our evaluation effort identifies key performance trends, we acknowledge that it covers only a representative subset of the vast spectrum of existing methods. For example, we evaluated an auxiliary goal strategy centered on future torque prediction, this approach remains only partially ex-plored as for how to define auxiliary goals that are more easily learnable while providing significant improvements to policy performance. In addition, the proposed approach currently sense and reason about the F/T data passively. It’s validated in tasks that do not require the robot to actively apply forces to interact with the real world. The latter usually plays a more important role in real world to finish some tasks like surface finishing and precision disassembly/assembly. REFERENCES [1] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 44, no. 10-11, pp. 1684–1704, 2025. [2] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees, S. Dasari, J. Hejna, T. Kreiman, C. Xu, et al. , “Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. [3] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, et al. , “pi0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [4] J. Bjorck, F. Casta˜ neda, N. Cherniadev, X. Da, R. Ding, L. Fan, Y. Fang, D. Fox, F. Hu, S. Huang, et al. , “Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. [5] T. Tsuji, Y. Kato, G. Solak, H. Zhang, T. Petriˇ c, F. Nori, and A. Ajoudani, “A survey on imitation learning for contact-rich tasks in robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13498 , 2025. [6] M. Suomalainen, Y. Karayiannidis, and V. Kyrki, “A survey of robot manipulation in contact,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 156, p. 104224, 2022. [7] Z. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Yang, C. Yue, Z. Lin, H.-a. Gao, Z. Wang, and H. Zhao, “Ta-vla: Elucidating the design space of torque-aware vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07962 , 2025. [8] Y. She, S. Wang, S. Dong, N. Sunil, A. Rodriguez, and E. Adelson, “Cable manipulation with a tactile-reactive gripper,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 40, no. 12-14, pp. 1385–1401, 2021. [9] K. Nottensteiner, A. Sachtler, and A. Albu-Sch¨ affer, “Towards au-tonomous robotic assembly: Using combined visual and tactile sensing for adaptive task execution,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems ,vol. 101, no. 3, p. 49, 2021. [10] C. Liu, S. Tian, X. Liang, and M. Zheng, “Self-vla: A skill enhanced agentic vision-language-action framework for contact-rich disassem-bly,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11080 , 2026. [11] Y. Saka, J.-C. Hu, A. Desai, Z. Zhang, B. Zhang, Q. K. Luu, M. R. I. Prince, M. Zheng, and Y. She, “Contact: Contact-aware tactile learning for robotic disassembly,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08560 , 2026. [12] C. Liu, S. Tian, S. Behdad, X. Liang, and M. Zheng, “Vision-language-action models for selective robotic disassembly: A case study on critical component extraction from desktops,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04446 , 2025. [13] C. Tsuji, E. Coronado, P. Osorio, and G. Venture, “Adaptive contact-rich manipulation through few-shot imitation learning with force-torque feedback and pre-trained object representations,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 240–247, 2024. [14] J. E. Solanes, L. Gracia, P. Mu˜ noz-Benavent, J. Valls Miro, C. Perez-Vidal, and J. Tornero, “Robust hybrid position-force control for robotic surface polishing,” Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineer-ing , vol. 141, no. 1, p. 011013, 2019. [15] J. J. Liu, Y. Li, K. Shaw, T. Tao, R. Salakhutdinov, and D. Pathak, “Factr: Force-attending curriculum training for contact-rich policy learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17432 , 2025. [16] W. Chen, H. Xue, Y. Wang, F. Zhou, J. Lv, Y. Jin, S. Tang, C. Wen, and C. Lu, “Implicitrdp: An end-to-end visual-force diffusion policy with structural slow-fast learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10946 ,2025. [17] Z. He, H. Fang, J. Chen, H.-S. Fang, and C. Lu, “Foar: Force-aware reactive policy for contact-rich robotic manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [18] H. Chen, J. Xu, H. Chen, K. Hong, B. Huang, C. Liu, J. Mao, Y. Li, Y. Du, and K. Driggs-Campbell, “Multi-modal manipulation via multi-modal policy consensus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23468 , 2025. [19] J. Yu, H. Liu, Q. Yu, J. Ren, C. Hao, H. Ding, G. Huang, G. Huang, Y. Song, P. Cai, et al. , “Forcevla: Enhancing vla models with a force-aware moe for contact-rich manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22159 , 2025. [20] Y. Hou, Z. Liu, C. Chi, E. Cousineau, N. Kuppuswamy, S. Feng, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Adaptive compliance policy: Learning approximate compliance for diffusion guided control,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 4829–4836. [21] C. Chen, Z. Yu, H. Choi, M. Cutkosky, and J. Bohg, “Dexforce: Extracting force-informed actions from kinesthetic demonstrations for dexterous manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,2025. [22] M. A. Lee, Y. Zhu, K. Srinivasan, P. Shah, S. Savarese, L. Fei-Fei, A. Garg, and J. Bohg, “Making sense of vision and touch: Self-supervised learning of multimodal representations for contact-rich tasks,” in 2019 International conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 8943–8950. [23] N. Fazeli, M. Oller, J. Wu, Z. Wu, J. B. Tenenbaum, and A. Rodriguez, “See, feel, act: Hierarchical learning for complex manipulation skills with multisensory fusion,” Science Robotics , vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaav3123, 2019. [24] W. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Wang, and C. Lu, “Forcemimic: Force-centric imitation learning with force-motion capture system for contact-rich manipulation,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1105–1112. [25] H. Xue, J. Ren, W. Chen, G. Zhang, Y. Fang, G. Gu, H. Xu, and C. Lu, “Reactive diffusion policy: Slow-fast visual-tactile policy learning for contact-rich manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02881 , 2025. [26] J. H. Kang, S. Joshi, R. Huang, and S. K. Gupta, “Robotic compliant object prying using diffusion policy guided by vision and force observations,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [27] H. Qi, B. Yi, S. Suresh, M. Lambeta, Y. Ma, R. Calandra, and J. Malik, “General in-hand object rotation with vision and touch,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 2549–2564. [28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778. [29] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Confer-ence on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention .Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241. [30] J. Ho and T. Salimans, “Classifier-free diffusion guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. [31] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni, L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu, and R. Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, “What matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot manipula-tion,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298 , 2021. [32] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.