Title: VA-FastNavi-MARL: Real-Time Robot Control with Multimedia-Driven Meta-Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03998v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:56:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# VA-FastNavi-MARL: Real-Time Robot Control with Multimedia-Driven Meta-Reinforcement Learning 

Yang Zhang 2, Shengxi Jing 3, Fengxiang Wang 3, Feng Yuan 2, Hong Wang 1†,4 

> 1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, Hubei, China 

> 2

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65201, USA 

> 3

School of Construction Machinery, Chang’an University, Xi’an, 710064, Shaanxi, China 

> 4

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Sensing System and Security (Ministry of Education), Hubei University, Wuhan, China 

{zhangy1,yfzc8 }@missouri.edu, {fengxiang.wang,sx.jing }@chd.edu.cn, hong.wang@hubu.edu.cn 

Abstract —Interpreting dynamic, heterogeneous multimedia commands with real-time responsiveness is critical for Human-Robot Interaction. We present VA-FastNavi-MARL, a framework that aligns asynchronous audio-visual inputs into a unified latent representation. By treating diverse instructions as a dis-tribution of navigable goals via Meta-Reinforcement Learning, our method enables rapid adaptation to unseen directives with negligible inference overhead. Unlike approaches bottlenecked by heavy sensory processing, our modality-agnostic stream ensures seamless, low-latency control. Validation on a multi-arm workspace confirms that VA-FastNavi-MARL significantly outperforms baselines in sample efficiency and maintains robust, real-time execution even under noisy multimedia streams. 

Index Terms —Human machine interaction, Reinforcement learning, Multimedia 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent advances in multimedia technologies have signif-icantly accelerated the development of intelligent systems capable of processing and understanding heterogeneous data from diverse sources. Modern multimedia systems increas-ingly rely on multimodal learning, where visual, textual, and sensory signals are jointly modeled to enable comprehensive cross-modal understanding and robust representation learning. Representative approaches such as CLIP [1] and Flamingo [2] demonstrate that aligning information across modalities can substantially improve semantic reasoning and generalization, establishing multimodal learning as a core paradigm in multi-media research [3]. Beyond representation learning, multime-dia research has also expanded toward integrating multimodal perception with sequential decision-making, where agents must interpret and act upon heterogeneous multimedia streams in dynamic environments. For example, approaches such as SayCan [4] and RT-2 [5] incorporate vision-language repre-sentations into embodied decision-making, enabling agents to execute high-level semantic instructions, while tasks such as vision-and-language navigation [6] and video-language mod-eling [7] further highlight the importance of jointly modeling perception and action in multimedia-driven scenarios. To further improve adaptability in such complex environ-ments, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been extended with meta-learning mechanisms, allowing agents to rapidly adapt to new tasks and changing conditions. This paradigm, known as Meta Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn-ing (Meta-MARL [8]), enhances flexibility by bridging the gap between static policy learning and dynamic online replanning. However, existing MARL and Meta-RL approaches typically assume that task specifications are provided synchronously and remain stationary during execution, which is inconsistent with real-world multimedia systems, where information is naturally presented as asynchronous and heterogeneous streams (e.g., speech, visual cues, symbolic commands). This mismatch is particularly evident in human–robot interaction scenarios, where multimodal instructions arrive irregularly and are funda-mentally misaligned with continuous control processes. From a multimedia perspective, this exposes a critical challenge: how to effectively align asynchronous multimodal inputs with continuous multi-agent decision-making. We formalize multimedia instruction following as a tem-poral alignment problem between irregular, semantically rich human inputs and high-frequency continuous control signals. Building upon the principles of Meta-MARL, we introduce VA-FastNavi-MARL, a novel framework for adaptive multi-arm motion planning and execution driven by heterogeneous visual and audio instructions. Unlike traditional MARL ap-proaches that rely on fixed interaction strategies or static goal coordinates, VA-FastNavi-MARL learns from a dynamic distribution of multimodal human instructions. This capability enables the system to rapidly adapt its motion plans to unseen commands–ranging from voice directives to visual cues–with minimal gradient updates. Furthermore, we address the chal-lenge of real-time responsiveness by implementing an asyn-chronous instruction stream, designed to handle the irregularity of human input. This facilitates seamless online control, allow-ing agents to incorporate dynamic, unprogrammed instructions into their execution pipeline instantaneously. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly outper-forms MARL baselines in terms of both sample efficiency and real-time adaptation success. 

Our contributions include:  

> •

A modality-agnostic multimedia instruction representa-tion that aligns asynchronous audio, visual, and symbolic commands into a unified navigable task space, enabling instruction-level generalization. 

Accepted for publication in the 2026 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME). ©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.  

> arXiv:2604.03998v1 [cs.RO] 5 Apr 2026 •

A real-time multimedia instruction stream formulation, modeling human inputs as an asynchronous temporal process and bridging bursty multimedia signals with continuous robotic control.  

> •

A Meta-RL based adaptive controller that leverages the above multimedia formulation for rapid policy adaptation in multi-robot systems. II. R ELATED WORKS 

We categorize existing research into two streams: MARL for manipulation and Meta-RL for policy adaptation. 

A. MARL in Human-robot Interaction 

MARL offers a scalable alternative to centralized planners for high-dimensional human-robot interaction. Recent works have successfully applied MARL to task decomposition, such as separating position and orientation control [9] or employing modular strategies for surgical trajectory tracking [10]. To address scalability in high-DOF systems, decentralized archi-tectures have been proposed to learn local policies from global abstractions [11] or independent joint control [12]. Further-more, innovations in reward shaping–ranging from Hindsight Experience Replay [13] to potential-based coordination [14]– have improved convergence. However, these methods typically overfit to fixed task definitions and struggle to generalize when semantic instructions or task sequences change. Our work bridges this gap by integrating a programmable instruction queue for real-time adaptation. 

B. Meta-Learning for Policy Adaptation 

Meta-RL enables agents to generalize to new tasks with minimal interaction. Optimization-based methods, pioneered by MAML [15], optimize initial parameters for rapid fine-tuning. Subsequent variants have improved stability through first-order approximations (e.g., Reptile, FOMAML [16]) and implicit differentiation [17]. Alternatively, context-based meth-ods like RL 2 [18] and PEARL [19] internalize adaptation by encoding past experience into latent states via RNNs or probabilistic encoders. Despite their success, standard Meta-RL formulations are primarily designed for single-agent set-tings. They lack the mechanisms to handle the non-stationarity of multi-agent coordination, particularly when agents must adapt to dynamic instruction streams rather than static physical environments. III. M ETHOD 

In this section, we introduce VA-FastNavi-MARL, a Meta-RL based motion planning framework that enables multi-arm robotic systems to rapidly adapt online to varying audio and visual instructions. 

A. Problem Formulation 

We consider a collaborative robotic motion control task where N = 3 robotic arms must sequentially reach target points ptarget derived from heterogeneous audio-visual instruc-tions. We model the interaction among the arms as a Markov Game (MG), defined by the tuple: 

(N , S, A, P, R, I, γ ),

where N = {1, . . . , N } denotes the set of agents. The instruction space I represents the set of latent embeddings derived from the multimedia buffer, where each instruction 

φ ∈ I specifies the target coordinates and execution sequence. The joint state and action spaces are defined as S = S1 ×· · · × S N and A = A1 × · · · × A N , respectively, where Si and 

Ai represent the individual state and action spaces of agent i.The state transition function is given by P : S × A → [0 , 1] ,and the reward function by R : S × A × I → R. We denote the discount factor by γ ∈ (0 , 1] .To enable scalable coordination, we employ parameter sharing , utilizing a unified policy πθ across all agents. At time step t, the global observation st ∈ R15 is constructed as a concatenation of individual agent states: 

st = [ p1 

> t

, d 1 

> t

, ϕ 1 

> t

; p2 

> t

, d 2 

> t

, ϕ 2 

> t

; p3 

> t

, d 3 

> t

, ϕ 3 

> t

],

where pit ∈ R3 is the end-effector position of arm i, dit =

∥pit − ptarget ∥ is the Euclidean distance to the target, and ϕit ∈{0, 1, 2} is a discrete phase flag indicating the agent’s current sequential status (e.g., waiting, executing, or completed). The joint action at ∈ R9 concatenates the 3D velocity commands. 

B. Multimedia Instruction Generator 

The proposed framework begins with a Multimedia-Driven Instruction Module (Fig. 1, top) that unifies instructions from machine code ( Imachine ), audio ( Iaudio ), and visual cues (Ivisual ). To bridge the semantic gap between modalities, we employ a parallel Encoder-Decoder architecture. Rather than designing modality-specific feature extractors, we explicitly target semantic alignment across heterogeneous multimedia streams. To this end, we employ parallel encoder branches, using 1D convolutions to capture temporal phonetic patterns from Iaudio and 2D convolutions to extract spatial structures from Ivisual , followed by a shared projection into a unified, modality-agnostic latent space Φ. The key contribution of this module lies in cross-modal representation alignment, which bridges asynchronous and structurally distinct sensory inputs at the semantic level. By enforcing this alignment, the downstream policy πθ becomes invariant to the source modality, treating audio and visual instructions as different manifestations of a shared navigable goal distribution. As a result, the agent can generalize instruction-following behaviors across modalities without requiring modality-specific policies. 

C. Dynamic Instruction Stream 

To enable continuous online supervision, we formulate the dynamic instruction stream (Fig. 1 Middle) as a Dynamic Instruction Queue (DIQ). At any time step t, the system maintains an ordered sequence of pending instructions Qt:

Qt = ( φ1, φ 2, . . . , φ K ) (1) Fig. 1: Architecture of VA-FastNavi-MARL. Multimedia Instruction Generator (Top) Heterogeneous inputs (machine, audio, visual) are fused into a unified embedding ( φn) via parallel encoders. Dynamic Instruction Stream (Middle) 

An asynchronous buffer schedules real-time commands ( φt)to handle irregular input rates. Task-adaptive Motion Con-troller (Bottom) The active instruction parameterizes the task ( Tt), triggering the Meta-RL policy πθ to adapt into a specialized task policy πθt for control. where φi represents the active instruction currently guiding the control policy, and φK is the last instruction in the buffer. The queue evolves according to a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) protocol governed by two primary transitions: 

Instruction Completion (Dequeue): If the active instruc-tion φ1 is executed, the instruction will be removed, and control shifts to the subsequent objective: 

Qt+1 ← Dequeue (Qt) = ( φ2, . . . , φ K ) if st |= φ1 (2) 

Instruction Arrival (Enqueue): New instructions φnew is-sued by the high-level planner or human operator are appended dynamically: 

Qt+1 ← Enqueue (Qt, φ new ) = ( φ1, . . . , φ K , φ new ) (3) Each motion instruction φi is defined as an ordered se-quence of waypoints, denoted as φi = ⟨wi, 1, . . . , w i,M ⟩,where wk represents the k-th sub-goal to be reached sequen-tially. 

D. VA-FastNavi-MARL 1) Task Distribution Formulation: Standard MARL opti-mizes a policy for a single, static reward function. In contrast, VA-FastNavi-MARL requires the agent to generalize across a possibly infinite space of programmable motion instructions. We formulate this as a meta-learning problem where the task distribution ρ(T ) is defined over the distribution of valid instructions ρ(Φ) .A specific task Ti ∼ ρ(T ) is characterized by a unique instruction sequence φi = ⟨wi, 1, . . . , w i,M ⟩. The MDP for task Ti shares the same robot dynamics but possesses a task-specific reward function Ri(s, a ) that encourages sequential progression through the waypoints in φi. The goal of the meta-learner is to find a set of initial policy parameters θ that can rapidly adapt to maximize the expected return of any unseen instruction φnew after limited interaction. 

2) Meta-Training with Soft Actor-Critic (SAC): We employ MAML-based exploration using Soft Actor-Critic. The train-ing process alternates between two loops: 

Inner Loop (Fast Adaptation): For a sampled instruction 

φi, the agent interacts with the environment to collect a 

support set of transitions Dsupp  

> i

. The policy parameters θ

are updated to task-specific parameters θ′ 

> i

by performing K

gradient descent steps on the SAC objective JSAC :

θ′ 

> i

= θ − α∇θ JSAC (θ, Dsupp  

> i

) (4) This step simulates the agent’s ability to ”fine-tune” its under-standing of the new instruction sequence geometry. 

Outer Loop (Meta-Optimization): To ensure the initial-ization θ is broadly generalizable, we evaluate the adapted parameters θ′ 

> i

on a separate query set Dquery  

> i

(collected using 

πθ′ 

> i

). The meta-parameters are updated to minimize the loss across the batch of sampled instructions: 

θ ← θ − β∇θ

X 

> Ti∼p(T)

JSAC (θ′

> i

, Dquery  

> i

) (5) Algorithm 1 VA-FastNavi-MARL: Online Meta-Adaptation & Execution  

> 1:

Input: Pre-trained Meta-Policy πθ , Adaptation step α,Instruction Queue Q 

> 2:

Initialize: Task Policy πθt ← πθ 

> 3:

while System Active do  

> 4:

1. Dynamic Instruction Retrieval  

> 5:

if Q is empty then  

> 6:

Maintain Hold state; Continue  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

φt ← Q .dequeue ()  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

2. Fast Adaptation  

> 11:

Parameterize task T with φt 

> 12:

Collect trajectories Dsupp via interaction using πθ 

> 13:

Compute task-specific parameters:  

> 14:

θt ← θ − α∇θ JSAC (Dsupp , θ ) 

> 15:

3. Task Execution  

> 16:

while Task φt not completed do  

> 17:

Select action at ∼ πθt (st, φ t) 

> 18:

Execute at, observe st+1 and reward rt 

> 19:

end while  

> 20:

Reset θt ← θ 

> 21:

end while 

3) Task-adaptive Motion Controller (Fig. 1, bottom): Dur-ing Meta-Adaptation stage (Algorithm 1), the robot receives novel, unseen instructions from dynamic instruction stream. The system utilizes the meta-learned initialization θ and per-forms continuous online gradient updates. This allows the controller to dynamically adjust to the specific constraints of the current active instruction in the queue. We call these instruction adaptation steps as task-adaptive motion control. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

Unlike prior works that focus on environment-level gen-eralization, we evaluate generalization across instruction dis-tributions. All experiments use the same workspace, while instruction semantics, length, modality, and temporal ordering differ between training and evaluation. 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Environment Configuration: We constructed a high-fidelity collaborative environment consisting of three robotic arms sharing a workspace. The state space S ∈ R15 is defined by a unified feature vector containing the end-effector positions, distances to targets, and task-phase indicators for all three arms. The action space A ∈ R9 consists of continuous velocity commands for the end-effectors. The architecture of the Policy network is shown in Fig. 2 

2) Robustness Evaluation Protocol: To validate the sys-tem’s applicability to real-world scenarios where sensory in-puts are often imperfect, we introduce stochastic perturbations during evaluation. Intermediate Layers(Hidden) 

> Layer 1 (fc1)
> Linear + ReLU
> 15 → 128
> Input State Vector
> Dimension = 15
> Layer 2 (fc2)
> Linear + ReLU
> 128 → 128
> Mean Head (μ)
> Linear 128 → 9
> Clamp [-10, 10]
> Log Std Head (σ)
> Linear 128 → 9
> Clamp [-5, 2]
> Mean Output μ
> (9-dim action mean)
> Log Std Output σ
> (9-dim std)
> Sampling → Gaussian Policy
> Tanh + Scaling → Action

Fig. 2: Architecture of the policy network. The network processes a 15-dimensional state vector through two hidden layers and uses a dual-head structure to output the parameters (μ and log σ) of a 9-dimensional Gaussian policy. Output values are clamped for numerical stability before final action sampling and scaling. 

Audio Noise: We inject additive Gaussian white noise (SNR=20dB) into the raw audio waveforms to simulate en-vironmental background chatter. 

Visual Occlusion: We apply random ”Cutout” masks (cov-ering 10-20% of the image frame) to the visual inputs, simulating camera obstructions or sensor failures. The model is evaluated on its ability to maintain trajectory precision under these noisy conditions without re-training. 

3) Meta-Task Distribution: In contrast to standard RL set-tings where the task is fixed, VA-FastNavi-MARL leverages a diverse distribution of tasks to facilitate meta-adaptation. We define a task Ti as a specific sequential coordination order of the three arms. During meta-training, the global policy is updated by sampling batches of 5 distinct tasks. Specifically, the task distribution p(T ) is characterized by stochastic sequences of involving arbitrary arm ordering (e.g., 

[2 , 3, 1, 3, 2, 1] ), ensuring the agent learns to generalize across complex interaction patterns. 

B. Experimental Results 

We rigorously validate the performance of VA-FastNavi-MARL through evaluation along three core dimensions: 

1) Convergence Speed: The provided performance metrics (As shown in Fig. 3) illustrate a comparative analysis between our proposed method and three baselines (MAAC, MAPPO, and MADDPG) across 50 adaption steps. Our method (solid red line) demonstrates superior convergence, reaching a peak Average Reward of approximately 1700 by epoch 20, whereas baselines like MAAC suffer from significant performance degradation after an initial rise. This efficiency is mirrored in Fig. 3: Performance comparison across different models. From left to right: Average Reward, Success Rate, and Collision Rate. Our method (Solid Red) achieves faster adaptation and higher safety compared to baselines. 

Fig. 4: Trajectory evolution (Top) during the Long-Horizon Continuous Adaptation test ( T = 2000 steps).The experiment is segmented into five distinct phases (separated by vertical dashed lines), where the underlying instruction logic shifts abruptly from simple instructions (e.g., Seq: [1,2,3] ) to complex instructions (e.g., Seq: [2,3,1,3,2,3] ). Bottom is the state activation timeline corresponding to the continuous adaptation task. Blue segments denote the Approaching phase (active execution), while pink regions represent the Returning/Holding phase. the Success Rate, where our approach achieves a perfect 1.0 score early on, while MAPPO and MADDPG fail to solve the task. Furthermore, despite an initial exploration-driven spike in the Collision Rate, our method successfully converges to zero collisions by epoch 20. These results highlight our model’s robustness and its ability to achieve optimal multi-agent coor-dination while prioritizing safety and task completion. 

2) Robot Control Performance: Beyond single-task perfor-mance, a critical requirement for real-world deployment is the system’s ability to handle dynamic, non-stationary instruction streams, which we visualized in the Long-Horizon Continuous Adaptation Test (Fig. 4). The experiment tracks the distance-to-target trajectories of the three arms over 2000 steps, divided into five phases separated by vertical dashed lines; the under-lying task logic is abruptly switched when previous instruction has finished, evolving from a simple ( Seq:[1,2,3] ) to more irregular patterns such as Seq:[2,3,1,3] . The plotted trajectories reveal a robust “negotiated turn-taking” behaviour: for instance, during the third phase (steps 600–1000) that demands the four-step sequence [2,3,1,3] , the system modulates the activity of Arm 2 (blue) and Arm 3 (green) to accommodate the interleaved activation of Arm 1 (red), with distance valleys aligning precisely to the prescribed order. Immediately after each phase boundary, the agents adjust their policy within a few gradient steps–seen as rapid corrections in trajectory slope–without catastrophic forgetting or collisions, and the yellow threshold line confirms that every targeted arm converges to within the tolerance ϵtarget for every instruction in the queue. 

3) Efficiency and Robustness Analysis on Instruction Gen-eration: In this part, we evaluate the performance of in-struction generation of different multimedia input (machine order, audio input and audio-visual input) in terms of effi-ciency (instruction generation time) and accuracy (instruction generation precision). To investigate the robustness of VA-FastNavi-MARL under instructions of varying complexity, we categorize instructions into three difficulty levels based on their semantic and compositional complexity, which is approximated by instruction length. Specifically, instructions are labeled as Easy ([0 , 3] ), Medium ([4 , 6] ), and Hard 

([7 , 10] ). This evaluation protocol mirrors standard multimedia generalization benchmarks, where the sensory stream remains similar while the semantic instruction distribution shifts. TABLE I: Instruction Generation Time and Accuracy of VA-FastNavi-MARL Across Instruction Difficulty Levels and Multimedia Inputs (5 Seeds, 100 Samples) 

Difficulty Input Type Time (s) Accuracy (%) Easy Audio 0.008 ±0.001 93.80 ±1.70 Audio (noise) 0.008 ±0.001 87.40 ±2.70 Audio-Visual 0.389 ±0.038 94.60 ±0.80 Audio-Visual (noise) 0.498 ±0.058 92.80 ±2.14 Medium Audio 0.015 ±0.001 87.80 ±1.60 Audio (noise) 0.017 ±0.001 77.20 ±2.00 Audio-Visual 0.465 ±0.047 91.20 ±2.04 Audio-Visual (noise) 0.571 ±0.034 88.00 ±3.74 Hard Audio 0.023 ±0.002 83.00 ±1.50 Audio (noise) 0.025 ±0.003 67.00 ±3.50 Audio-Visual 0.489 ±0.028 90.60 ±2.24 Audio-Visual (noise) 0.516 ±0.079 83.20 ±1.60 

Table I validates the system’s efficiency and resilience across varying difficulty levels. The generation time remains strictly sub-second ( < 0.6s) even under noisy conditions, fully satisfying real-time control requirements. Crucially, the system demonstrates remarkable robustness against sensory perturbations. In Easy and Medium settings, the impact of noise is minimal, with the model consistently maintaining high precision. This stability extends to the challenging Hard 

category, where our Audio-Visual fusion significantly out-performs the unimodal baseline (retaining 83 .20% accuracy versus 67 .00% ), confirming that our modality-agnostic em-bedding effectively preserves robust semantic intent against environmental corruption. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced VA-FastNavi-MARL, a Meta-RL framework designed for time-critical multi-arm adaptation to dynamic motion instructions. Our Multimedia-Driven In-struction Generator utilizes parallel encoder-decoder networks to fuse heterogeneous inputs–machine codes, audio, and vi-sual cues–into a unified, modality-agnostic instruction. Cru-cially, by leveraging an asynchronous programmable motion-instruction stream, the framework decouples complex percep-tion processing from actuation. This design supports highly responsive human-robot interaction, allowing users to issue online motion commands that the system can interpret and execute with millisecond latency. The demonstrated compu-tational efficiency and robustness to sensory noise confirm the system’s potential for deployment on physical robotic hardware. Future work will focus on sim-to-real transfer using physical UR5 robotic arms to validate robustness against real-world communication delays, as well as extending the framework to larger robot teams. REFERENCES [1] Alec Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020 , 2021. [2] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac et al., “Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198 , 2022. [3] Tadas Baltrusaitis et al., “Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2019. [4] Michael Ahn et al., “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. [5] Anthony Brohan et al., “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 ,2023. [6] Xin Wang et al., “Reinforced cross-modal matching and self-supervised imitation learning for vision-language navigation,” in Proceedings of CVPR , 2019. [7] Chen Sun et al., “Videobert: A joint model for video and language representation learning,” in Proceedings of ICCV , 2019. [8] Weichao Mao et al., “Multi-agent meta-reinforcement learning: Sharper convergence rates with task similarity,” in Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [9] Guohua Cao et al., “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning-based robotic arm assembly research,” PLOS ONE , 2025. [10] Guanglin Ji et al., “Surgical continuum manipulator control using multiagent team deep q learning,” in 2023 International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society , 2023. [11] Asad Ali Shahid et al., “Decentralized multi-agent control of amanipulator in continuous task learning,” Applied Sciences , 2021. [12] Adolfo Perrusqu´ ıa et al., “Multi-agent reinforcement learning for redundant robot control in task-space,” International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics , 2021. [13] Luyu Liu et al., “A collaborative control method of dual-arm robots based on deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Sciences , 2021. [14] Huiwen Yan et al., “Markov potential game construction and multi-agent reinforcement learning with applications to autonomous driving,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00212 , 2025. [15] Chelsea Finn et al., “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2017. [16] Alex Nichol et al., “On first-order meta-learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999 , 2018. [17] Yang Zhang et al., “Directed-maml: Meta reinforcement learn-ing algorithm with task-directed approximation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00212 , 2025. [18] Yan Duan et al., “RL 2: Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforce-ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779 , 2016. [19] Kate Rakelly et al., “Efficient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.