Title: EmbodiedLGR: Integrating Lightweight Graph Representation and Retrieval for Semantic-Spatial Memory in Robotic Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18271v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:33:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# EmbodiedLGR: Integrating Lightweight Graph Representation and Retrieval for Semantic-Spatial Memory in Robotic Agents 

Paolo Riva ∗1, Leonardo Gargani 1, Matteo Frosi 1, Matteo Matteucci 1

> This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible.

Abstract — As the world of agentic artificial intelligence applied to robotics evolves, the need for agents capable of building and retrieving memories and observations efficiently is increasing. Robots operating in complex environments must build memory structures to enable useful human-robot interac-tions by leveraging the mnemonic representation of the current operating context. People interacting with robots may expect the embodied agent to provide information about locations, events, or objects, which requires the agent to provide precise answers within human-like inference times to be perceived as responsive. While prior work has addressed the memory-building phase, little work has optimized memory representations to enable LLM-based agents to quickly build, traverse, and efficiently retrieve memory entries in real-time scenarios. To address this gap, we propose the Embodied Light Graph Retrieval Agent (EmbodiedLGR-Agent), a visual-language model (VLM)-driven agent architecture that constructs dense and efficient represen-tations of robot operating environments. EmbodiedLGR-Agent directly addresses the need for an efficient memory represen-tation of the environment by providing a hybrid building-retrieval approach built on parameter-efficient VLMs that store low-level information about objects and their positions in a semantic graph, while retaining high-level descriptions of the observed scenes with a traditional retrieval-augmented architecture. EmbodiedLGR-Agent is evaluated on the pop-ular NaVQA dataset, achieving state-of-the-art performance in inference and querying times for embodied agents, while retaining competitive accuracy on the global task relative to the current state-of-the-art approaches. Moreover, EmbodiedLGR-Agent was successfully deployed on a physical robot, showing practical utility in real-world contexts through human-robot interaction, while running the visual-language model and the building-retrieval pipeline locally. 

I. INTRODUCTION The deployment of autonomous mobile robots in complex, unstructured environments has driven a growing need for memory-enhanced agentic artificial intelligence. For these systems to engage in meaningful human-robot interaction (HRI) and provide insightful information, they must go beyond executing simple, reactive commands to understand and recall the context of their surroundings, as a human would with past knowledge of a given environment. Humans naturally expect robots operating in domestic or public spaces to answer questions regarding the location of objects, the history of events, or the spatial layout of the environment. To meet these expectations, embodied agents must construct                  

> ∗Corresponding author
> 1All authors are with the Department of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering (DEIB), Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Emails:

paolo13.riva@mail.polimi.it, {leonardo. gargani,matteo.frosi,matteo.matteucci 

}@polimi.it  

> Fig. 1. The operational cycle of EmbodiedLGR-Agent starts by (1) first constructing a memory representation of the environment from observations. Then, (2) once sufficient exploration has been conducted, the user can query the agent with spatial, temporal, or descriptive requests. Lastly, (3) the agent retrieves relevant information from memory and addresses the request, guiding the user towards retrieved positions if needed.

robust memory structures that allow for the rapid and precise information retrieval at human-like inference speeds. Recent literature has actively explored the integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to tackle these embodied challenges, where several studies have translated visual observations into struc-tured semantic maps through ad-hoc tailored visual mod-els [1], [2], while other works have focused on building expressive 3D scene graphs [3], [4]. Furthermore, to man-age long-term context and address complex spatial queries inherent to Embodied Question Answering (EQA) tasks [5], [6], contemporary approaches increasingly employ Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) paradigms [7]. Systems such as ReMEmbR [8] store episodic observations and VLM-generated captions in vector databases to extend the agent’s effective memory. However, many state-of-the-art methods treat memory accumulation monotonically, rely on computa-tionally expensive models, or fail to optimize redundancies and repetitions among semantic concepts. As a consequence, they lead to dense, conceptually overly abundant vector databases that introduce computational overhead, which hin-der real-time querying capabilities and the spatial reasoning required for time-responsive human-robot interactions. To address this gap, we propose the Embodied Light Graph Retrieval Agent (EmbodiedLGR-Agent), a VLM-driven agent architecture that constructs efficient represen-

> arXiv:2604.18271v1 [cs.RO] 20 Apr 2026

tations of robot operating environments using lightweight VLMs and memory structures, as illustrated in Fig. 1. EmbodiedLGR directly addresses the need for efficient mem-ory by providing a hybrid building-retrieval approach that stores low-level information about objects and their precise positions within a semantic memory graph, while retaining high-level descriptions of the observed scenes in a separate vector database. This dual-level structure enables the agent to exploit the traversability of graph representations, allowing real-time updates and entity associations over long-horizon image feeds from the robot’s exploration. Our primary contributions are summarized as follows.  

> •

We introduce EmbodiedLGR-Agent, a novel architec-ture that uses a semantic memory graph to handle multi-ple observations of the same entity/object through real-time positional and temporal updates, while retaining querying capabilities over a vector database, depending on the complexity of the user query.  

> •

We propose a suite of three specialized retrieval tools, i.e., semantic, positional, and time-based, that enable the LLM agent to address diverse queries with low latency.  

> •

We demonstrate the efficiency of our approach by evaluating on the NaVQA [8] dataset, achieving state-of-the-art inference and querying times for memory items while maintaining competitive accuracy.  

> •

We validate the practical utility of our system by suc-cessfully deploying it on a physical robot and running the entire VLM and memory pipeline locally on the platform during the exploration and querying phases. II. RELATED WORK The development of autonomous robot agents capable of operating in complex, real-world environments has led to a shift from purely traditional utility- and goal-based agents to memory-augmented, context-aware, cognitive architectures. Modern embodied systems must not only perceive their surroundings but also maintain a persistent, long-horizon internal representation of the spatial, temporal, and semantic characteristics of their operational context. 

A. Semantic Memory and Scene Representations 

Recent studies have made significant progress in translat-ing 2D visual observations into structured semantic mem-ories for autonomous agents. Some approaches, such as CLIP-fields [1] and Visual Language Maps [2], leverage foundation models and compose them to embed semantic features into spatial maps, enabling text-based retrieval that relies on similarity metrics computed in the proposed repre-sentation space. Furthermore, 3D scene graphs [3], [4] have emerged as powerful mental models for agents, providing high-level representations of entities and their spatial rela-tionships by clustering atomic perceptions into hierarchical representations. While these approaches offer semantically rich representations of the environment that aid language-conditioned navigation, they fall short in real-time robotic scenarios, as they do not explicitly optimize the processing pipeline with respect to data representation for real-world deployment. 

B. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for LLMs 

With the rapid advancement of Retrieval-Augmented Gen-eration (RAG) techniques [7], embodied agents are increas-ingly relying on external memory modules to circumvent the context-window limitations of traditional LLMs. In robotics, systems such as ReMEmbR [8] have successfully applied RAG by storing episodic observations (e.g., VLM-generated captions) and leveraging an LLM to iteratively query this history to reason over long horizons. While these systems excel at building comprehensive memories, often exploit-ing computationally-heavy representations to provide several information primitives to the agent [9], they often struggle with redundancy and fragmentation when tracking dynamic entities, as the memory bank grows monotonically over time and is not optimized for the actual atomic pieces of information. 

C. Embodied Question Answering 

Embodied Question Answering (EQA) [5] activities re-quire agents to organically integrate perception, navigation, and reasoning to answer natural language queries about their environment. Recent large-scale benchmarks, such as OpenEQA [6], challenge agents to perform spatial reasoning similar to human cognitive processes, demanding a deep understanding of what the robot has seen, as well as where and when it was observed. While prior works rely on generic querying against monolithic memory banks, achiev-ing human-like response times and low-latency, real-time processing of scenes with memory-efficient visual language models like Florence-2 [10] remains mostly unexplored. III. METHOD EmbodiedLGR-Agent proposes a VLM-driven memory architecture for LLM-based agents to populate and manage memory elements from the robot’s observations, adopting a double-level approach to enable effective and efficient infor-mation retrieval in real-world robotic contexts. Therefore, our work focuses on providing a memory representation that is efficient in both the memory building phase and the retrieval phase, while retaining the flexibility to query across multiple information dimensions, from positional to semantic. An overview of the agent’s architecture is shown in Fig. 2. EmbodiedLGR-Agent directly addresses the need for an efficient memory representation of the environment by in-troducing three retrieval tools for agents and providing two logically separated memory structures: a memory graph and a vector database. Through such tools, the LLM agent can address user queries directly from the memory graph, either performing semantic-based retrieval, positional-based retrieval, or time-based retrieval. The vector database, fol-lowing state-of-the-art approaches, is populated with richer semantic descriptions of the observed scenes and queried only by the agent for semantically complex user queries. 2Fig. 2. We split the EmbodiedLGR-Agent operational phases between memory building (left) and querying (right). The memory building phase ingests frames from the robot’s image perception suite (i.e., one or more RGB cameras) and feeds them to a Florence-2 VLM, generating, for each frame, a caption and a set of object labels. These are then used to populate the vector database and the memory graph, along with the robot’s pose and time. The querying phase begins when the user submits a query, after which an LLM is invoked to retrieve memory data via provided tools from either the memory graph or the vector database. The LLM provides an answer to the user based on what it retrieved during the reasoning loop. 

A. Memory Building 

The memory building phase begins (1) with the collection of the current image frame, position and timestamp from the exploring robot; (2) within the same time instant, the frame is processed by a VLM to extract all of the objects present in the scene, along with the visual description of the scene itself; (3) once the set of object labels and frame description are returned, embeddings for each label and the description are generated, to (4) populate the memory graph and the vector database. Multiple perceptions of the same object within the current observation window are updated on the memory graph, avoiding subsequent duplicate entries. 

Data Processing. Our proposed method considers a stream of image frames I1: k, a set of poses P1: k and a set of time instants T1: k. We associate each image Ii with a unique pose Pi and time Ti, corresponding to the robot’s pose and time at which the image was sampled from perception. Image frames, poses, and time instant are therefore sampled from the robot as it moves through the environment. Each image frame Ii is processed in real-time by a visual-language model, extracting both a set of labels {OD 1, . . . , OD n}i,corresponding brief semantic descriptions of the detected objects, and a global visual description Di of the frame. Both outputs are obtained by running Florence-2 locally on the robot, a multi-purpose, lightweight VLM that pro-cesses images with low inference times and provides both object detection and frame captioning. Labels and description of each image frame Ii are then used to compute label embeddings {EOD 1, . . . , EOD n}i and description embed-ding ED i, associated with the current frame Ii, through the sentence transformer all-MiniLM-L6-v2 .

Memory Graph Population and Update. Given an image frame Ii, triplets of the form {EOD ij , P i, T i} are created, with j ∈ 1 : n, associating entities in the frame to the robot’s pose and time when they were detected during exploration. From here, each triplet is stored as a node in the memory graph for future retrieval. The implemented memory graph is therefore populated with low-level semantic information about observed objects and is directly accessible to the robot’s agent at any time. The traversing efficiency of the memory graph allows the system not only to create nodes from novel observations but also to update nodes in real time that correspond to previously observed objects or entities. Unlike other state-of-the-art approaches [8][9], which base their work only on heavy and data-wise redundant representations of the scenes, we exploit the traversability and query-responsiveness of the memory graph representation to handle multiple observations of the same entity in subsequent frames, by updating the pose and time of detection on already-created node instances. Consider an already-observed object represented by the node {EOD i, P h, T h}, with embedded label EOD i, last-associated pose Ph, and last-observed at time Th. Upon observing the same embedded label EOD i in a new pose Pk,and time instant Tk, the node’s associated pose is updated if: 

|| Pk − Ph|| ≤ δP , (1) 

where δP is a distance threshold specified as a parameter of the agent, depending on its context of deployment. Specif-ically, if the condition is satisfied, the pose is updated on the components {x, y, z } with a moving-average approach between Ph and Pk, while the pose’s original yaw is pre-served for simplicity, and the node is updated with the new time Tk. If the condition over δP is not satisfied, a new node 3with embedding EOD i, pose Pk, and time Tk is created. Since the VLM can attribute multiple semantically-equivalent labels for the same entity between subsequent image frames (e.g., “cup” and “mug” retain very similar semantic meaning, therefore being close in the embedding space), we also consider a semantic similarity threshold δE to avoid duplicate creation of the same entity during detection, following the cosine similarity formula: 

EOD j · EOD k

|| EOD j || 2|| EOD k|| 2

> δ E . (2) 

If the cosine similarity score between two labels is above the defined δE , the already-existing instance of the object with label OD j is updated as previously described. EmbodiedLGR-Agent also handles multiple objects of the same type being observed in a single image frame Ii,by checking the number of semantically-equivalent nodes already present in memory, and comparing it with the number of currently observed equal entities. For a given label embedding EOD j , suppose we observe k elements of type EOD j . Given the considered distance radius δP , the memory graph already retains h elements with label EOD j .From here, based on k and h, our approach proceeds (1) updating the position and time on nodes associated with the previously-observed h entities, or (2) creating new entity nodes if the current observed scene contains more elements of the considered label than the number of already-known ones, i.e., k − h. For k < h , we update the k-closest nodes with respect to the current robot’s position. This approach, with sufficient exploration of the environment, allows the discovery and update of all objects of the same type EOD j

within the considered positional radius δP .

Vector Database Population. As the robot populates the memory graph, it simultaneously fills the vector database with a richer representation of the observed scene frame, by generating a visual description from the VLM and em-bedding it through all-MiniLM-L6-v2 . Triplets of the form 

{ED i, P i, T i} are built and inserted into the vector database. 

B. Memory Retrieval 

Having populated both the memory graph and the vector database, the LLM-agent’s querying phase is modeled as a cyclic finite-state diagram, in which the agent invokes retrieval tools based on the user query until an answer is available or the cycle iteration limit is reached. EmbodiedLGR-Agent defines three on-graph search tools (callable functions) that retrieve data from the memory graph structure: semantic, positional, and temporal search. Depend-ing on the complexity and nature of the user query, the LLM agent can also invoke querying tools on the vector database by calling a ReMEmbR agent [8], providing articulated answers by reasoning over the stored descriptive captions, as previously described. Any output returned by the invoked tools is directly added to the LLM context window. 

On-graph Semantic Search. The agent can retrieve nodes that are semantically similar to a query chosen upon tool invocation. The semantic search tool tS is defined as: 

tS (query ) → { EOD, P, T }1: k, (3) 

where query is provided by the agent, and k nodes are returned to the agent from the graph. The tool first invokes 

all-MiniLM-L6-v2 to compute the embedding of the input query, i.e., EQ . Then, it computes the cosine similarity metric over the node-label embeddings, returning the k nodes with EOD closest to EQ in the embedding space. 

On-graph Positional Search. The agent can retrieve nodes corresponding to objects spatially close to a given position, provided as input by the agent upon tool invocation. The positional search tool tP is defined as: 

tP (x, y, z ) → { EOD, P, T }1: k, (4) 

where position {x, y, z } is provided as input by the agent, and k nodes are retrieved from the graph. The tool computes the L2 distances from the provided position and returns the 

k nodes with the P smallest distances. 

On-graph Temporal Search. The agent can retrieve nodes based on a reference time instant provided as input by the agent. The temporal search tool tT is defined as follows: 

tT (hh, mm, ss ) → { EOD, P, T }1: k, (5) 

as the timestamp {hh, mm, ss } is provided by the agent, and 

k nodes are returned from the graph having T closest to the input timestamp with respect to the L1 temporal distance. 

Vector Database Queries. To query the vector database, EmbodiedLGR-Agent integrates and invokes tools specified by a ReMEmbR agent [8] instance, to retrieve either descrip-tive, positional, or temporal information over the observed scene’s descriptions, populated during the memory building phase. The vector database retains visual descriptions of the perceived scenes during the exploration phase. Nonethe-less, the LLM agent is prompted to independently decide whether to invoke a retrieval from the vector database, and is prompted to do so only if the primitives available on the memory graph are insufficient for the current query. Our layered approach allows the EmbodiedLGR-Agent to access only the memory structure that best suits a given query’s information request, maximizing retrieval efficiency: for simple, low-level queries (e.g., known position of atomic objects), the agent can perform retrieval on the memory graph through the tools tS , t P , t T , while for semantically-complex queries (e.g., observed scene matching a specific scene setting) the agent can perform retrieval directly on the vector database through the ReMEmbR agent. This not only improves the responsiveness of the proposed EmbodiedLGR-Agent over simple, atomic queries but also reduces overhead compared to other presented solutions [8][9]. 

C. Inference 

The inference process of the EmbodiedLGR-Agent fol-lows the traditional LLM invocation in agentic applications, exploiting system prompting and state-of-the-art libraries 4to implement agentic components and perform API calls, depending on the chosen model, in an extensible manner. After receiving a user query via human-robot interaction, the LLM enters a reasoning loop, invoking memory retrieval tools based on the user request’s complexity and atomic requests and selecting them independently without strict system prompt constraints. All the information retrieved by the tools over either the graph memory or the vector database is fed into the LLM’s context window; tools can be invoked multiple times during the reasoning loop, as illustrated in Fig. 2, until the LLM can provide an answer to the user. IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP We evaluate the EmbodiedLGR-Agent on the NaVQA dataset [8] to assess the agent’s ability to build and retrieve memory for navigation-related tasks, which require both semantic understanding of the query and positional retrieval of the target position. We evaluate the responsiveness of the memory graph and the vector database presented, and report the overall accuracy across spatial and temporal metrics. We test object labels and visual captions generation with 

Florence-2-base (0.22B parameters) and Florence-2-large 

(0.77B parameters), two models significantly smaller than the ones employed by other solutions, like VILA1.5-13B (13B parameters) [8] or Qwen2.5-VL-7B (7B parameters) [9], to further stress the requirement of a feasible deployment sce-nario for a real-time constrained computational stack. Label and caption generation are handled by specific tasks available on the chosen VLM. Florence-2 is a multi-purpose model that allows performing several visual processing tasks on an input image. Specifically, we select the MORE-DETAILED-CAPTION task, to generate visual captions over frames (populating the vector database), and the DENSE-REGION-CAPTION task to generate semantic labels of the entities within the frames (populating the memory graph). 

Metrics for Evaluation. Considering the NaVQA dataset and following the approach of ReMEmbR [8], we define specific evaluation criteria to measure the system’s ability to answer spatial and temporal questions efficiently.  

> •

Response Latency: queries are evaluated over the mem-ory graph and vector database depending on the quanta of information to retrieve to return an answer. We evaluate the average response latency across queries in NaVQA and report the latency for each component of the agent’s memory architecture.  

> •

Fallback percentage: the LLM determines which mem-ory structure to query based on the semantic complexity of the request. To show how frequently the agent falls back from just querying the graph to passing the query over the vector database, we consider the number of ReMEmbR agent calls Nvector over the number of queries Nqueries as: 

F allback = Nvector 

Nqueries 

. (6)  

> •

Spatial Accuracy: given queries requiring the agent to provide the position of an object or an area within the environment, the agent is evaluated over the mean Euclidean distance (L2 norm) between the predicted and ground-truth {x, y, z } coordinates. We consider a spatial query to be correct if the error is within 25 meters of the ground truth, as this radius effectively captures region-level retrieval in a real-time deployment with reduced frame rate processing, conditioning the amount of spatial information processed.  

> •

Temporal Accuracy: given queries requiring the agent to provide the observation time instant of a given object or area, the agent is evaluated over the mean temporal error (L1 norm) with respect to the ground truth. We consider a temporal query to be correct if the error is within 3 minutes of the ground truth, given the coarse temporal sampling rate of a real-time scenario. 

Implementation Details. During the memory-building phase, the agent processes incoming frames at a sub-sampled rate of 1 frame every 2.0 seconds. This extraction rate was empirically chosen to balance high-fidelity spatial tracking with memory efficiency: in real-world deployment scenarios, reduced processing frame rates represent a good compromise between computational overhead and information redun-dancy. The VLM generation process is limited to 1024 tokens, which we found to be a sufficient upper bound for describing highly cluttered environments without degrading throughput. We also empirically set a distance threshold δP

to 5 meters and a semantic threshold δE to 0.75, which we observed to be the best-performing setup for the node-update dynamics described in Section III-A. As previously specified, we select the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence transformer to compute embeddings across the architecture. For agent deployment, we use GPT-4o as the reference LLM, invoking it via its APIs alongside our tools through LangChain [11]. The memory graph and the vector database are implemented using NetworkX [12] and Milvus [13], respectively, enabling physical deployment scalability. V. R ESULTS 

We evaluated a set of 120 questions from the NaVQA dataset, using both Florence-2-base and Florence-2-large 

in combination with either the graph memory, the vector database (queried with a ReMEmbR agent), or both, to assess performance under the ablation of single memory components. This was carried out by selectively passing only a subset of the tools defined in Section III-B to the agent. 

Query Accuracy. Table I presents the performance com-parison over the positional accuracy and temporal accuracy metrics over different versions of the Florence-2 VLM. The table first shows that combining the vector database (ReMEmbR) with the graph memory component improved the average accuracy relative to the ReMEmbR baseline on the considered query data. By integrating querying capabil-ities over graph memory along the vector database (“Graph Memory + ReMEmbR” in the table), the EmbodiedLGR-Agent improved its positional accuracy observed across the dataset. This is likely due to a more fine-grained posi-tional representation being available to the agent, which 5TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT VLM S AND CONFIGURATIONS OVER QUERY ACCURACY .                                          

> VLM Agent Configuration Positional Accuracy [%] Temporal Accuracy [%] Average [%]
> Graph Memory 13.75 20.48 17.11 Florence-2-base ReMEmbR 6.67 38.63 22.65 Graph Memory + ReMEmbR 19.59 30.30 24.94
> Graph Memory 13.75 14.82 14.29 Florence-2-large ReMEmbR 19.59 38.63 29.11 Graph Memory + ReMEmbR 29.17 38.63 33.90
> TABLE II PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT VLM S AND CONFIGURATIONS OVER RESPONSE LATENCY AND FALLBACK PERCENTAGE .
> VLM Agent Configuration Response Latency [s] Fallback Percentage [%]
> Graph Memory 10.80 —Florence-2-base ReMEmbR 19.14 —Graph Memory + ReMEmbR 23.13 93.34 Graph Memory 9.97 —Florence-2-large ReMEmbR 19.79 —Graph Memory + ReMEmbR 23.73 80.83

distributes atomic poses across the semantic entities in the memory graph. For temporal queries, the agent matched ReMEmbR’s vector database-only performance for Florence-2-large , while showing a bigger difference in performance for the graph-only configuration, as temporal requests from NaVQA were not generally tied to a specific entity in the space, and could be better addressed by querying over the visual captions in the vector database. The results shown in Table I are consistent with the VLM dimensions (parameter size < 1B), employed for generating visual descriptions and entity labels, and they show that agents like EmbodiedLGR-Agent, which rely on such VLMs, can be effectively deployed for edge-memory building with competitive real-time performance over query accuracy. 

Latency and Fallback percentage. Table II first demon-strates how the LLM response times when combined only with the graph memory component significantly improved when compared to ReMEmbR’s vector database query times: on both Florence-2-base and Florence-2-large VLM configu-rations, the response latency over an EmbodiedLGR-Agent’s LLM call reduced to a half of the response times showed by the baseline. Furthermore, the global response latency when both structures were active (23.73 seconds for Florence-2-Large ) remains relatively close to the vector-database-only configuration (19.79 seconds). In scenarios with a prevalence of atomic queries over semantically complex ones, unlike the NaVQA dataset, the graph memory component can poten-tially reduce response latency under the global configuration, as it may be more heavily exploited by the architecture. Table II also shows how often the agent invoked specific memory modules to answer queries. The LLM was prompted to rely on faster graph-querying tools whenever possible and to fall back to querying the vector database through ReMEmbR only if the information retrieved from the graph was insufficient to answer the proposed query. From the fallback percentage in the table, we observe a distinct behav-ioral difference across VLM implementations. The Florence-2-base configuration exhibited a fallback percentage of            

> Fig. 3. EmbodiedLGR-Agent was deployed on a Nvidia Jetson Orin, interfaced with an AgileX Bunker Pro ROS 2 environment for autonomous navigation. The robot was equipped with ZED Xcameras for image retrieval, and a Velodyne LiDAR for SLAM and autonomous navigation with Nav2. EmbodiedLGR-Agent learned an environment representation during the memory building phase (top) and correctly navigated to objects it had previously stored in the graph memory (bottom).

93.34%, indicating that, for the lighter VLM implementation, the agent relied more on vector-database entries, answering 6.66% of queries solely by accessing the graph. In contrast, 

Florence-2-large , which generates semantically richer entity representations relative to the base version, resulted in a much lower fallback percentage of 80.83%, with 19.17% of queries addressed solely via graph retrieval. This shows that as the VLM-generated semantic labels become more accurate and detailed, the agent increasingly relies on the graph-memory entity representation, leading to almost 20% of queries being answered without querying the vector database. VI. R EAL WORLD DEPLOYMENT 

To validate the lightness of the deployed EmbodiedLGR-Agent architecture, we first tested it on a traditional, consumer-specifications PC. We successfully tested the 6ROS 2 node deployment of the agent by simulating an AgileX Scout robot in a warehouse environment with Gazebo [14], running both the memory building and query phases on an AMD Ryzen 7 3700X processor, an NVIDIA RTX3060 12 GB GPU, and 32 GB of DDR4 RAM. To evaluate the performance and querying capabilities of EmbodiedLGR-Agent, we then deployed it on an AgileX Bunker Pro mobile robot equipped with an Nvidia Jetson AGX Orin 64 GB . Our intent is to evaluate the ability of our solution to explore and build memory entries for both the memory graph and the vector database in a real-world setting with real-time processing, allowing us to test the agent on built memory at any time during and after the exploration phase. An outline of the deployment process is shown in Fig. 3. For the employed VLM, we tested our solution with 

Florence-2-large running locally on the Jetson, without any parameter quantization, given the reduced (0.77B) native model dimension. To enable integration of the ROS 2 en-vironment [14] for controlling the robot with the GPT4o API backend, we chose ROSA agent framework [15], which is designed to allow the LLM to access the ROS 2 backend natively. The robot was equipped with a ZED X camera, providing an image feed over a dedicated ROS 2 topic; a Velodyne 3D LiDAR was also integrated into the system to allow autonomous navigation via SLAM and Nav2 [16]. 

EmbodiedLGR-Agent Deployment. The EmbodiedLGR-Agent architecture was deployed over ROSA’s framework as a set of ROS 2 nodes, allowing the exploitation of the ROS 2 middleware to handle data exchange between the build and querying components over the implemented memory architectures. The tools presented in Section III-B were integrated directly within the LLM agent, allowing (1) on-graph semantic similarity search, (2) on-graph positional search, (3) on-graph time search, or (4) vector database retrieval through a ReMEmbR agent instance. To allow aided navigation, we also implemented a tool within the LLM, enabling the agent to post Nav2 goals to guide the user to retrievable locations upon request via HRI. 

Results. An overview of the deployed system, performing both memory building and agent query tasks, is shown in Fig. 3. We first drove the robot around a university campus for 30 minutes, running the memory-building pipeline as it explored portions of the space. We then queried the EmbodiedLGR-Agent with semantic, positional, or temporal requests to stress-test specific tool invocations and to evaluate the agent’s ability to suggest specific locations from generic questions. For example, we provided questions such as “Take me to a place where I can repair my robot” to which the robot correctly replied “I found the location of a ‘laboratory’ at position {x, y, z }. Follow me”, having observed the word “laboratory” on the corresponding building’s entrance door during the exploration phase. Other queries, such as “Find me a bench with a red wooden tint” were not addressed correctly as the robot returned a set of known benches in memory. This is likely due to the way the environment was explored, as it was conducted while the robot was remotely controlled at a maximum speed of 1.5 meters per second. For this reason, brief observations of objects during rapid motion were not processed into semantically detailed labels by the VLM. Apart from specific, semantically complex queries about object details, the robot correctly returned navigable posi-tions from memory and exhibited human-like responsiveness across diverse queries. Human-robot interaction was particu-larly responsive for simple, atomic queries like “where is the closest hydrant?”, fully exploiting the memory graph query tools, where the answering overhead was basically limited only by the LLM’s APIs inference times. VII. C ONCLUSIONS 

In this work, we introduced EmbodiedLGR-Agent, a novel VLM-driven agent architecture designed to build and retrieve efficient semantic-spatial memories for robotic agents in real-time scenarios. Our agent achieves highly responsive infer-ence times suitable for real-world human-robot interaction while allowing for exploration and the direct construction of memory representations within the robot’s deployment window. The proposed EmbodiedLGR-Agent enables robots to leverage long-term memory, presenting a novel state-of-the-art approach to efficient and scalable memory manage-ment for intelligent agents operating under time-critical or computationally bounded conditions. 

Limitations and Future Work. The proposed architecture presents some limitations. It depends heavily on the under-lying LLM, which can occasionally produce incorrect tool calls or misinterpret retrieved information. We also deliber-ately use small, multi-purpose VLMs such as Florence-2 to enable real-time, low-latency deployment, but this reduces the richness and granularity of scene descriptions relative to larger models. Future work will evaluate alternative LLMs for more reliable tool invocation and explore other edge-deployable VLMs. Finally, beyond our efficient memory structure, we plan to investigate hierarchical memory rep-resentations to support spatial reasoning over complex yet efficiently traversable memory-graph structures. REFERENCES [1] N. M. M. Shafiullah, C. Paxton, L. Pinto, S. Chintala, and A. Szlam, “Clip-fields: Weakly supervised semantic fields for robotic memory,”             

> arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05663 , 2022. [2] C. Huang, O. Mees, A. Zeng, and W. Burgard, “Visual language maps for robot navigation,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, 2023, pp. 10 608–10 615. [3] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Hydra: A real-time spatial perception system for 3d scene graph construction and optimization,”
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13360 , 2022. [4] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen, A. Agarwal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa, et al. ,“Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .IEEE, 2024, pp. 5021–5028. [5] A. Das, S. Datta, G. Gkioxari, S. Lee, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, “Em-bodied question answering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 1–10. [6] A. Majumdar, A. Ajay, X. Zhang, P. Putta, S. Yenamandra, M. Henaff, S. Silwal, P. Mcvay, O. Maksymets, S. Arnaud, et al. , “Openeqa: Embodied question answering in the era of foundation models,” in
> Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 16 488–16 498.

7[7] Z. Guo, L. Xia, Y. Yu, T. Ao, and C. Huang, “Lightrag: Simple and fast retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05779 ,vol. 2, no. 3, 2024. [8] A. Anwar, J. Welsh, J. Biswas, S. Pouya, and Y. Chang, “Remembr: Building and reasoning over long-horizon spatio-temporal memory for robot navigation,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 2838–2845. [9] Y. Mao, H. Ye, W. Dong, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Meta-memory: Retrieving and integrating semantic-spatial memories for robot spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20754 , 2025. [10] B. Xiao, H. Wu, W. Xu, X. Dai, H. Hu, Y. Lu, M. Zeng, C. Liu, and L. Yuan, “Florence-2: Advancing a unified representation for a variety of vision tasks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 4818–4829. [11] A. Hurst, A. Lerer, A. P. Goucher, A. Perelman, A. Ramesh, A. Clark, A. Ostrow, A. Welihinda, A. Hayes, A. Radford, et al. , “Gpt-4o system card,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. [12] A. Hagberg, P. J. Swart, and D. A. Schult, “Exploring network struc-ture, dynamics, and function using networkx,” Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Tech. Rep., 2007. [13] J. Wang, X. Yi, R. Guo, H. Jin, P. Xu, S. Li, X. Wang, X. Guo, C. Li, X. Xu, et al. , “Milvus: A purpose-built vector data management system,” in Proceedings of the 2021 international conference on management of data , 2021, pp. 2614–2627. [14] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette, and W. Woodall, “Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild,” Science Robotics , vol. 7, no. 66, p. eabm6074, 2022. [15] R. Royce et al. , “Enabling novel mission operations and interactions with ROSA: The Robot Operating System Agent,” in 2025 IEEE Aerospace Conference . IEEE, 2025. [16] S. Macenski, F. Mart´ ın, R. White, and J. Gin´ es Clavero, “The Marathon 2: A Navigation System,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 2718–2725. 

8