Title: PEAM: Parametric Embodied Agent Memory through Contrastive Internalization of Experience in Minecraft

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27762v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:28:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
## PEAM: Parametric Embodied Agent Memory through Contrastive Internalization of Experience in Minecraft 

Yuchen Guo 1, Junli Gong 2, Hongmin Cai 3, Yiu-ming Cheung 4, Weifeng Su 5

1Northwestern University 2Northeastern University 3South China University of Technology 

4Hong Kong Baptist University 5Beijing Normal - Hong Kong Baptist University 

Correspondence: yuchenguo2027@u.northwestern.edu, wfsu@bnbu.edu.cn Experience Loop  

> 4Store Trajectory
> (failure + correction)

Failed! 

> Zombie hit

Corrected! 

> Use shield

Succeed! 

> Craft furnace

Slow Tier: Deliberative LLM 

Reason · Plan · Reflect · Verify 

Curriculum · Code · Feedback 

Fast Tier: Parametric Skills 

Reflexive · Low -latency · 

Execute Consolidated Skills 

Episodic Memory 

✓ Success Trajectories 

✗ Failure + Correction Pairs 

> Reflection Logs
> Environment Observations

Parametric Skills Module   

> Multimodal MoE -LoRA (Per -Category Isolated Adapters)
> Crafting Adapter
> Combat Adapter
> Gather Adapter
> Navigate Adapter

The Agent Changes 

Skills are internalized 

into parameters, not just 

stored in a library 

Benefits 

✓ Parameter -level 

> Continual Learning

✓ Forgetting 

> Resistance

✓ Fast Inference   

> 2. When to Internalize (When)
> Scale -Free Self -Triggered Consolidation
> Failure Rate (Moving W indow)

Trigger!  

> No task -specific failure threshold
> Transfers across distributions
> 1. What to Internalize (What)
> Parameterization -Worthiness Score
> Score

↑ → Worthy!    

> 3. Parametric Consolidation (How)
> Isolated Adapters + Failure -Correction Learning
> Physically isolated per category
> →Forgetting resistance by design
> Cost/Effort
> Stability
> Redundancy
> Interference Risk
> Crafting Combat Survival
> Adapter Adapter Adapter

... 

✓

✓   

> Plan &
> Verify
> Execute &
> Report
> Try sub -tasks
> 1Explore
> Detect failure & analyze
> 2Fail & Reflect
> Fix and complete
> 3Correct & Succeed
> ✓
> ✓
> ✓

Figure 1: PEAM turns episodic agent memory into parametric embodied skills. A slow deliberative LLM explores, verifies, and produces corrected trajectories, which are staged in episodic memory. PEAM then decides what to internalize using parameterization-worthiness (PV), when to consolidate using self-triggered consolidation (STC), and how to update parameters through isolated MoE-LoRA adapters trained on success and failure–correction pairs. 

Abstract 

We present PEAM , a Parametric Embodied 

Agent Memory framework in Minecraft that transforms agent memory from inference-time retrieval into parameter-resident skills internal-ized through experience. PEAM pairs a slow deliberative LLM for open-ended reasoning with a fast parametric module for reflexive ex-ecution of consolidated skills. The fast mod-ule is a multimodal Mixture-of-Experts LoRA architecture with per-category physically iso-lated adapters, enabling parameter-level con-tinual learning without catastrophic forgetting. We treat failure as a first-class training signal: failure–correction trajectory pairs are internal-ized through a joint behavioral-cloning and contrastive objective, so the agent learns not only what succeeds but also how corrected ac-tions differ from failed ones. To govern consol-idation, PEAM introduces a parameterization-worthiness score for deciding which experience should be internalized, and a scale-free self-triggered consolidation mechanism for decid-ing when to internalize without task-specific hand-tuned thresholds, making the agent self-evolving as the trigger transfers across task distributions without re-tuning. Experiments in Minecraft show that PEAM improves long-horizon task performance, mitigates forget-ting on previously consolidated skills, and im-proves parametric-versus-retrieval efficiency over retrieval-based embodied agents and para-metric memory variants. 

1 Introduction 

Current LLM-based embodied agents typically rely on memory that is non-parametric: past trajecto-1

> arXiv:2605.27762v1 [cs.AI] 26 May 2026

ries, reflections, and skills are stored externally and re-injected at inference time, while the agent’s parametric policy ( e.g. , the parameters of the back-bone model or trainable policy module) remains un-changed across tasks (Hu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025; Du, 2026). Minecraft is a suitable environ-ment for evaluating embodied agent performance, which requires players to explore vast, procedurally generated 3D terrains and unlock a tech tree using gathered resources (Wang et al., 2023). But for current agents, after repeated attempts at the same craft chain, the policy may remain unchanged even if an external skill library has grown (Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). This design has practical costs as deployment continues. Every recall consumes context budget because past trajectories must be re-injected into the prompt; retrieval and prompt construction add latency to each decision cycle; and experience that remains external must be rein-troduced whenever the agent needs to use it. We view this as a missing consolidation pathway rather than a failure of retrieval-augmented memory itself: external memory supports recall, but it does not by itself specify how selected experience becomes part of the agent’s parametric competence. A long-standing view in cognitive neuroscience holds that durable memory arises from two com-plementary systems: a fast, sparse episodic store that encodes new experience and a slow, distributed parametric store that integrates stable structure over time (McClelland et al., 1995). These systems are coupled by offline consolidation, classically asso-ciated with sleep, in which episodic traces are re-played and gradually written into distributed repre-sentations (McClelland et al., 1995; Klinzing et al., 2019). Related cultivate-then-consolidate patterns also appear in recent LLM-scale systems, such as DeepSeek-V4, which cultivates domain-specific experts through independent training and then con-solidates them into a unified model via distilla-tion (DeepSeek-AI, 2026). Across these settings, durable competence separates the acquisition of new experience from its integration into long-term parameters. Existing embodied-agent memory sys-tems instantiate the acquisition side through skill libraries, reflection logs, and retrieval-augmented contexts (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023, 2024; Li et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2023). PEAM ad-dresses the consolidation side for embodied agents by deciding which accumulated traces should be-come parametric competence, and when. Rather than replaying traces into a shared substrate or distilling specialists into a single model, PEAM consolidates experience into per-category adapters, using parameter isolation to reduce cross-category forgetting. PEAM operationalizes this principle as a two-tier embodied agent. A slow deliberative LLM han-dles open-ended reasoning, curriculum proposal, code synthesis, and outcome verification. An exter-nal episodic store stages successful and corrected trajectories, while a fast parametric module ex-ecutes consolidated skills through a multimodal Mixture-of-Experts LoRA architecture (Römer et al., 2026; Ge et al., 2025). The tiers commu-nicate through a consolidation pipeline that de-cides which episodic traces should be internal-ized into parametric adapters and when consoli-dation should occur. PEAM makes three design choices. First, failure is treated as a training sig-nal: rather than converting failed trajectories only into textual guidance for later prompts, PEAM trains on failure-correction trajectory pairs through a joint behavioral-cloning and contrastive objec-tive (Rafailov et al., 2023). Second, consolidation occurs into per-category isolated adapters, so inter-nalizing a craft skill does not update the parameters used for a combat skill; forgetting resistance is supported by architecture rather than only by reg-ularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2016; Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018; Mallya et al., 2018). Third, PEAM formalizes the questions of what and when to consolidate: a parameterization-worthiness score ranks candidate experience along cost, stability, redundancy, and interference dimen-sions, and a self-triggered consolidation mecha-nism decides when to internalize based on the agent’s failure statistics rather than a task-specific hand-tuned schedule. Together, these mechanisms provide a pathway by which selected experience can move from external recall into the agent’s train-able parameters. We instantiate PEAM in Minecraft, where long-horizon embodied tasks exercise skill reuse, cor-rection, and consolidation, and evaluate against retrieval-based embodied agents and parametric memory variants on task success, forgetting, in-ference efficiency, and cross-distribution stability of the consolidation trigger (Wang et al., 2023). In addition to the main comparison, our exper-iments report methodology findings relevant to agent evaluation: forward-pass preference mar-gins can fail to predict generate-path deployabil-ity, quantized on-device agent serving introduces 2deployment-specific failure modes, and trajectory re-slicing can provide a controlled substitute for cross-distribution trigger evaluation. The remain-der of the paper details the method, experiments, and limitations. 

2 Related Work 

Retrieval-based memory in embodied agents. 

A dominant design in LLM agents treats memory as a non-parametric store: past trajectories, reflec-tions, and skills are written externally and retrieved into the context at inference time (Du, 2026; Hu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025) ( e.g. , Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Guo et al., 2026)). ReAct established the reasoning-acting interface adopted by many later agents (Yao et al., 2022), while Reflexion stores failure feedback as natural-language reflections for subsequent attempts (Shinn et al., 2023). In embodied domains, recent systems extend this pattern with structured spatial, seman-tic, and multimodal memories: Embodied-RAG builds hierarchical non-parametric memory for em-bodied retrieval and generation (Xie et al., 2024), while open-world Minecraft agents such as VOY-AGER (Wang et al., 2023), JARVIS-1 (Wang et al., 2024), Optimus-1 (Li et al., 2024), and GITM (Zhu et al., 2023) maintain external skill, trajectory, or collaboration memories for long-horizon behavior. PEAM differs from this family architecturally: re-trieved memory remains in prompt space, whereas PEAM consolidates selected experience into pa-rameters. We adopt VOYAGER’s Minecraft exe-cution framework ( e.g. , its Mineflayer-based bot interface and code-as-action pipeline) as a shared testbed, holding the action interface fixed while changing the memory architecture. PEAM also differs from Reflexion in how it uses failure: Re-flexion converts failures into textual guidance for future prompts, whereas PEAM trains on failure-correction pairs directly, making corrected behavior available through the parametric policy rather than through retrieval. 

Parametric memory and continual learning. 

A separate line of work asks how new competence can be added to model parameters without erasing old competence. Continual learning is commonly organized into regularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Li and Hoiem, 2017), replay (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Boschini et al., 2022), and architecture-or isolation-based methods (Rusu et al., 2016; Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018; Mallya et al., 2018), a taxonomy that recent LLM continual-learning surveys preserve while adapting it to continual pre-training, fine-tuning, and alignment (Wang et al., 2025). Recent parameter-efficient variants use LoRA routing, dynamic adapter expansion, and mixture-of-LoRA experts to reduce interference in LLMs and multimodal models (Römer et al., 2026; Ge et al., 2025). PEAM follows the parameter-isolation route, but applies it to embodied mem-ory at the granularity of semantic skill categories through per-category LoRA adapters. The design also connects to cultivate-then-consolidate views of memory: complementary learning systems theory posits that fast episodic traces are gradually consol-idated into slow distributed representations through offline replay (McClelland et al., 1995; Klinzing et al., 2019), and recent LLM-scale systems such as DeepSeek-V4 cultivate domain experts inde-pendently and then consolidate them via distilla-tion (DeepSeek-AI, 2026). PEAM follows the acquisition-then-consolidation logic but chooses a different consolidation mechanism: rather than replaying traces into a shared substrate or distilling specialists into one model, it preserves physical pa-rameter isolation across categories, making forget-ting resistance a structural property of the memory system. 

3 PEAM 

3.1 Overview: Two-Tier Embodied Memory 

PEAM operates as a two-tier embodied agent (Figure 2). A slow deliberative LLM πslow 

handles open-ended reasoning, code synthesis, and outcome verification. An external episodic store E stages successful and corrected trajec-tories produced during this acquisition process. A fast parametric module πfast is implemented as a multimodal Mixture-of-Experts LoRA over the Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct backbone, with per-category isolated adapters {θc}c∈C , and executes consolidated skills reflexively. The tiers are cou-pled by a consolidation pipeline with two gates: pa-rameterization worthiness (PV), which scores what should be internalized, and self-triggered consoli-dation (STC), which determines when an adapter update should run. At inference, PEAM first attempts the fast path. A task is routed to a category adapter; if an ap-plicable adapter exists, πfast generates executable code and a verifier checks the resulting trajectory. 3Minecraft                  

> Environment
> Slow Deliberative
> LLM (πslow )
> Reasoning & Planning
> Episodic Store ℰ
> ✓Success Trajectories 𝒟 succ
> ✕Failure –Correction Pairs 𝒟 cpair
> Consolidation Pipeline
> 1) Candidate
> Extraction
> filter τfrom 𝒟
> 2) S election 4) Consolidate
> update adapter θ_c only
> Fast Parametric Module Multimodal MoE –LoRA over Qwen3 -VL -8B -Instruct
> Inputs
> Visual
> (egocentric
> frames)
> Textual
> (instruction,
> context)
> Qwen3 -VL -8B -Instruct
> Backbone Mixture -of -Experts
> Gating
> Per -Category LoRA Adapters (Physically Isolated)
> Crafting
> 𝜃 !"#$%
> Code Synthesis
> Outcome Verification
> Action Code
> (Output)
> Episodic Store ℰ

...   

> Execution & Feedback
> Code
> Excution
> Envionment
> Feedback
> Outcome
> Verification Failure Success
> LoRA
> ∆W!"#$%
> Combat
> 𝜃 &'()#%
> LoRA
> ∆W&'()#%
> Building
> 𝜃 *+,-.
> LoRA
> ∆W*+,-.
> More …
> 𝜃 …
> LoRA
> ∆W…

...            

> Executor
> (Mineflayer Bot)
> PV ∈top -q∧Z(s) > z ₐ
> 3) S coring
> Task Labels Skill Routing (Select Category c)
> Mining Combat Navigation Redstone Farming Crafting

...  

> Multimodal: visual and
> textual
> (πfast ):
> Reflection on the environment
> ChatGPT -4o

... Figure 2: PEAM architecture. Successful and corrected trajectories produced by the slow tier are staged in episodic memory. PV selects which traces are worth internalizing, STC determines when consolidation should run, and joint BC+DPO updates the corresponding isolated category adapter. At inference, the fast parametric module executes consolidated skills directly and falls back to the slow tier when verification fails. 

If no adapter applies or verification fails, control falls back to πslow , whose successful or corrected trajectory is written to E as a future consolida-tion candidate. During consolidation, candidate skills extracted from E are scored by PV and mon-itored by STC; when both the PV gate and the STC trigger are satisfied, only the corresponding category adapter θc is updated. Skill categories are assigned during verification from the fixed set 

C = {craft , gather , combat } and reused for routing, PV scoring, and contrastive-pair construction. 

3.2 How: Success and Failure-Correction Consolidation 

The episodic store contains two trajectory streams: verified success demonstrations Dsucc and failure-correction pairs Dcpair = {(x, τ f , τ c, c )}, where τf

fails a task, τc later succeeds under matched context 

x, and c is the skill category. Consolidation updates only the corresponding adapter θc by minimizing 

LPEAM (θc) = LBC (θc; D(c)

succ )+ λLPEAM DPO (θc; D(c)

cpair ),

(1) where λ = 1 .0 in our experiments. The behavioral-cloning term is standard next-token negative log-likelihood on successful executable trajectories. The PEAM-DPO term is an adapter-conditioned preference loss: 

LPEAM DPO = − E(x,τ f ,τ c,c )



log σ



β

h

log πθc (τc | x)

πref (τc | x)

− log πθc (τf | x)

πref (τf | x)

i 

,

(2) with the corrected trajectory τc as chosen, the failed trajectory τf as rejected, and πref the frozen fast-policy checkpoint before the current consolidation cycle. After consolidation, the updated adapter becomes part of πfast ; future cycles snapshot the then-current fast policy as their new reference. This is standard DPO applied at the trajectory level, but restricted to the adapter selected by the skill cat-egory. The BC term is load-bearing rather than auxiliary: DPO teaches the adapter to prefer cor-rected actions over failed ones, but it does not by it-self provide an absolute imitation signal for shared syntactic scaffolding such as the async function name(bot){...} wrapper required by the action parser. BC supplies this format-level likelihood sig-nal, which is necessary for generate-path deploy-ability as shown in §4.5. Per-category isolation is enforced by routing each pair only to θc, so updates to one category cannot modify another category’s adapter. 4Algorithm 1 PEAM execution and consolidation 

Require: Task t, episodic store E, adapters 

{θc}c∈C , parameterized skills P 

> 1:

c ← ROUTE (t) ▷ skill category  

> 2:

if APPLICABLE (t, c, P) then  

> 3:

a ← πfast (t; θc) ▷ reflexive execution  

> 4:

τ ← EXECUTE (a) 

> 5:

o ← VERIFY (τ, t ) 

> 6:

if ¬o then  

> 7:

a ← πslow (t) ▷ deliberative fallback  

> 8:

τ ← EXECUTE (a) 

> 9:

o ← VERIFY (τ, t ) 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

a ← πslow (t) ▷ no consolidated skill  

> 13:

τ ← EXECUTE (a) 

> 14:

o ← VERIFY (τ, t ) 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

E ← E ∪ { (t, c, τ, o )} 

> 17:

S ← EXTRACT CANDIDATES (E) 

> 18:

for all s ∈ S do  

> 19:

if Z(s) > z α and PV( s) ∈ top-q then  

> 20:

θc(s) ← CONSOLIDATE (s, θ c(s)) 

> 21:

P ← P ∪ { s} 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end for 3.3 What: Parameterization Worthiness 

Not every trajectory in E should be consolidated: internalizing trivial skills wastes adapter capac-ity, redundant skills duplicate existing competence, and unstable skills embed fragile behavior. We formalize selection through a parameterization-worthiness (PV) score, computed per candidate skill s:PV (s) = w1Ucost (s) + w2Ustab (s)

− w3Predun (s) − w4Rforget (s). (3) 

Ucost (s) = ˆf (s) · | code( s)| captures retrieval-cost saving as the product of an EMA-based future-call-frequency estimate and the skill’s code length. 

Ustab (s) = SR (s) · (1 − Var ctx [success | s]) re-wards skills that succeed consistently across con-texts. Predun (s) = max s′∈P cos( ϕ(s), ϕ (s′)) pe-nalizes similarity to skills already in the param-eterized set P, where ϕ is a TF-IDF embedding of the code. For Rforget , we use a structural bi-nary proxy: Rforget (s) = 1 if s shares a cate-gory with any element of P, and 0 otherwise. Be-cause adapters do not share trainable parameters across categories, cross-category adapter updates are isolated by construction, making category iden-tity the actionable interference signal. Weights 

{wi}4 

> i=1

are fixed and selected by grid search; the heuristic baseline used in prior agent work, e.g., SR ≥ 0.8 ∧ retrieval count ≥ 15 , is recovered as a degenerate special case using only partial Ucost and 

Ustab terms, enabling a direct ablation in §4.3. 

3.4 When: Self-Triggered Consolidation 

A fixed-schedule consolidation regime that runs every N episodes may spend computation when few candidates are ready and may delay internaliza-tion when valuable experience accumulates faster than the schedule. PEAM instead implements self-triggered consolidation (STC): the agent monitors its own failure statistics and triggers consolidation when warranted, with a criterion that is scale-free in the sense that it requires no task-specific abso-lute failure threshold. For each candidate skill s,STC fires when both conditions hold: 

Z(s) = ˆprecent (s) − ˆpbaseline (s)

pˆp(s)(1 − ˆp(s))(1 /W + 1 /B ) > z α,

and PV (s) ∈ top-q, 

(4) where ˆprecent is the failure rate over the most recent 

W executions of s, ˆpbaseline is its rolling histori-cal baseline over B executions, ˆp is the pooled proportion, and PV must rank in the top-q quan-tile of currently scored candidates. Each skill is therefore judged against its own historical baseline rather than an externally set threshold. In our ex-periments we use W = B = 10 , α = 0 .05 , and 

q = 0 .5; these are statistical and structural hyper-parameters that do not require re-tuning across task distributions, a property we evaluate directly in §4.4. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Setup 

We instantiate PEAM in Minecraft 1.19 using VOYAGER’s Mineflayer-based execution frame-work (Wang et al., 2023). The held-out task suite contains 11 long-horizon tasks spanning the craft, gather, and combat categories, each requiring multi-step planning and execution (full task list in Ap-pendix A). Every result is averaged over 3 random seeds unless otherwise noted. We compare PEAM against eight baselines covering non-parametric 5Table 1: Main results on the held-out long-horizon task suite. Results use 11 tasks and 3 seeds. Success rates include Wilson 95% confidence intervals; ∆ vs B1 reports the paired success-rate difference in percentage points. Latency is median per-call wall-clock time, and tokens are per-task totals. 

Method Success rate 95% CI ∆ vs B1 Latency (s) Tokens / task Memory type B6 No-memory ReAct 6.1% [0.7, 20.2] −48 .4 — — none B7 Reflexion 27.3% [13.3, 45.5] −27 .2 — — textual reflection B8 MrSteve 33.3% [18.0, 52.9] −21 .2 — — spatial-temporal B3 Naive full-FT 42.4% [26.9, 59.6] −12 .1 4.8 — parametric (full FT) B4 Single shared LoRA 48.5% [32.0, 65.3] −6.0 3.5 — parametric (shared) B5 EWC 51.5% [34.8, 67.7] −3.0 3.8 — parametric (regularized) B1 VOYAGER 54.5% [38.0, 70.1] — 5.5 31.2K retrieval B2 Optimus-1-rep. 60.6% [43.7, 75.3] +6 .1 6.1 28.4K multimodal retrieval 

PEAM (ours) 69.7% [53.0, 83.4] +15.2 † 3.2 4.6K parametric (MoE)  

> †

McNemar paired test PEAM vs B1: p = 0 .018 .                              

> $!# !#)
> #%&# 
> #%!!#
> %##!
> #%"(
> %#!
> !%)!
> #%%
> %#$%! 
> #%$%
> !%$%!
> 
> #
> %%! %# ) &'$&#$%
> &$!# &#$%$!$%$
> 
> &"+*')"& -&+("*'+"#
> ".'%+!-/
> ".)+!-/
> '%+!-/
> )+!-/
> *%
> )   
> !&+'"&+)&$"0+)" ))'**"*+)",+"'&*
> +)" )")* ".")*

Figure 3: PV and STC make consolidation selective and self-triggered. (a) Full PV scoring ranks candidate skills differently from the prior success-rate and retrieval-count heuristic; orange markers indicate candidates also selected by the heuristic. (b) STC uses the same statistical trigger across craft-heavy and combat-heavy trajectory slices, producing sparse consolidation events, while a fixed failure-rate threshold requires distribution-specific tuning. 

memory, multimodal retrieval, continual learning, spatial-temporal memory, and text-based reflection. All baselines use the same Minecraft execution interface, allowing us to compare memory mech-anisms under a shared action substrate. Slow-tier LLM calls use Azure GPT-4o across all methods. We report four groups of metrics. Task success 

is measured by environment-side verification of the final task condition after executing the generated code; a trial is counted as successful only if the verifier confirms completion without manual inter-vention. Forgetting is measured by retention on early craft skills after subsequent category consol-idations, normalized by the performance immedi-ately after craft consolidation. Inference efficiency 

is measured by median observation-to-action la-tency and total tokens consumed per task, including retrieved context, system prompts, generated code, and verification calls. Trigger robustness is mea-sured by running the same STC hyperparameters across distribution slices and comparing both trig-ger events and top-ranked PV candidates. These metrics separate the three claims PEAM evaluates: whether internalized experience improves task com-pletion, whether isolated adapters preserve prior competence under continual learning, and whether consolidation decisions remain stable without task-specific threshold tuning. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports task success on the held-out long-horizon suite, alongside per-call latency and tokens consumed per task. PEAM achieves 69.7% task success (23/33, 95% Wilson CI [0.530, 0.834]), out-performing VOYAGER (54.5%, 18/33) by +15.2 percentage points; a McNemar paired test gives 

p = 0 .018 . On efficiency, PEAM’s parametric path eliminates per-call skill-library re-injection: me-dian per-call latency drops from 5.5s (B1) to 3.2s (PEAM, −42% ), and tokens per task drop from 

∼31,200 to ∼4,600 ( −85% ). These gains reflect the removal of per-call skill-library re-injection on the parametric path. 6The performance gap is not only a success-rate effect. Retrieval-based agents improve by accu-mulating increasingly useful external artifacts, but each reuse requires those artifacts to be selected, se-rialized, and reintroduced into the prompt. PEAM instead pays the consolidation cost offline and amortizes it across future executions. The latency and token reductions in Table 1 measure this op-erational consequence of internalization: once a skill has become parameter-resident, invoking it no longer requires reconstructing the corresponding experience through retrieval. PEAM also improves over the strongest retrieval-based comparison, B2 Optimus-1-rep., by 9.1 per-centage points. This comparison is useful because B2 strengthens the retrieval path with multimodal context, whereas PEAM moves selected experi-ence into the parametric path. The gap is therefore consistent with the central claim that consolidation provides benefits not captured by richer retrieval alone. The efficiency contrast is similar: B2 con-sumes 28.4K tokens per task, while PEAM uses 4.6K, reflecting the cost of repeatedly reintroducing retrieved context at inference time. 

4.3 Forgetting and Ablations 

We evaluate cross-category forgetting by sequen-tially consolidating craft →gather →combat and re-measuring performance on the early craft skill set after each step (Figure 4). PEAM shows no mea-surable cross-category forgetting in this sequence, as expected from per-category parameter isolation, while B4 Single shared LoRA loses 32.4%, B5 EWC loses 43.3%, and B3 Naive full-FT loses 78.5%. Table 2 summarizes ablations over PEAM’s three design choices. We highlight two findings in prose. Failure-as-signal (A1) requires the BC term. On held-out tasks, a pure-DPO adapter generates wrapper-format-correct code for 0/12 cases; the joint BC+DPO objective achieves 12/12. The held-out reward margin rises from +6 .51 (DPO-only) to 

+37 .92 (joint), confirming that the BC term is load-bearing rather than auxiliary: without it, preference learning succeeds on the forward pass but fails to produce parser-compatible code (§4.5). MoE isolation (A2) is the source of forgetting resis-tance. Replacing per-category adapters with a sin-gle shared LoRA increases forgetting from 0% to 32.4% over two sequential consolidations, isolating per-category isolation as the structural mechanism. The remaining ablations, PV vs. heuristic selection, After craft After gather After combat 

> Sequential consolidation step
> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Craft skill retention
> (% of initial)
> Naive full-FT
> EWC
> Single shared LoRA
> PEAM (MoE isolated)

Figure 4: Forgetting under sequential consolidation. We measure retained performance on early craft skills after consolidating craft, gather, and combat skills in sequence. Markers indicate measured checkpoints, and curves are monotone interpolants for visual continuity. PEAM remains at full retention under cross-category consolidation, while shared-parameter baselines de-grade as additional categories are consolidated. 

PV component leave-one-out, STC vs. fixed sched-ule, and the visual-retrieval weight sweep, are sum-marized in Table 2; each design choice produces a measurable effect on its corresponding axis. 

4.4 Trigger Robustness Across Distributions 

The scale-free property of STC’s trigger (Sec-tion 3.4) is the basis of PEAM’s self-triggered consolidation claim, and we evaluate it directly. We construct two task distributions, a craft-heavy distribution and a combat-heavy distribution, by re-slicing the episodic store along category axes, and run STC with identical hyperparameters ( W =

B = 10 , α = 0 .05 , q = 0 .5) on each. The trigger produces interpretable firing patterns on both (4 fires on 80-skill instrumented data), with top-10 PV overlap between the two distributions of Jac-card = 0 .538 on the synthetic re-slice and 0.61 

on real paired-distribution collection. A fixed-τ

baseline (manual failure-rate threshold) requires distribution-specific re-tuning to achieve compara-ble trigger sensitivity, while STC’s statistical cri-terion stabilizes without modification. This sup-ports the self-triggered consolidation claim: the same trigger selects consolidation events across task distributions without operator-tuned failure thresholds. 

4.5 Additional Methodology Findings 

Four findings emerged during development that hold significant potential for agent research. 7Table 2: Ablation summary. Each row replaces one PEAM design choice and reports the effect on the metric targeted by that design.                                                 

> Ablation Replacement Effect A1: BC + DPO joint DPO only format 12 /12 →0/12 ; margin +37 .92 →+6 .51
> A2: MoE isolation single shared LoRA forgetting 0% →32 .4% over 2 sequential consolida-tions A3: full PV score heuristic (SR ≥0.8∧retr ≥15 )task success −8.7pp; Spearman ρ=−0.375 be-tween rankings A4: 4-component PV leave-one-out per component top-10 ranking shifts ≥1entry per component; Ucost
> load-bearing A5: STC trigger fixed every-Nschedule 37% fewer cycles to matched performance; delay
> 23 →7episodes A6: visual grounding α= 1 (text-only) α∗= 0 .5best across sweep; text-only underperforms

Forward-pass margin does not predict generate-path deployability. A pure-DPO adapter can pass held-out preference-margin evaluation (+6 .51 logp delta on craft) while failing to gener-ate parser-compatible code (0/12 wrapper format), because DPO supplies a relative preference signal but no absolute likelihood signal for shared syntac-tic scaffolding. We recommend that DPO-based agent work report both margin and generate-path outcome metrics. 

Quantized on-device serving introduces deployment-specific failure modes. During devel-opment we observed three failure modes when de-ploying an 8B 4-bit quantized adapter on consumer hardware: high per-step latency, merge_adapter 

silently zeroing low-magnitude BC updates on quantized weights, and parser-required output length exceeding the feasible max_new_tokens 

budget. We report the corresponding deployment details in Appendix E. 

Failure-mode type determines cpair yield. 

Among the four skill categories we attempted, nav-igation did not yield usable failure-correction pairs: navigation failures in Minecraft are predominantly environmental (the target biome or resource is not reachable within the exploration budget) rather than code-level, so the retry loop that produces correc-tions for craft and gather does not apply. This sug-gests that contrastive parametric consolidation is best suited to action-space failures with code-level corrections. 

Trajectory re-slicing as substitute for cross-distribution evaluation. When paired real-environment collection is bounded by exploration ceilings, re-slicing an existing trajectory pool along categorical axes provides a tractable substitute for cross-distribution stability evaluation, with explicit acknowledgment of the synthetic-versus-real gap. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented PEAM, a parametric embodied mem-ory framework that turns agent memory from inference-time retrieval into experience internal-ized by the agent’s own parameters. PEAM couples a slow deliberative LLM, an episodic staging store, and a fast MoE-LoRA parametric module, using failure-correction trajectories, parameterization-worthiness scoring, and self-triggered consolida-tion to decide how, what, and when experience should be internalized. The slow tier explores, veri-fies, and corrects behavior, while the fast tier stores selected skills as isolated parametric adapters for later execution. Experiments show that PEAM im-proves long-horizon task performance, preserves consolidated skills under continual learning, and reduces the inference cost of retrieval-based mem-ory. The ablations further show that each part of the pipeline is needed: BC supplies deployable ac-tion format, adapter isolation limits forgetting, PV changes which skills are selected, and STC deter-mines when consolidation occurs without a task-specific failure threshold. More broadly, PEAM suggests that embodied agents should not merely accumulate histories around a fixed policy: they should have a pathway for selected experience to become part of the policy itself. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by the Guang-dong Provincial Key Laboratory of IRADS (2022B1212010006), in part by the Guangdong Higher Education Upgrading Plan (2021–2025), in part by the Guangdong and Hong Kong Universi-ties “1+1+1” Joint Research Collaboration Scheme, in part by the National Key Research and Devel-opment Program of China (2022ZD0117700), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of 8China (62325204), and in part by the MSAI Confer-ence Funding of MSAI program of Northwestern University. The authors would like to thank Sibo Zhu for insightful discussions. 

Limitations 

We outline the scope conditions under which our claims should be read. Single environment. All experiments are conducted in Minecraft 1.19 with VOYAGER’s Mineflayer-based execution frame-work. Our claims about long-horizon task success, forgetting resistance, parametric-versus-retrieval efficiency, and trigger stability are stated over this setting; transfer to other embodied domains such as robotic manipulation or web agents is outside the present scope. Consolidated category set. The parametric tier covers three consolidated skill cat-egories: craft, gather, and combat. Forgetting and routing results are stated over these categories. Be-cause PEAM uses one lightweight LoRA adapter per consolidated category, adapter parameters grow linearly with the number of categories included in the parametric tier; our experiments evaluate this category-level isolation regime at the scale of the consolidated set above. The slow tier handles all other behaviors, including navigation, throughout our experiments. Action grammar. PEAM-DPO is evaluated with the executable JavaScript action grammar used by our Minecraft parser. The role of the BC term in restoring deployable syntactic structure is established for this grammar; we do not characterize its role for other action-space syn-taxes, such as tool-use APIs or non-code control interfaces. Fixed consolidation policy. PV com-ponent weights {w1, . . . , w 4} are selected by grid search and held fixed across all experiments, and the trigger hyperparameters (W, B, α, q ) are like-wise fixed. Our results therefore evaluate a fixed scoring and triggering rule, not the space of poli-cies obtainable by adapting these values. Cross-distribution evaluation methodology. The cross-distribution trigger evaluation uses re-slicing of the trajectory pool along categorical axes. The scale-free property of the criterion is exercised under this protocol; we do not claim equivalence to evaluation under independently collected paired distributions. 

Ethical Considerations 

PEAM is evaluated in Minecraft and does not in-volve human subjects, personal data, or real-world deployment. The main ethical risks are indirect: embodied agents that internalize experience into pa-rameters may become harder to inspect than agents whose memories remain external and retrievable, and failures in verification could cause incorrect behaviors to be reinforced. Our implementation mitigates this risk by requiring environment-side verification before trajectories enter the consolida-tion pool and by restricting parametric updates to isolated category adapters rather than updating the full backbone. Broader deployment of parametric embodied memory systems should include audit-ing tools for consolidated skills, safeguards against unsafe action execution, and clear logging of which experiences were internalized. 

References             

> Matteo Boschini, Lorenzo Bonicelli, Pietro Buzzega, Angelo Porrello, and Simone Calderara. 2022. Class-incremental continual learning into the extended der-verse. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 45(5):5497–5512. Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2018. Effi-cient lifelong learning with a-gem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00420 .DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4 technical report. Technical report, DeepSeek. Pengfei Du. 2026. Memory for autonomous llm agents: Mechanisms, evaluation, and emerging frontiers.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07670 .Chendi Ge, Xin Wang, Zeyang Zhang, Hong Chen, Jia-pei Fan, Longtao Huang, Hui Xue, and Wenwu Zhu. 2025. Dynamic mixture of curriculum lora experts for continual multimodal instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11672 .Yuchen Guo, Junli Gong, Hongmin Cai, Yiu-ming Che-ung, and Weifeng Su. 2026. Lumivideo: An intelli-gent agentic system for video color grading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02409 .Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, and 1 others. 2025. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 .James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, and 1 others. 2017. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural net-works. Proceedings of the national academy of sci-ences , 114(13):3521–3526.

9Jens G Klinzing, Niels Niethard, and Jan Born. 2019. Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation dur-ing sleep. Nature neuroscience , 22(10):1598–1610. Zaijing Li, Yuquan Xie, Rui Shao, Gongwei Chen, Dongmei Jiang, and Liqiang Nie. 2024. Optimus-1: Hybrid multimodal memory empowered agents excel in long-horizon tasks. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 37:49881–49913. Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. 2017. Learning without forgetting. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 40(12):2935–2947. David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2017. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 30. Arun Mallya, Dillon Davis, and Svetlana Lazebnik. 2018. Piggyback: Adapting a single network to mul-tiple tasks by learning to mask weights. In Proceed-ings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 67–82. Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik. 2018. Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7765–7773. James L McClelland, Bruce L McNaughton, and Ran-dall C O’Reilly. 1995. Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connec-tionist models of learning and memory. Psychologi-cal review , 102(3):419. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741. Ralf Römer, Yi Zhang, Yuming Li, and Angela P Schoel-lig. 2026. Clare: Continual learning for vision-language-action models via autonomous adapter rout-ing and expansion. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters .Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Des-jardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. 2016. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671 .Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 .Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Yonggang Jin, Jin-bing Hou, Bowei Zhang, Haowei Lin, Zhaofeng He, Zilong Zheng, Yaodong Yang, and 1 others. 2024. Jarvis-1: Open-world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 47(3):1894–1907. Zitao Wang, Xinyi Wang, and Wei Hu. 2025. Mixture of lora experts for continual information extraction with llms. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 13324– 13339. Quanting Xie, So Yeon Min, Pengliang Ji, Yue Yang, Tianyi Zhang, Kedi Xu, Aarav Bajaj, Rus-lan Salakhutdinov, Matthew Johnson-Roberson, and Yonatan Bisk. 2024. Embodied-rag: General non-parametric embodied memory for retrieval and gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18313 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. 2017. Continual learning through synaptic intelli-gence. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pages 3987–3995. Pmlr. Zeyu Zhang, Quanyu Dai, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transac-tions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47. Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, and 1 others. 2023. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world environments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144 .

A Held-Out Task Suite 

Our held-out evaluation set contains 11 long-horizon tasks spanning three skill categories. Tasks are drawn from VOYAGER’s Minecraft tech-tree progression and supplemented with a curated set of failure-prone subtasks designed to stress consol-idation of corrected behavior. Each task is run for at most N = 200 agent-environment interaction steps; we report success if and only if VOYAGER’s environment-side verifier confirms task completion without manual intervention. Table 3 lists the full suite. Tasks T1–T5 require multi-step recipe planning and inventory management; T6–T9 require re-source location and extraction; T10–T11 require combat behavior under environmental constraints 10 Table 3: The 11 held-out long-horizon tasks, by skill category.                                

> ID Category Task description T1 craft Craft a crafting table T2 craft Craft a wooden pickaxe T3 craft Craft a stone pickaxe T4 craft Craft a furnace T5 craft Craft an iron pickaxe T6 gather Collect 4 oak logs T7 gather Mine 8 cobblestone T8 gather Mine 2iron ore (with smelting) T9 gather Collect 4 coal T10 combat Defeat a zombie at night T11 combat Defeat askeleton with bow

(lighting and projectile evasion). Each task is run with three random seeds (42, 43, 44), yielding 33 trials per method. 

B Training Hyperparameters and Implementation Details 

Table 4 lists all hyperparameters used across the PEAM training and consolidation pipeline. Values were selected through a coarse grid search on a held-out validation subset disjoint from the held-out task suite. 

Backbone and serving. The fast parametric mod-ule uses Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct as the shared back-bone. All per-category adapters are loaded simul-taneously at inference and switched by the rout-ing classifier; no adapter merging is performed at serving time, avoiding the quantization-induced degradation discussed in §4.5 (point 2). Inference is served from a single A100 80GB GPU in bf16 precision, with median per-call wall-clock latency of 3.2 seconds. 

Slow tier. The slow deliberative LLM ( πslow ) is Azure GPT-4o (deployment version 2024-11-20). It is invoked for curriculum proposal, code synthe-sis when no adapter applies, fast-path verification, and outcome judgment. All baselines that involve LLM reasoning (B1, B2, B6, B7) use the same GPT-4o version to control for slow-tier capability. 

Reproducibility. All experiments use random seeds {42 , 43 , 44 }. Reported numbers are means across the three seeds; intervals in Table 1 are Wil-son 95% confidence intervals over the 33 trials per method (11 tasks × 3 seeds). 

C Per-Task Results Breakdown 

Table 5 shows per-task success rates (number of successful seeds out of 3) for PEAM and the strongest non-parametric baseline B1 VOYAGER. PEAM matches or exceeds B1 on 10 of 11 tasks, with strict improvements concentrated on craft tasks involving multi-step recipe chains (T3, T4, T5) and on resource-extraction tasks that benefit from the gather adapter’s consolidated location and mining patterns (T8, T9). Both methods fail on T11 (defeat skeleton with bow), which requires precise ranged-combat tim-ing that exceeds the action-space granularity of the JavaScript bot interface; this is consistent with combat being the lowest-yield cpair category in our data collection (see Appendix D). 

D Contrastive-Pair Construction Details 

Failure–correction pairs Dcpair are extracted from VOYAGER trajectory logs through a four-stage pipeline. 

Stage 1: failure identification. We mark a tra-jectory as a failure if the environment-side verifier returns false on the task condition after the bot exhausts its retry budget (default 4 attempts per task). The trajectory’s final executed action, termi-nal state, and verifier reason are recorded. 

Stage 2: correction matching. For each failure trajectory τf on task t, we search subsequent tra-jectories on the same task t for a verified success 

τc produced within ∆ = 5 episodes. This temporal bound ensures the corrected behavior reflects lo-cal refinement rather than long-horizon curriculum drift. 

Stage 3: context matching. Pairs (τf , τ c) must additionally agree on a discrete pre-action state vector capturing inventory composition (item set and counts), biome identity, time-of-day bucket (day/dusk/night), and bot location quantized to a 

32 -block grid. This prevents spurious pairings where the corrected trajectory succeeds because environmental conditions changed. 

Stage 4: quality gate. Pairs that pass Stages 1–3 are further filtered by: (i) syntactic non-triviality (the executed code in τf and τc must differ on at least 3 non-whitespace tokens), to exclude byte-identical near-duplicates; (ii) wrapper-format valid-ity on both sides (parsable as a VOYAGER action function); (iii) category-label agreement, verified 11 Table 4: PEAM training and consolidation hyperparameters. Values not otherwise noted are held fixed across all experiments.                                               

> Group Hyperparameter Value LoRA adapter rank r32
> α64 dropout 0.05 target modules q,k,v,o + gate,up,down precision bf16 total params/adapter ∼83M Optimization optimizer AdamW learning rate 2×10 −4
> schedule cosine, 5% warmup batch size 2grad accumulation 8training steps 100 Joint loss BC weight 1.0 DPO weight λ1.0 DPO β0.1 STC trigger window W10 baseline B10 significance α0.05 top quantile q0.5 PV weights
> w1(Ucost )0.4
> w2(Ustab )0.3
> w3(Predun )0.2
> w4(Rforget )0.1 Routing classifier DistilBERT top-1 confidence threshold ρ0.6 finetuning data (instruction, category) pairs from P
> Inference max new tokens 2048 temperature 0.7 top-p 0.9

Table 5: Per-task success rates over 3 seeds. Cells show the number of successful seeds out of 3. Bold indicates PEAM strictly improves over B1.                                       

> ID Task (abbreviated) B1 VOYAGER PEAM T1 crafting table 3/3 3/3 T2 wooden pickaxe 3/3 3/3 T3 stone pickaxe 2/3 3/3
> T4 furnace 1/3 2/3
> T5 iron pickaxe 0/3 1/3
> T6 4 oak logs 3/3 3/3 T7 8 cobblestone 2/3 2/3 T8 2 iron ore 1/3 2/3
> T9 4 coal 1/3 2/3
> T10 defeat zombie 2/3 2/3 T11 defeat skeleton 0/3 0/3 Overall 18/33 (54.5%) 23/33 (69.7%)

by the slow LLM. Pairs failing any criterion are discarded with the reason logged. 

Category labeling. The slow LLM assigns each trajectory a category in 

C = {craft , gather , combat } during outcome verification, based on task semantics and the dominant action class in the executed code. Trajectories with mixed category signatures are routed to the dominant category and a mixed flag is preserved for analysis. 

Yield statistics. Of ∼80 failure trajectories logged during collection, roughly 40% admit a matched correction within the ∆ = 5 window and pass all four stages, yielding the |D cpair | used for consolidation. Per-category yield varies: craft and gather show the highest yield (around 50% ), com-bat yields lower ( ∼ 25% ), and navigation yields no usable pairs — see §4.5, point 3. 

E Deployment-Realism Details 

We document the three failure modes encountered during attempts to deploy PEAM on consumer-grade hardware (see §4.5, point 2), and the hardware-parity protocol that resolves them. These details are reported as a methodology contribution for groups intending to deploy LoRA-augmented LLM agents on edge devices. 12 Failure mode 1: prohibitive per-step latency. 

On an RTX 4070 (12 GB VRAM) running Qwen3-VL-8B quantized to 4-bit (bitsandbytes NF4) with a single LoRA adapter loaded, median per-step generation latency reached ∼2,000 seconds at 

max_new_tokens = 512 . The bottleneck is not GPU compute but VRAM-bound activation recom-putation when the prefill context exceeds available KV-cache headroom. We confirmed this on three independent prompts of approximately 8K input tokens each. 

Failure mode 2: merge_adapter on quantized weights. Calling peft.merge_and_unload() 

on a 4-bit quantized backbone silently zeroes low-magnitude LoRA updates whose absolute value falls below the dequantization threshold of the underlying nf4 scheme. Because the BC term in 

LPEAM produces broad but low-magnitude weight updates (recovering format-level scaffolding rather than introducing concentrated preference shifts), the BC contribution is disproportionately affected. We verified this by comparing θc before and after 

merge_and_unload : ∼37% of LoRA delta-W entries with magnitude below 5 × 10 −3 were zeroed on the 4-bit path, versus 0% on the bf16 path. 

Failure mode 3: parser–token-budget mismatch. 

The VOYAGER action parser requires complete 

async function name(bot){...} wrappers to extract executable code. Skill bodies for craft tasks frequently exceed 1,500 generated tokens, but rais-ing max_new_tokens to ≥2,048 compounds Fail-ure mode 1 to fully infeasible wall-clock budgets. Lowering it truncates trajectories mid-wrapper and produces parser rejection rates of ∼84%. 

Hardware-parity protocol. We resolve all three failure modes by serving the fast tier on 8 A100 80GB GPUs at bf16 precision, with adapters kept un-merged and hot-swapped at request time via PEFT’s set_adapter API. Under this protocol: median latency drops to 3.2 seconds per call; the BC contribution is preserved (no quantization-induced zeroing); and max_new_tokens = 2048 

remains within tractable serving budgets. We recommend that practitioners reporting paramet-ric agent efficiency explicitly state the serving precision and whether adapters are merged or hot-swapped, as these choices materially affect both deployability and the validity of forward-pass preference-margin metrics. 13