Title: Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00780v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:54:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning 

Fuyuan Qian * 1 Menglong Zhang * 2 Song Wang 1 Quanying Liu 1 3 4 

## Abstract 

Offline meta-reinforcement learning leverages static datasets to enable agents to generalize to un-seen environments by combining offline efficiency with meta-learning adaptability, yet it faces key challenges from context and policy distribution shifts. These issues hinder agents from adapting to online environments, and are further exacer-bated under sparse-reward settings. As a result, agents often become trapped in an inherent pat-tern dilemma, failing to achieve robust generaliza-tion. In this work, we propose a novel frame-work that integrates information-theoretic task representation learning with a Transformer-based stochastic world model. Our approach extracts task-defining latent variables that are invariant to behavior policy, thereby effectively mitigating the context distribution shift. To further handle policy shift and model exploitation, we apply a conserva-tive value penalty to imagination-based rollouts, preventing the policy from exploiting model inac-curacies while maintaining robust adaptation. Ex-tensive evaluations demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches, with su-perior stability and generalization under out-of-distribution and sparse-reward settings. 

## 1. Introduction 

In meta-reinforcement learning, agents adapt to unknown environments by learning representations from similar tasks and exploiting prior knowledge (Finn et al., 2017; Duan 

> *

Equal contribution 1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guang-dong, China 2AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China 

> 3

Omni-Intelligence, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China 4Shenzhen Loop Area Institute, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. Correspon-dence to: Quanying Liu <liuqy@sustech.edu.cn >, Menglong Zhang <mzhang943@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). Offline dataset collected by behavior policies         

> World Model
> Severe behavior policy -induced
> distribution shift
> Focus on latent task
> dynamics
> {𝜋 𝛽 𝑖
> 𝑛 }𝑛 =1
> 𝑁
> Facilitate the
> adaptation
> to new tasks
> 𝑇 ℎ
> 𝑅 ℎ
> 𝑇 𝑖
> 𝑇 𝑗
> 𝑇 𝑘
> 𝑅 𝑖
> 𝑅 𝑗
> 𝑅 𝑘
> {𝜋 𝛽 ℎ
> 𝑛 }𝑛 =1
> 𝑁 {𝜋 𝛽 𝑘
> 𝑛 }𝑛 =1
> 𝑁 {𝜋 𝛽 𝑗
> 𝑛 }𝑛 =1
> 𝑁

Figure 1. Modeling latent task dynamics with a world model facil-itates the capture of behavior-invariant task information, thereby supporting task inference and enabling rapid adaptation. 

et al., 2016; Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020). Compared to online meta-RL, offline meta-RL is required to model a static task distribution and ensure that policies learned from offline data can robustly transfer to unseen tasks and subsequent online deployment while maintain-ing strong generalization (Dorfman et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). When reward sig-nals are sparse, effective adaptation increasingly depends on learning robust representations of task dynamics and implicit transfer relationships to handle distributional shifts (Packer et al., 2021; Grigsby et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b). Nevertheless, current offline meta-RL approaches struggle to learn such representations in sparse-reward and out-of-distribution environments. Moreover, offline meta-RL faces two coupled distribution-shift challenges. First, context distribution shift arises be-cause the contexts used for task inference during meta-training are sampled from static datasets collected by task-dependent behavior policies, whereas during meta-testing the agent must infer the task from contexts collected online by its exploration policy. The mismatch between behavior and exploration policies can make the learned context en-coder unreliable on test-time contexts, leading to degraded task inference and generalization (Yuan & Lu, 2022; Gao et al., 2023; Ajay et al., 2022). Second, policy distribu-1

> arXiv:2606.00780v1 [cs.LG] 30 May 2026 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL

tion shift arises because offline datasets cannot cover the full state-action space. When the learned policy selects out-of-distribution actions during optimization, the critic may assign overestimated values to unsupported regions, a problem that becomes more complex in offline meta-RL due to the need for cross-task generalization (Mitchell et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023). Together with MDP ambiguity (Dorfman et al., 2021), these issues give rise to an inherent pattern dilemma , where agents overfit to behavior-policy-specific patterns encoded in the offline data, limiting their ability to generalize efficiently to unseen environments. World models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2020) provide a natural mechanism for learning predictive dynamics and performing planning through latent imagina-tion. By compressing observations into a compact latent space and predicting how latent states evolve under actions, a world model allows an agent to evaluate potential future outcomes without directly interacting with the real environ-ment. This ability has led to strong performance in complex video games (Hafner et al., 2021; 2025a;b), robotic control (Wu et al., 2023), and autonomous driving (Wang et al., 2024a;b). By modeling task-specific latent dynamics in a compact latent space, world models help avoid overfitting to the empirical task distribution and partially filter out the effects induced by heterogeneous behavior policies. This property naturally aligns with the requirements of offline meta-RL for learning robust task representations (Figure 1). In this work, we propose MetaSTAR , a novel offline 

Meta -reinforcement learning framework with a Stochastic 

Transformer-based world model for beh Avior-invariant task 

Representations. Motivated by the information-theoretic view of causal disentanglement, MetaSTAR constructs a stochastic world model to predict forward latent dynamics in a compact state space. By forcing the model to capture transition-related and reward-related evolution rather than behavior-policy-specific correlations, MetaSTAR learns dynamics-centric task representations that are less sensi-tive to heterogeneous data-collection policies, thereby miti-gating context distribution shift. To further address policy distribution shift in offline meta-RL, MetaSTAR combines the learned world model with contextual imagination and conservative policy optimization. The world model gener-ates context-conditioned imagined rollouts, while the con-servative value objective penalizes unsupported state-action regions and discourages the policy from exploiting model er-rors. This design enables safer latent-space imagination and more reliable transfer from offline training to online adapta-tion, especially under sparse rewards and out-of-distribution tasks. Our main contributions are as follows: • From an information-theoretic perspective on task rep-resentation, we propose MetaSTAR that leverages world models to learn behavior-invariant representa-tions in offline meta-reinforcement learning. • We theoretically validate the effectiveness of world models in filtering the impact of behavior-policy-induced distribution shift during the meta-training stage, providing principled justification for behavior-invariant task representation learning. • Empirically, MetaSTAR alleviates the inherent pattern dilemma and achieves strong online adaptation per-formance across a wide range of sparse-reward and out-of-distribution tasks. 

## 2. Preliminaries 

2.1. Problem Formulation 

We consider a context-based offline meta-reinforcement learning setting, where tasks are drawn from a distri-bution p(M). Each task Mi ∈ M is modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the tuple 

Mi = ( S, A, T i, R i, ρ 0, γ ). All tasks share the same state space S and action space A, while differing in their tran-sition dynamics Ti and reward functions Ri. In the of-fline setting, the agent has access only to a static dataset 

D = {D i}Ntasks  

> i=1

, where each Di consists of transitions 

{(sij , a ij , r ij , s ′ij )}Nsize  

> j=1

collected by its corresponding behav-ior policies {πnβi }Nupdate  

> n=1

. Given a context ci ⊂ D i, the agent first infers a task representation zi via an encoder qϕ(zi | ci).The learned task representation zi is then concatenated with the state s and provided as input to the policy πθ (a | s, z i)

for policy learning. The overall optimization objective can be expressed as: 

max  

> θ,ϕ

EMi∼p(M), c i∼D i, z i∼qϕ(z|ci)

h

JMi

 πθ (· | s, z i)i

.

(1) The agent is required to infer task-specific dynamics from limited context and adapt to unseen tasks. As discussed in the introduction, offline meta-RL is challenged by both context distribution shift and policy distribution shift, which can make task inference unreliable and policy improvement unstable. These issues are further amplified under sparse rewards and out-of-distribution task adaptation, where task-identifying signals are limited and offline datasets provide incomplete coverage of the state-action space. The above issues can be summarized as follows: the learned patterns are overly rigid, resulting in limited exploratory behavior and driving agents into an inherent pattern dilemma . Since offline datasets are inevitably shaped by the behavior poli-cies used for data collection, task representations learned without appropriate constraints may capture correlations that are predictive within the training distribution but fail to transfer to unseen tasks. Consequently, it is crucial to learn 

behavior-invariant task representations (Definition 2.1) that preserve task-relevant transition and reward structures 2Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

while suppressing behavior-policy-specific variations. Such representations are essential for handling task distribution shifts and achieving robust domain adaptation. 

2.2. Information-Theoretic Task Representation 

To formally define behavior-invariant task representations from an information-theoretic perspective, we adopt the framework proposed in UNICORN (Li et al., 2024) which posits that an ideal task representation Z should maximize the mutual information I(Z; M ) with the task variable M .However, since the true task identity M is unobservable in practice, the representation can only be inferred from the observed context sequence X. Following the causal decomposition, the context variable X is decoupled into behavior-related components Xb = ( s, a ) and task-related components Xt = ( r, s ′). By the chain rule, this yields 

I(Z; X) = I(Z; Xt | Xb)

| {z }

> Primary Causality

+ I(Z; Xb)

| {z }

> Lesser Causality

. (2) Based on this decomposition, UNICORN introduces the following central theorem to bound I(Z; M ):

I(Z; Xt | Xb) ≤ I(Z; M ) ≤ I(Z; Xt | Xb) + I(Z; Xb).

(3) Therefore, robustness to context shift can be promoted by maximizing the primary causality I(Z; Xt | Xb), while suppressing the lesser causality I(Z; Xb). Intuitively, Z

should preserve predictive information about future states and rewards, which characterize task dynamics, while dis-carding spurious correlations regarding which actions the behavior policy would inherently select. In our work, we argue that a Transformer-based world model provides a principled realization of this objective (Theo-rem 3.1). By training the world model to predict future latent states from historical latent states and actions, the dynamics-learning objective encourages Z to capture pre-dictive transition-related and reward-related structures. This can be interpreted as a variational surrogate for increasing the primary causality I(Z; Xt | Xb) in the latent space. Consequently, the learned representation is encouraged to distill behavior-invariant latent task dynamics, providing compact and informative task signals for robust task infer-ence and adaptation. 

Definition 2.1 (Behavior-invariant task representation) .

Given a context sequence X = ( Xb, X t) collected from task Mi, with Xb = ( s, a ) and Xt = ( r, s ′), a represen-tation Z is called a behavior-invariant task representation 

if it preserves task-relevant information about Ti and Ri

by promoting high primary causality I(Z; Xt | Xb), while suppressing behavior-policy-specific information measured by the lesser causality I(Z; Xb).

## 3. Method 

In this section, we first introduce the process of modeling la-tent task dynamics using a Transformer-based world model (Section 3.1). We then describe how world model-based planning is combined with offline datasets to enable con-servative policy learning (Section 3.2). Finally, we provide a theoretical analysis showing that optimizing the world model can be viewed as approximately learning behavior-invariant task representations (Section 3.3). 

3.1. World Model Learning 

In offline settings, data are collected by heterogeneous be-havior policies, leading to diverse action distributions that can bias task representations and hinder reliable task iden-tification. Standard context encoders may therefore cap-ture correlations induced by behavior policies rather than task-relevant dynamics, especially under sparse rewards and out-of-distribution settings. In contrast, world models learn compact latent dynamics of the underlying MDP and natu-rally support long-horizon imagination. Motivated by these advantages, we employ a Transformer-based world model to learn behavior-invariant task representations. 

Latent Dynamics for Task Representation. To learn behavior-invariant task representations, our approach mod-els task-relevant latent dynamics rather than directly en-coding trajectories in the original state space. This design reduces the influence of heterogeneous behavior policies and enables robust latent dynamics modeling across multi-ple offline tasks. For a trajectory τ i = {(sit, a it, r it, s ′it )}Tt=1  

> 1

from task Mi, we define the observation as ot = [ st, r t−1].Explicitly incorporating the reward from the previous time step rt−1 as part of the observation serves as a crucial signal for characterizing task-specific MDP dynamics, and facili-tates the model’s ability to distinguish between different task reward functions (Zintgraf et al., 2019; Choshen & Tamar, 2023; Rimon et al., 2024). We empirically validate the importance of this design in Appendix D.6. To represent tra-jectories from multiple MDPs while preserving stochasticity in the latent space, we employ a variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) to map observation ot

into a continuous latent distribution Et. Specifically, at each time step, we sample a latent embedding et ∼ Et,which serves as the stochastic latent observation used for dynamics prediction. To capture long-horizon temporal dependencies across different tasks in offline datasets, we employ a Transformer as the deterministic component of the world model (Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; Chen et al., 2022), serving as the sequence model in the latent state space. The sequence of stochastic latent observations and actions, τ e,a  

> 1: t

= {e1, a 1, . . . , e t, a t}, is provided as input to 

> 1For clarity of presentation, we omit explicit task indices when no confusion arises.

3Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL Offline Dataset 𝒟  

> Context World
> Model
> 𝑊 𝜙
> ℒ𝑊𝑀 (𝜙 )
> 𝑍
> ℒ𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐 (𝜔 )

## ∪               

> ℒ𝐹𝑂𝐶𝐴𝐿 (𝜙 )
> Task
> Embedding
> Actor
> 𝜋 𝜃 (𝑎 |𝑠 ,𝑧 )
> Critic
> 𝑄 𝜔 (𝑠 ,𝑧 ,𝑎 )
> ℒ𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 (𝜃 )
> Transformer Block
> Enc Dec Enc Enc Dec Dec
> 𝑜 1ො𝑜 1𝑜 2𝑜 𝑡 ො𝑜 1ො𝑜 𝑡
> 𝐸 1𝐸 2𝐸 𝑡 𝑒 1𝑒 2𝑒 𝑡

⨁ ⨁ ⨁𝑎 1 𝑎 2 𝑎 𝑡 …

…       

> ℎ1ℎ2ℎ𝑡 Ƹ𝑐 1Ƹ𝑐 𝑡 Ƹ𝑐 2
> ෠𝐸 2෠𝐸 3෠𝐸 𝑡 +1
> 𝐸 𝑇
> (a) (b)

…       

> Empty Task
> Embedding
> ℎz
> 𝑍
> Imagination
> (Ƹ𝑠 ,ො𝑎 ,Ƹ𝑟 ,Ƹ𝑠 ′)

Figure 2. MetaSTAR Framework. (a) The world model is responsible not only for inferring task representation from context but also for augmenting the data distribution via imagination. (b) The Transformer module simultaneously handles temporal encoding and dynamic prediction, ensuring that the extracted task representations are causal. 

the Transformer, which outputs a context embedding ht that aggregates historical information in the latent space. The resulting context embedding ht is then fed into two inde-pendent MLP heads: a dynamics predictor, which forecasts the latent state distribution at the next time step ˆEt+1 , and a continuation predictor, which predicts the continuation flag 

ˆct ∈ { 0, 1}. The stochastic dynamics predictor allows the model to represent uncertainty in latent transitions, which helps reduce over-reliance on rigid patterns in offline data and improves robustness over purely deterministic represen-tation architectures. The components of our world model are defined as follows: Observation encoder: et ∼ qϕ(et | ot),

Observation decoder: ˆot ∼ pϕ(ˆ ot | et),

Sequence model: h1: t = fϕ(τ e,a  

> 1: t

),

Latent dynamics predictor: ˆet+1 ∼ pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht),

Continuation predictor: ˆct ∼ pϕ(ˆ ct | ht),

Task embedding projector: z ∼ qϕ(z | hz ).

(4) To identify the underlying MDP from the latent history, we append a learnable query token at the end of the trajectory, as illustrated in Figure 2 (b). Through the self-attention mechanism, this embedding attends to the historical latent trajectory, aggregating task-relevant information and produc-ing a global context embedding hz . Finally, a task-specific MLP head qϕ(z | hz ) projects hz into the task embedding space to yield the global task embedding z.

Loss Functions. The objective is to minimize a joint loss comprising the prediction loss Lpred , the dynamics loss Ldyn ,and the representation loss Lrep :

LWM (ϕ) .

= E

" TX

> t=1

(Lpred (ϕ) + Ldyn (ϕ) + βrep Lrep (ϕ)) 

#

.

(5) The prediction loss consists of two components: observation reconstruction log pϕ(ot | et) and continuation prediction 

log pϕ(ct | ht). The former is optimized via the negative log-likelihood of ot to ensure that the stochastic latent et

preserves sufficient information for reconstruction. The lat-ter is trained as a logistic regression task to predict episode termination. The dynamics and representation losses govern the alignment between the posterior qϕ(et+1 | ot+1 ) and the prior pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht). We employ KL balancing with a ”free-bits” threshold of 1.0 to prevent the KL divergence from dominating the total loss, thereby avoiding posterior col-lapse. Specifically, Ldyn (ϕ) trains the Transformer’s prior to match the encoder’s posterior. By applying a stop-gradient (sg ) to the encoder, we force the Transformer to internalize the underlying environment dynamics without allowing the encoder to simplify the latent space to minimize the loss. Finally, Lrep (ϕ) ensures that observation representations re-main consistent with the temporal dynamics, facilitating more stable and accurate multi-step imagination. 

Lpred (ϕ) .

= − log pϕ(ot | et) − log pϕ(ct | ht),

Ldyn (ϕ) .

= max(1 , KL [sg (qϕ(et+1 |ot+1 )) ∥ pϕ(ˆ et+1 |ht)]) ,

Lrep (ϕ) .

= max(1 , KL [qϕ(et+1 |ot+1 ) ∥ sg (pϕ(ˆ et+1 |ht))]) .

(6) While the world model loss LWM ensures that the task em-bedding z captures the primary causality (Theorem 3.1), it does not explicitly guarantee that embeddings from different tasks are well-separated in the latent space. To ensure that z

is a discriminative and sufficient statistic for the task variable 

M , we incorporate the distance metric learning objective from FOCAL (Li et al., 2020). The FOCAL loss serves as a contrastive regularizer that optimizes the task-identifiability. This objective treats task representation learning as a dis-tance metric learning problem, aiming to cluster embeddings of the same task while repelling those from different tasks. Specifically, given a batch of task embeddings {zi, z j } ex-4Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

tracted from different trajectory segments, the FOCAL loss is defined as: 

LFOCAL (ϕ) .

= Ei,j 

h

1{i=j}∥zi − zj ∥22

+ 1{i̸=j}

1

∥zi − zj ∥22 + ϵ

i

.

(7) By minimizing this loss, we enforce the task representation 

z inferred from different trajectory segments of the same MDP to lie in a consistent region of the latent space, while separating embeddings from different MDPs. This regular-ization improves task discriminability across data collected by heterogeneous behavior policies and reduces the depen-dence of z on behavior-related components Xb. The total objective for the world model in MetaSTAR is: 

Ltotal (ϕ) = LWM (ϕ) + λLFOCAL (ϕ). (8) This integrated objective encourages the world model to learn latent dynamics grounded in stable task information rather than spurious variations induced by behavior policies. In particular, LWM promotes predictive modeling of task-related components Xt = ( r, s ′), while LFOCAL ensures that the resulting task embedding z is structured and dis-criminative. The effect of the contrastive loss weight λ is analyzed in Appendix D.7. 

3.2. Agent Learning 

Following the training of Wϕ, we proceed to learn a conser-vative critic Qω (s, z, a ) and a meta-policy πθ (a|s, z ). The primary objective of this stage is to mitigate policy dis-tribution shift by discouraging the policy from selecting unsupported state-action pairs and exploiting model inaccu-racies in out-of-support regions. 

Planning with Contextual Imagination. We use the learned world model Wϕ to generate imagined rollouts for policy learning. While sequence-based world models nat-urally condition predictions on historical trajectories, our 

contextual imagination refers specifically to the offline meta-RL procedure of warming up the world model with real task context before imagination. This distinction is important because offline meta-RL suffers from MDP ambiguity (Dorf-man et al., 2021): when the static context lacks sufficient identifying transitions, a meta-agent may fail to determine which MDP generated the data. Unlike standard single-task world-model rollouts, which use history mainly for pre-dictive accuracy, contextual imagination uses real context to establish a task-consistent latent history before gener-ating synthetic transitions for downstream policy learning. Specifically, we sample a context segment of length L from the offline dataset: τ1: L = {(st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

)}Lt=1 . This pre-fix is fed into the world model Wϕ to establish a histori-cal prior. Through its self-attention mechanism, the world model aggregates these historical transitions to encounter potential identifying state-action pairs. Taking the termi-nal state sL of the warm-up sequence as the anchor, the world model continues the sequence autoregressively for a horizon of H: ˆτL+1: L+H = {(ˆ st, ˆat, ˆrt, ˆs′

> t

)}L+Ht=L+1 . During this phase, actions are sampled from the current meta-policy 

ˆat ∼ πθ (·| ˆst, z ). By prefixing the imagination with real historical context, the generated rollouts are conditioned on evidence about the current task rather than produced from an ambiguous or uninformative latent state. This ensures that the generated transitions are not only physically plausi-ble but also grounded in the specific MDP identified during the warm-up phase, effectively alleviating the identifiability challenges in offline meta-RL. 

Conservative Meta-Value Evaluation. To mitigate value overestimation associated with policy distribution shift, we implement a conservative evaluation objective for the critic 

Qω (s, z, a ). In the offline setting, the meta-policy may se-lect actions outside the support of the offline dataset, causing the world model to generate transitions in regions where the learned dynamics are unreliable. Without regularization, the critic tends to assign erroneously high values to these regions, leading the policy to exploit model hallucinations. Drawing on conservative model-based optimization (Yu et al., 2021), we train the critic using real transitions sam-pled from the offline dataset together with imagined transi-tions generated by the learned world model. Specifically, at each update, we sample a mini-batch of real transitions d

from D and use Wϕ to generate a set of context-conditioned imagined transitions ˆdϕ through rollout. We then form the augmented transition batch df

.

= d ∪ ˆdϕ, where the relative amount of imagined data is determined by the number of imagination rollouts and the rollout horizon H. The conser-vative meta-value objective is formulated as: 

Lcritic (ω) .

= β (Es,a ∼ρ[Qω (s, z, a )] − Es,a ∼D [Qω (s, z, a )]) + 12 Es,a ∼df



Qω (s, z, a ) − bBπ Qω (s, z, a )

2

,

(9) where ρ(s, a ) = dπ

> cM

(s)πθ (a|s, z ) represents the state-action marginal distribution induced by the current meta-policy πθ when it is executed in the learned world model 

cM. The first term actively lowers the Q-values of states-actions pairs that are evaluated as having high value by the current policy but are not present in the real offline data. To ensure the critic remains grounded in the real experi-ence distribution D, we need to increase the Q-values of the state-action pairs in D, thereby preventing the meta-policy from using the imagined data generated by the world model beyond the support region and generating overly high value estimates. The second term ensures the Bellman consistency on the augmented data df , which consists of 5Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

both real transitions and imagined transitions. The operator 

bBπ is the context-dependent Bellman operator, defined as 

bBπ Qω (s, z, a ) .

= r + γEa′∼πθ (·| s′,z )[Q¯ω (s′, z, a ′)] , where 

¯ω denotes the target network parameters. 

Meta-Policy Improvement. Finally, under the constraints of the conservative critic, we optimize the meta-policy pa-rameters θ by minimizing the following objective on the augmented data df :

Lactor (θ) .

= −E s∼df 

> a∼πθ(·| s,z )

[Qω (s, z, a )] − αH(πθ (·| s, z )) .

(10) The conservative critic acts as an implicit regularizer for pol-icy improvement. Since in the regions lacking data support, 

Qω is tuned to be pessimistic, maximizing it is equivalent to implicitly setting a safety constraint: the policy naturally avoids taking actions that lead to unreliable imagined states, because these states are assigned lower values during the value evaluation stage. Therefore, the agent can safely lever-age the generalization ability of the world model to discover the optimal trajectory for the given task Mi, even in sparse-reward environments where the offline dataset may only provide suboptimal or fragmented evidence. This enables the agent to mitigate the inherent pattern dilemma in the of-fline setting: it no longer merely imitates the behavior policy in D, but learns a general adaptive policy that can effectively interpolate and extrapolate on the task manifold, thereby achieving higher stability and performance in unseen tasks. 

3.3. Theoretical Analysis of Behavior-invariant Representation in World Model 

By extracting latent task dynamics from the world model, we theoretically show that such dynamics substantially re-duce the influence of behavior-induced action distributions on task identification, thereby improving robustness under heterogeneous behavior policies. 

Theorem 3.1 (World model dynamics as primary causal-ity) . Given a stochastic world model with latent states 

et and temporal context embeddings ht = fϕ(e1: t, a 1: t),

Xb = {et, a t} denote behavior-related variables and 

Xt = {et+1 } denote task-related variables. Let Z be a global task representation aggregated from {ht}. Then op-timizing the latent dynamics of the world model Ldyn =

E[KL( qϕ(et+1 | ot+1 ) ∥ pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht))] can be viewed as maximizing the primary causality I(Z; Xt | Xb).

This theorem shows that optimizing the latent dynamics of a world model effectively captures task-relevant primary causality in offline meta-RL settings. 

Proposition 3.2. For each task M and behavior policy π, the task-token posterior is calibrated: 

Eτ ∼p(τ |M,π )

h

KL  qϕ(z | τ )∥p(z | M )i

≤ ε, which is enforced by minimizing Ldyn .

Theorem 3.3 (Dynamics-induced behavior invariance) .

Consider the task latent Z inferred by the world model task token. Under standard posterior–prior calibration of the dynamics KL, if Ldyn ≤ ε, then I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ ε.

Theorem 3.4 (Behavior-policy robustness of task represen-tation) . Under the same condition, for any two behavior policies π, π ′ on task M , the induced representation distri-butions satisfy TV  p(Z | M, π ), p (Z | M, π ′) ≤ √2ε.

All proofs are provided in Appendix A. 

## 4. Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate MetaSTAR on multiple dense-reward and challenging sparse-reward tasks, aiming to ad-dress the following three core questions: 1. Does MetaS-TAR outperform existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in standard offline meta-reinforcement learning benchmarks, especially in sparse reward settings? 2. Can MetaSTAR maintain effective adaptation capabilities when the distribu-tion of test tasks significantly differs from the training data distribution? 3. Can the proposed behavior-invariant repre-sentation learning framework with transformer-based world models effectively decouple task dynamics from behavior policies and generate a structured latent space? 

4.1. Experimental Settings Environments and Baselines. The experimental envi-ronments include Point-Robot-Sparse and continuous con-trol tasks based on the MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) physics engine, covering Ant-Dir, Cheetah-Vel, Hopper-Param, Walker-Param, and the sparse-reward variants with the exception of Ant-Dir (see Appendix F for details). We compare MetaSTAR against four representative context-based offline meta-reinforcement learning baseline methods: 

FOCAL (Li et al., 2020), CORRO (Yuan & Lu, 2022), 

CSRO (Gao et al., 2023) and UNICORN (Li et al., 2024). Details of these baselines are provided in Appendix E. 

Data Collection. For each environment, we randomly sam-ple 40 different tasks, partitioning them into a set of 30 tasks for offline meta-training, and the remaining 10 tasks for testing. For each task Mi, the offline dataset is con-structed from the replay buffer accumulated throughout the training of an independently trained SAC agent (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Thus, each task-specific buffer contains mixed-proficiency transitions induced by a non-stationary sequence of behavior policies, denoted as {πnβi }Nupdate  

> n=1

, from early ex-ploration to more proficient policies. To evaluate the robust-ness of MetaSTAR in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios, we divided the data of four environments (Ant-Dir, Point-Robot-Sparse, Cheetah-Vel, and Cheetah-Vel-Sparse) into in-distribution (ID) and OOD tasks based on the task goals (see Table 4 in Appendix F). 6Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL MetaSTAR  CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  UNICORN  

> Figure 3. Average online meta-testing performance on 4 dense-reward environments and 4 sparse-reward environments.

Evaluation Protocols. In the meta-testing phase, we em-ploy two evaluation protocols: offline test and online test. Offline test is an idealized but impractical evaluation method. It directly uses pre-collected offline data as the context, thus ignoring the context shift problem, and usually achieves higher performance. In contrast, online test involves the agent collecting context data through online interactions with the test environment using its current exploration pol-icy. As this represents a more practical evaluation protocol, we place greater emphasis on MetaSTAR’s performance during online testing . The results are averaged over 3 ran-dom seeds. In the tables, the best result is bolded , and the second-best result is underlined. 

4.2. Main Results on Meta-Testing 

Table 1 and Figure 3 present the average returns of MetaS-TAR compared to baseline methods in multiple environ-ments. The experimental results show that MetaSTAR achieves superior performance in the vast majority of tasks. In the two dense-reward tasks of Ant-Dir and Walker-Param, the offline and online testing returns of MetaSTAR are sig-nificantly higher than those of the baselines. Notably, in Ant-Dir, MetaSTAR achieves an online return of 230 ± 42 , while the suboptimal baseline CORRO was only 149 ± 39 . The advantage of MetaSTAR is even more pronounced in sparse-reward environments , where baseline methods frequently succumb to pattern collapse. Particularly in Cheetah-Vel-Sparse and Point-Robot-Sparse, MetaSTAR achieves high returns of 296 ± 19 and 21 ± 8 respectively, far exceeding the closest baseline CORRO ( 216 ± 15 and 10 ± 6). This validates that by maximizing the primary causality, MetaS-TAR can extract features intrinsic to the task dynamics from the sparse rewards, rather than overfitting to the behavior-induced correlations in the offline data. This indicates that MetaSTAR can effectively mitigates the context distribution shift and achieves more robust online adaptation. 

4.3. Out-of-Distribution Adaptation MetaSTAR  CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  UNICORN    

> Figure 4. Average online adaptation performance of the first five episodes on out-of-distribution tasks.

To address the second question, we evaluate MetaSTAR under out-of-distribution online adaptation, where policy distribution shift becomes more challenging. Table 2 details the final episode performance of each baseline in both ID and OOD scenarios for online adaptation. The relevant adap-tation curves are presented in Figure 4 (OOD) and Figure 8 (ID). From Figure 4, we can observe that in the OOD setting, MetaSTAR rapidly attains high performance within the first episode of OOD exploration and maintains stability there-after. This indicates its ability to rapidly infer task-relevant information with limited online interaction. This success stems from the synergy between our conservative value reg-ularization and the imagination rollouts of the world model, which enables the policy to explore safely when encoun-tering unknown states, thereby preventing policy collapse due to overestimation of value. Conversely, while baselines like CORRO perform adequately in ID settings, their perfor-mance deteriorates significantly in OOD scenarios. These results suggest that MetaSTAR maintains stronger online adaptation ability under task distribution shifts, rather than 7Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

Table 1. Average meta-testing returns of MetaSTAR against other baselines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

> Environment CORRO CSRO FOCAL UNICORN MetaSTAR Offline Online Offline Online Offline Online Offline Online Offline Online Ant-Dir 183 ±41 149 ±39 141 ±42 109 ±33 194 ±42 115 ±27 210 ±40 140 ±36 236 ±48 230 ±42
> Cheetah-Vel −34 ±3−60 ±10 −38 ±10 −57 ±14 −36 ±6−57 ±7−32 ±3−56 ±10 −33 ±4−60 ±19
> Hopper-Param 300 ±29 294 ±28 236 ±22 242 ±31 253 ±35 245 ±30 296 ±24 289 ±22 276 ±24 279 ±25
> Walker-Param 126 ±25 127 ±22 28 ±33 54 ±34 116 ±31 84 ±50 103 ±30 117 ±86 140 ±24 139 ±27
> Point-Robot-Sparse 38 ±710 ±613 ±74±328 ±55±340 ±56±342 ±521 ±8
> Cheetah-Vel-Sparse 260 ±13 216 ±15 169 ±59 137 ±46 242 ±18 196 ±31 238 ±14 212 ±60 296 ±19 260 ±34
> Hopper-Param-Sparse 89 ±289 ±283 ±479 ±388 ±384 ±485 ±381 ±490 ±489 ±3
> Walker-Param-Sparse 78 ±176 ±175 ±475 ±376 ±376 ±275 ±574 ±281 ±282 ±2

Table 2. Average online adaptation performance for the final episode.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

> Environment CORRO CSRO FOCAL UNICORN MetaSTAR ID OOD ID OOD ID OOD ID OOD ID OOD Ant-Dir 136 ±34 −40 ±20 143 ±30 −7±14 75 ±16 0±10 200 ±24 1±10 269 ±24 59 ±19
> Cheetah-Vel −76 ±13 −214 ±1−223 ±17 −287 ±3−164 ±45 −115 ±10 −68 ±1−110 ±7−53 ±1−107 ±21
> Hopper-Param 302 ±19 /257 ±10 /259 ±19 /259 ±16 /270 ±12 /Walker-Param 119 ±13 /63 ±17 /53 ±4/47 ±6/158 ±6/Point-Robot-Sparse 17 ±510 ±32±28±55±27±54±36±436 ±57±2
> Cheetah-Vel-Sparse 214 ±26 18 ±1183 ±896 ±20 190 ±15 119 ±30 240 ±19 135 ±21 269 ±15 142 ±7
> Hopper-Param-Sparse 75 ±1/77 ±1/76 ±1/74 ±1/81 ±1/Walker-Param-Sparse 88 ±1/70 ±1/87 ±2/80 ±1/89 ±1/

overfitting to the offline training distribution. 

4.4. Visualization of Task Representations CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL 

> MetaSTAR UNICORN

Figure 5. T-SNE visualization of the learned task representation space in Hopper-Param. 

To qualitatively examine the property of behavior invari-ance , we used t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008) to visualize the learned task representations. Figure 5 shows the latent space structures of different methods in Hopper-Param. As clearly shown in this figure, the task representations gen-erated by MetaSTAR exhibit highly structured clustering characteristics. Samples from the same task are closely clustered, while the boundaries between different tasks are distinct. In contrast, the representations of other baselines are more disordered and even overlap between different tasks. This suggests that their task representations are sus-ceptible to the influence of behavior. This support our the-oretical analysis that the Transformer-based world model successfully extracts the behavior-invariant task represen-tations. Additional t-SNE visualizations are provided in Appendix D.3, including dense-reward environments in Fig-ure 9 and sparse-reward environments in Figure 10. 

4.5. Euclidean Distance of Task Representations CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  

> UNICORN MetaSTAR

Figure 6. Euclidean distance of task representations on Cheetah-Vel-Sparse. 

Beyond t-SNE visualization, we further analyze whether the learned representation space preserves the semantic rela-tionships among unseen tasks. Specifically, we compute the pairwise Euclidean distances between task embeddings and compare the resulting distance patterns with the underlying task parameters. Figure 6 shows the distance matrices on Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, where the task goal is the target ve-locity sampled from [0.0, 3.0]. MetaSTAR exhibits a clear locally smooth structure: tasks with similar target veloci-ties are mapped closer in the latent space, while tasks with larger velocity gaps tend to have larger representation dis-tances. This trend remains visible despite the sparse-reward 8Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

setting, indicating that MetaSTAR can extract task-relevant structure from limited feedback. In contrast, the baseline methods show weaker or less consistent distance patterns, suggesting that their representations are less aligned with the underlying task semantics. These results complement the t-SNE visualizations and provide further evidence that MetaSTAR encourages task representations to capture task-relevant structure while reducing behavior-induced varia-tions. Additional Euclidean distance analyses on Cheetah-Vel and Point-Robot-Sparse are provided in Appendix D.4. 

4.6. Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation studies to examine the contribution of the world-model objective LWM and conservative pol-icy optimization. Figure 13 and Figure 14 compare the full MetaSTAR with its ablated variants under online and offline testing. Removing LWM generally degrades perfor-mance, confirming the importance of world-model-based representation learning for task inference and cross-task gen-eralization. Removing conservative policy optimization also hurts performance in many settings, indicating its role in reducing value overestimation and limiting model exploita-tion during imagination-based policy learning. When both components are removed, the model becomes a simplified metric-learning variant without latent dynamics learning or conservative imagination-based policy optimization, leading to the largest degradation, especially in sparse-reward envi-ronments. These results show that the two components are complementary: LWM improves task representation under context distribution shift, while conservative policy opti-mization stabilizes policy learning under policy distribution shift. We also observe task-dependent effects; for example, on Hopper-Param, removing conservative policy optimiza-tion slightly improves performance, possibly because dense rewards and informative offline trajectories reduce the need for imagined data, while model rollouts may introduce addi-tional bias. 

## 5. Related Works 

Task Representation Learning in Meta-RL. Learning compact and expressive task representations is central to meta-RL, as it enables agents to extract task-relevant infor-mation and rapidly adapt corresponding tasks (Beck et al., 2025). Prior works explore different representation methods in meta-RL, including reconstruction-based inference (Zint-graf et al., 2020; 2021), distance metric learning (Li et al., 2020), contrastive learning (Yuan & Lu, 2022; Choshen & Tamar, 2023) and bisimulation metrics (Zhang et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025b). 

Information-theoretic Perspectives on Task Inference. 

Information-theoretic and causal perspectives have been widely used to study representation learning, invariance, and generalization (Sch ¨olkopf et al., 2021; Mu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2024). In offline meta-RL, CORRO maximizes task-related information with con-trastive learning over transition tuples (Yuan & Lu, 2022), while CSRO reduces context shift by suppressing policy-related information in task representations (Gao et al., 2023). UNICORN further provides a unified information-theoretic framework that interprets FOCAL, CORRO, and CSRO as different approximations of task information (Li et al., 2024). BATI performs behavior-agnostic task inference through dynamics-based likelihood (Ma et al., 2025), while recent work analyzes the impact of task representation shift during encoder-policy optimization (Zhang et al., 2025a). 

World Models. World models learn stochastic latent dy-namics and enable imagination-based planning under partial observability (Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; 2021; 2025a;b). Transformer-based world models further improve long-range dependency modeling and complex dynamics pre-diction (Micheli et al., 2022; Robine et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Burchi & Timofte, 2025). In meta-RL, MAMBA directly instantiates a Dreamer-style learning-and-imagination pipeline for task adaptation, and MuDreamer explores robustness by relaxing reconstruction-centric training (Rimon et al., 2024; Burchi & Timofte, 2024). 

## 6. Conclusions 

We present MetaSTAR, a novel offline meta-RL frame-work for robust offline-to-online adaptation under sparse-reward and out-of-distribution settings. MetaSTAR uses a stochastic Transformer-based world model to learn behavior-invariant task representations that capture task-relevant dy-namics while reducing variations induced by heterogeneous behavior policies. It further combines contextual imagina-tion with conservative policy optimization to leverage imag-ined transitions while mitigating value overestimation and model exploitation in unsupported regions. Our theoretical analysis and empirical results suggest that world-model-based representation learning provides an effective way to address context and policy distribution shifts in offline meta-RL. We believe MetaSTAR offers a promising direction for robust task adaptation and efficient transfer from offline datasets to online deployment in real-world environments. 

Limitation. MetaSTAR introduces additional computa-tional overhead compared with model-free offline meta-RL baselines, mainly due to stochastic Transformer-based world-model training and contextual imagination during pol-icy optimization. Although this cost is incurred entirely dur-ing offline training and does not substantially affect test-time action inference, it may limit scalability to very large task collections or high-dimensional observation domains. A de-tailed training-time analysis is provided in Appendix D.11. 9Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by Brain Science and Brain-like Intelligence Technology - National Science and Technol-ogy Major Project (2021ZD0200500), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62472206, 3254100307), Na-tional Key R&D Program of China (2025YFC3410000), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (RCYX20231211090405003, JCYJ20220818100213029), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Founda-tion (2026B1515020099), Guangdong S&T Program (Grant No. 2026B0101110003), Shanghai Municipal Special Pro-gram for Basic Research on General AI Foundation Models (2025SHZDZX026D05), GuangDong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2025A1515011645 to ZC.L.), GuangDong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2026A1515010121 to XK.S.), Shenzhen Doctoral Startup Project (RCBS20231211090748082 to XK.S.), Shenzhen Loop Area Institute under grant FPF10120250012, and the open research fund of the Guangdong Provincial Key Lab-oratory of Mathematical and Neural Dynamical Systems, the Center for Computational Science and Engineering at Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Smart Healthcare Engineering. 

## Impact Statement 

This research aims to promote the development of offline meta-reinforcement learning. MetaSTAR learns behavior-invariant task representations from static datasets and em-ploys a world model for planning within the latent space. This strategy effectively expands the support region of the offline datasets, and demonstrates a stronger generalization ability in sparse-reward and out-of-distribution scenarios. Therefore, our method can significantly reduce the need for high-risk and costly real-world exploration during the training stage. These advancements can lower the deploy-ment costs and safety risks in fields such as industrial robots, healthcare, and autonomous driving, as conducting online trial-and-error is often not feasible in these domains. 

## References 

Ajay, A., Gupta, A., Ghosh, D., Levine, S., and Agrawal, P. Distributionally adaptive meta reinforcement learning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 25856–25869, 2022. Beck, J., Vuorio, R., Zheran Liu, E., Xiong, Z., Zintgraf, L., Finn, C., and Whiteson, S. A tutorial on meta-reinforcement learning. Foundations and Trends in Ma-chine Learning , 18(2-3):224–384, 2025. Burchi, M. and Timofte, R. Mudreamer: Learning predictive world models without reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15083 , 2024. Burchi, M. and Timofte, R. Learning transformer-based world models with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04416 , 2025. Chen, C., Wu, Y.-F., Yoon, J., and Ahn, S. Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning with transformer world models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481 , 2022. Choshen, E. and Tamar, A. Contrabar: Contrastive bayes-adaptive deep rl. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 6005–6027. PMLR, 2023. Dorfman, R., Shenfeld, I., and Tamar, A. Offline meta reinforcement learning–identifiability challenges and ef-fective data collection strategies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:4607–4618, 2021. Duan, Y., Schulman, J., Chen, X., Bartlett, P. L., Sutskever, I., and Abbeel, P. Rl2: Fast reinforcement learn-ing via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779 , 2016. Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017. Gao, Y., Zhang, R., Guo, J., Wu, F., Yi, Q., Peng, S., Lan, S., Chen, R., Du, Z., Hu, X., et al. Context shift reduction for offline meta-reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:80024–80043, 2023. Grigsby, J., Fan, L., and Zhu, Y. Amago: Scalable in-context reinforcement learning for adaptive agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2018. Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforce-ment learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1861–1870. Pmlr, 2018. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., and Davidson, J. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J., and Norouzi, M. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. 10 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T. P., Norouzi, M., and Ba, J. Mas-tering atari with discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., and Lillicrap, T. Mastering diverse control tasks through world models. Nature , pp. 1–7, 2025a. Hafner, D., Yan, W., and Lillicrap, T. Training agents inside of scalable world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24527 , 2025b. Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Li, L., Yang, R., and Luo, D. Focal: Efficient fully-offline meta-reinforcement learning via distance met-ric learning and behavior regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01112 , 2020. Li, L., Zhang, H., Zhang, X., Zhu, S., Yu, Y., Zhao, J., and Heng, P.-A. Towards an information theoretic framework of context-based offline meta-reinforcement learning. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 75642–75667, 2024. Ma, L., Zhong, F., and Wang, Y. Behavior-agnostic task inference for robust offline in-context reinforcement learn-ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pp. 42293–42308. PMLR, 2025. Maaten, L. v. d. and Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research , 9(Nov): 2579–2605, 2008. Micheli, V., Alonso, E., and Fleuret, F. Transform-ers are sample-efficient world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588 , 2022. Mitchell, E., Rafailov, R., Peng, X. B., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Offline meta-reinforcement learning with advan-tage weighting. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 7780–7791. PMLR, 2021. Mu, Y., Zhuang, Y., Ni, F., Wang, B., Chen, J., Hao, J., and Luo, P. Domino: Decomposed mutual information opti-mization for generalized context in meta-reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:27563–27575, 2022. Packer, C., Abbeel, P., and Gonzalez, J. E. Hindsight task relabelling: Experience replay for sparse reward meta-rl. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 34: 2466–2477, 2021. Rakelly, K., Zhou, A., Finn, C., Levine, S., and Quillen, D. Efficient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via prob-abilistic context variables. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019. Rimon, Z., Jurgenson, T., Krupnik, O., Adler, G., and Tamar, A. Mamba: an effective world model approach for meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09859 ,2024. Robine, J., H ¨oftmann, M., Uelwer, T., and Harmeling, S. Transformer-based world models are happy with 100k interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07109 , 2023. Sch ¨olkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalch-brenner, N., Goyal, A., and Bengio, Y. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the IEEE , 109(5): 612–634, 2021. Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ,pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012. 6386109. Wang, J., Zhang, J., Jiang, H., Zhang, J., Wang, L., and Zhang, C. Offline meta reinforcement learning with in-distribution online adaptation. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 36626–36669. PMLR, 2023. Wang, X., Zhu, Z., Huang, G., Chen, X., Zhu, J., and Lu, J. Drivedreamer: Towards real-world-drive world models for autonomous driving. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 55–72. Springer, 2024a. Wang, Y., He, J., Fan, L., Li, H., Chen, Y., and Zhang, Z. Driving into the future: Multiview visual forecasting and planning with world model for autonomous driving. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 14749–14759, 2024b. Wang, Z., Xiao, X., Xu, Z., Zhu, Y., and Stone, P. Causal dynamics learning for task-independent state abstraction. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13452 , 2022. Wu, P., Escontrela, A., Hafner, D., Abbeel, P., and Goldberg, K. Daydreamer: World models for physical robot learn-ing. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 2226–2240. PMLR, 2023. Yu, T., Kumar, A., Rafailov, R., Rajeswaran, A., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Combo: Conservative offline model-based policy optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:28954–28967, 2021. Yu, X., Dunion, M., Li, X., and Albrecht, S. V. Skill-aware mutual information optimisation for zero-shot generalisa-tion in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 37:110573–110612, 2024. Yuan, H. and Lu, Z. Robust task representations for of-fline meta-reinforcement learning via contrastive learning. 11 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 25747–25759. PMLR, 2022. Zang, H., Li, X., Zhang, L., Liu, Y., Sun, B., Islam, R., Tachet des Combes, R., and Laroche, R. Understanding and addressing the pitfalls of bisimulation-based repre-sentations in offline reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:28311– 28340, 2023. Zhang, A., McAllister, R. T., Calandra, R., Gal, Y., and Levine, S. Learning invariant representations for rein-forcement learning without reconstruction. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Zhang, H., Zheng, B., Ji, T., Liu, J., Guo, A., Zhao, J., and Li, L. Scrutinize what we ignore: Reining in task rep-resentation shift of context-based offline meta reinforce-ment learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025a. Zhang, M., Qian, F., and Liu, Q. Learning task belief similarity with latent dynamics for meta-reinforcement learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025b. Zhang, W., Wang, G., Sun, J., Yuan, Y., and Huang, G. Storm: Efficient stochastic transformer based world mod-els for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 36:27147–27166, 2023. Zintgraf, L., Shiarlis, K., Igl, M., Schulze, S., Gal, Y., Hof-mann, K., and Whiteson, S. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08348 , 2019. Zintgraf, L., Shiarlis, K., Igl, M., Schulze, S., Gal, Y., Hof-mann, K., and Whiteson, S. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Zintgraf, L. M., Feng, L., Lu, C., Igl, M., Hartikainen, K., Hofmann, K., and Whiteson, S. Exploration in approxi-mate hyper-state space for meta reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 12991–13001. PMLR, 2021. 12 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

## A. Theorems and Proofs 

Theorem A.1 (World model dynamics as primary causality) . Given a stochastic world model with latent states et and temporal context embeddings ht = fϕ(e1: t, a 1: t), Xb = {et, a t} denote behavior-related variables and Xt = {et+1 }

denote task-related variables. Let Z be a global task representation aggregated from {ht}. Then optimizing the latent dynamics of the world model Ldyn = E[KL( qϕ(et+1 | ot+1 ) ∥ pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht))] can be viewed as maximizing the primary causality I(Z; Xt | Xb).Proof. In world models, the observation ot = [ st, r t−1] is encoded into the stochastic latent states et. Therefore, the behavior-related components is Xb = {et, a t} and the task-related components is Xt = {et+1 }. As Z is global task representation distilled from {h1, . . . , h T } via self-attention, maximizing information about the environment’s physics 

I(Z; Xt|Xb) is equivalent to maximizing the mutual information between the hidden state and the future latent state: 

I(Z; Xt|Xb) = I(ht; Xt|Xb). (11) Using the chain rule for mutual information: 

I(ht; Xt|Xb) = I(Xt; ht, X b) − I(Xt; Xb). (12) In the offline setting, the dataset is fixed. I(Xt; Xb) depends only on the environment, rendering it a constant relative to the optimization of the dynamics model. Let ≡ denote equality up to a constant, then 

I(ht; Xt|Xb) ≡ I(Xt; ht, X b). (13) Using the chain rule: 

I(Xt; ht, X b) = I(Xt; ht) + I(Xt; Xb|ht). (14) By architecture, the dynamics predictor pϕ only receives ht as input. The raw history Xb provides no additional information about the future et+1 once the context embedding ht is computed. Thus, Xb → ht → Xt forms a Markov Chain, implying 

I(Xt; Xb|ht) = 0 . Thus, we have: 

I(ht; Xt|Xb) ≡ I(Xt; ht). (15) Expanding the mutual information: 

I(Xt; ht) = H(Xt) − H(Xt|ht)= H(et+1 ) − H(et+1 |ht). (16) Since the marginal entropy of the latent states H(et+1 ) is determined by the encoder and the fixed dataset, maximizing the mutual information is equivalent to minimizing the conditional entropy H(et+1 |ht):

max I(ht; Xt|Xb) ⇐⇒ min H(et+1 |ht). (17) The true conditional entropy H(et+1 |ht) is intractable. We use the world model’s prior distribution pϕ(ˆ et+1 |ht) as a variational approximation. By Gibbs’ Inequality, the cross-entropy serves as an upper bound: 

H(et+1 |ht) ≤ Ee∼qϕ,h ∼fϕ [− log pϕ(et+1 |ht)] . (18) In the world model objective, this is minimized via the KL Divergence (Dynamics Loss): 

Ldyn = E[KL( qϕ(et+1 |ot+1 ) ∥ pϕ(ˆ et+1 |ht))] = Eq [− log pϕ(et+1 |ht)] − H(qϕ). (19) Since the posterior entropy H(qϕ) is independent of the dynamics predictor, minimizing Ldyn directly minimizes the variational upper bound of the conditional entropy, thereby maximizing the primary causality I(Z; Xt|Xb). That is: 

min LWM ⇒ min Ldyn ⇒ max I(Z; Xt | Xb). (20) 13 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

Proposition A.2. Conditioned on a fixed task M , the behavior policy π influences the sampled segment τ only through Xb

(state-action visitation), and Z is inferred from τ . Hence, the following Markov chain holds: 

π → Xb → τ → Z (conditioned on M ). (21) 

Proposition A.3. There exists a task-conditional reference distribution p(z | M ) such that for any behavior policy π,

Eτ ∼p(τ |M,π )

h

KL  qϕ(z | τ ) ∥ p(z | M )i

≤ ε. (22) 

Moreover, minimizing Ldyn = E[KL( qϕ(et+1 | ot+1 ) ∥ pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht))] ensures (22) holds with ε upper bounded by Ldyn 

(up to a task-dependent constant absorbed into ε). 

Remark. Proposition A.3 is the standard “posterior calibration” condition in latent-variable world models: the inferred task latent from a segment is close to a task-identity distribution p(z | M ). In our architecture, Ldyn enforces posterior–prior consistency ( qϕ(et+1 | ot+1 ) vs. pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht)); under a well-specified model and sufficient optimization, the induced posteriors cluster around a task-specific distribution, yielding (22). 

Theorem A.4 (Dynamics-induced behavior invariance) . Under Proposition A.2–A.3, if Ldyn ≤ ε, then the lesser causality of the task representation is bounded as 

I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ ε. (23) 

Equivalently, the task representation Z is ε-invariant to behavior-induced context Xb under a fixed task. Proof. Since Xb is a function of the trajectory segment τ , by data processing, 

I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ I(Z; τ | M ). (24) We next upper bound I(Z; τ | M ) using the calibration condition (22). Using the identity 

I(Z; τ | M ) = Eτ ∼p(τ |M,π )

h

KL  qϕ(z | τ ) ∥ p(z | M )i

− KL  qϕ(z | M ) ∥ p(z | M ), (25) where qϕ(z | M ) = Eτ ∼p(τ |M,π )[qϕ(z | τ )] is the aggregated posterior under task M . Since KL is nonnegative, we obtain 

I(Z; τ | M ) ≤ Eτ ∼p(τ |M,π )

h

KL  qϕ(z | τ ) ∥ p(z | M )i

≤ ε. (26) Combining yields I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ ε. Finally, by Proposition A.3, minimizing Ldyn ensures the above holds with ε upper bounded by Ldyn .

Theorem A.5 (Behavior-policy robustness of task representation) . Fix a task M and any two behavior policies π and 

π′. Let P πM ≜ pϕ(z | M, π ) and P π′ 

> M

≜ pϕ(z | M, π ′) denote the induced distributions of Z. Under Proposition A.2, if 

I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ ε, then 

TV  P πM , P π′

> M

 ≤ √2ε. (27) 

In particular, by Theorem A.4, if Ldyn ≤ ε, then TV( P πM , P π′ 

> M

) ≤ √2ε.Proof. By Proposition A.2 and data processing, 

I(Z; π | M ) ≤ I(Z; Xb | M ) ≤ ε. 

Now define a binary random variable Π ∈ { π, π ′} with P(Π = π) = P(Π = π′) = 12 . Then I(Z; Π | M ) equals the Jensen–Shannon divergence between P πM and P π′ 

> M

(in nats). Let ¯P ≜ 12 (P πM + P π′ 

> M

). By Pinsker’s inequality, 

TV( P πM , ¯P ) ≤

q

KL( P πM ∥ ¯P )/2, TV( P π′ 

> M

, ¯P ) ≤

q

KL( P π′ 

> M

∥ ¯P )/2. (28) Using triangle inequality and Cauchy–Schwarz, 

TV( P πM , P π′ 

> M

) ≤ TV( P πM , ¯P ) + TV( ¯P , P π′ 

> M

) ≤

r

2

 12 KL( P πM ∥ ¯P ) + 12 KL( P π′ 

> M

∥ ¯P )



= p2I(Z; Π | M ). (29) Finally I(Z; Π | M ) ≤ I(Z; π | M ) ≤ ε yields TV( P πM , P π′ 

> M

) ≤ √2ε.14 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

## B. Code of MetaSTAR 

Our code is available at https://github.com/QianFY/MetaSTAR 

## C. MetaSTAR Pseudo-code 

Algorithm 1 Meta-training 

Require: Offline Datasets D = {D i}train  

> i=1

of a set of training tasks 

M = {Mi}Ntrain  

> i=1

, initialize learned policy πθ , Q-function Qω , world model Wϕ

Parameter: θ, ω, ϕ 

while not done do 

Sample task batch {Mj }Nbatch  

> j=1

from M

for step in each iter do 

// World Model Learning Sample context c = {(st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

)}Tt=1 from D

Get the observation ot = [ st, r t−1]

Sample latent observation by et ∼ qϕ(et | ot)

Compute hidden states h1: T , h z = fϕ(τ e,a  

> 1: T

= {(et, a t)}Tt=1 )

Predict next latent observation ˆet+1 ∼ pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht)

Predict continuation ˆct ∼ pϕ(ˆ ct | ht)

Project hz to task embedding space z ∼ qϕ(z | hz )

Calculate Lpred , Ldyn and Lrep according to Eq. (6) Calculate LWM according to Eq. (5) Calculate LFOCAL according to Eq. (7) Update ϕ via LWM and LFOCAL according to Eq. (8) // Agent Learning Sample imagination context {(st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

)}Lt=1 from D

Imagine trajectories ˆdϕ = {(ˆ st, ˆat, ˆrt, ˆs′

> t

)} ∼ Wϕ

Sample offline data d ∼ D 

df = d ∪ ˆdϕ

Conservatively evaluate πθ to obtain bBπ Qω (s, z, a ) using df

Update ω to minimize Lcritic according to Eq. (9) Update θ to minimize Lactor according to Eq. (10) 

end for end while Components of world model Wϕ

Observation encoder: qϕ(et | ot)

Observation decoder: pϕ(ˆ ot | et)

Sequence model: fϕ(τ e,a  

> 1: t

)

Latent dynamics predictor: pϕ(ˆ et+1 | ht)

Continuation predictor: pϕ(ˆ ct | ht)

Task embedding projector: qϕ(z | hz )

Algorithm 2 Meta-testing 

Require: A set of testing tasks M = {Mi}Ntest  

> i=1

, learned policy πθ , world model Wϕ, initial exploration length Lc

for each task Mi do 

Initialize context buffer c = Queue(maxlen = Lc)

for t = 0 , ..., T − 1 do if t < L c then 

Agent samples a random action at to roll out (st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

)

else 

Compute task embedding z ∼ qϕ(z | hz ), where hz = Wϕ(c)

Agent uses at ∼ πθ (·| s, z ) to roll out (st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

)

end if 

Push transition (st, a t, r t, s ′

> t

) into c

end for 

Compute episode return for evaluation 

end for 

15 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

## D. Additional Experiments 

D.1. Offline Meta-Testing Performance MetaSTAR  CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  UNICORN  

> Figure 7. Average offline meta-testing performance on 4 dense-reward environments and 4 sparse-reward environments.

Figure 7 reports the average offline meta-testing performance on four dense-reward environments and four sparse-reward environments. This protocol allows us to quantify the performance penalty caused by the mismatch between the behavior policies used for offline data collection and the exploration policy used during online adaptation. Under offline testing, all methods generally achieve improved performance compared with online testing, since they can infer tasks from pre-collected contexts without facing online context shift. Nevertheless, MetaSTAR remains competitive or superior in most environments under this idealized setting. This indicates that its performance gain does not solely come from handling online context collection, but also from stronger task representation learning and more reliable policy optimization. Comparing the offline and online testing curves further reveals the sensitivity of different methods to the source of context. Several baselines benefit substantially from pre-collected offline contexts, but their performance degrades when they are required to infer tasks from online contexts collected by the learned policy. In contrast, MetaSTAR exhibits a smaller performance gap between offline and online testing, indicating better robustness to changes in the context-collection policy and more reliable offline-to-online adaptation. 

D.2. Online Adaptation on In-Distribution Tasks MetaSTAR  CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  UNICORN  

> Figure 8. Average online adaptation performance of the first five episodes on in-distribution tasks.

Figure 8 reports the average online adaptation performance over the first five episodes on in-distribution tasks. Under the ID setting, several baselines, achieve competitive adaptation performance, indicating that their learned task representations can 16 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

handle moderate context shifts when the test tasks remain close to the training distribution. However, comparing these ID results with the OOD adaptation results in Figure 4 reveals a clear difference. Some baselines that perform well on ID tasks suffer substantial degradation under OOD tasks, suggesting that mitigating context shift alone may not be sufficient for robust offline-to-online adaptation when policy distribution shift and task distribution shift become more severe. In contrast, MetaSTAR maintains strong performance in both ID and OOD settings. This supports the effectiveness of combining behavior-invariant task representation learning with conservative policy optimization for more reliable online adaptation. 

D.3. Additional t-SNE Visualizations of Task Representations 

We provide additional t-SNE visualizations of task representations under online testing in both dense-reward and sparse-reward environments. These visualizations complement the quantitative results by showing how task embeddings are organized when contexts are collected online by the agent rather than sampled from pre-collected offline data. Since online contexts may differ substantially from the offline training contexts, a well-structured embedding space indicates that the representation is less sensitive to the behavior policy and more aligned with task-relevant information. CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  UNICORN  MetaSTAR  

> Ant -Dir Cheetah -Vel Hopper -Param Walker -Param
> Figure 9. T-SNE visualization of the task representation with online testing in dense-reward environments.

Figure 9 shows the results on dense-reward environments. MetaSTAR produces structured latent clusters, where samples from the same task are generally grouped together and different tasks are better separated. This suggests that the learned representation can preserve task identity even when the context is collected through online interaction. In relatively simpler environments such as Cheetah-Vel and Walker-Param, some baselines also produce recognizable clusters, indicating that dense rewards provide sufficient task-identifying signals for these methods. However, in more challenging environments such as Ant-Dir and Hopper-Param, the baseline representations become less structured and show more overlap across tasks. This suggests that their task embeddings are more sensitive to variations in the collected online contexts and may capture behavior-induced correlations rather than task-relevant dynamics. 17 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL Cheetah -Vel -Sparse  Point -Robot -Sparse Hopper -Param -Sparse Walker -Param -Sparse      

> CORRO CSRO FOCAL UNICORN MetaSTAR
> Figure 10. T-SNE visualization of the task representation with online testing in sparse-reward environments.

Figure 10 shows the visualization results on sparse-reward environments. Compared with dense-reward tasks, sparse-reward settings provide weaker and less frequent task-identifying signals, making task inference more challenging. Under this setting, MetaSTAR still maintains clearer cluster structures than the baselines, with embeddings from the same task grouped more consistently and different tasks better separated. In contrast, the baseline methods exhibit more overlap and less organized latent structures, suggesting that sparse feedback makes their task representations more vulnerable to context variation and behavior-induced bias. This result is consistent with the design of MetaSTAR. The FOCAL metric objective encourages embeddings from the same task to be close and those from different tasks to be separated, while the world-model dynamics objective encourages the representation to preserve transition-related and reward-related predictive information. These two objectives provide complementary supervision: the former improves task-level discriminability, and the latter encourages dynamics-centric representations that are less dependent on behavior policies. Together, they help MetaSTAR learn more structured task representations under online testing, especially when sparse rewards make direct task identification difficult. 

D.4. Additional Euclidean Distance Analysis of Task Representations 

To further examine whether the learned representation space preserves meaningful task relationships on unseen tasks, we provide additional Euclidean distance matrices of task representations on Cheetah-Vel and Point-Robot-Sparse. Unlike t-SNE visualizations, which provide a qualitative two-dimensional projection, the distance matrices directly measure pairwise distances between task embeddings in the learned representation space. Therefore, they offer a complementary view of whether the learned embeddings reflect the semantic relationships among tasks. Figure 11 shows the results on Cheetah-Vel, where the task goal is the target velocity sampled from [0.0, 3.0]. Since 18 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  

> UNICORN MetaSTAR

Figure 11. Euclidean distance of task representations on Cheetah-Vel. 

Cheetah-Vel is a relatively simple dense-reward task, most methods can capture a meaningful distance pattern to some extent: tasks with similar target velocities tend to be closer in the learned representation space, while tasks with larger velocity gaps are generally farther apart. MetaSTAR also preserves this locally smooth structure, indicating that its task embeddings are aligned with the underlying velocity semantics. CORRO  CSRO  FOCAL  

> UNICORN MetaSTAR

Figure 12. Euclidean distance of task representations on Point-Robot-Sparse. 

Figure 12 shows the results on Point-Robot-Sparse, where the goal position is (cos θ, sin θ) and θ is sampled from [0.0, π]. MetaSTAR also produces a distance pattern that is broadly consistent with the underlying task geometry: tasks with closer goal positions or similar angular structure tend to have smaller representation distances. This indicates that the representation learned by MetaSTAR captures geometric relationships among sparse-reward tasks, even though reward feedback is limited and task-identifying signals are harder to observe. We also note that angular distance alone does not always fully determine the representation distance in Point-Robot-Sparse. Some tasks with relatively different angles may still appear closer in the learned representation space because their goal positions share similar geometric components, such as similar sin θ values. 19 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

This behavior is reasonable because the task is defined by the position (cos θ, sin θ) rather than by the scalar angle alone. 

D.5. Ablation Results MetaSTAR  w/o ℒ𝑊𝑀  w/o Conservative Policy Optimization  w/o ℒ𝑊𝑀 and Conservative Policy Optimization 

Figure 13. Ablation study on online testing across 8 environments, to compare MetaSTAR with methods that without conservative policy optimization and/or LWM .MetaSTAR  w/o ℒ𝑊𝑀  w/o Conservative Policy Optimization  w/o ℒ𝑊𝑀 and Conservative Policy Optimization 

Figure 14. Ablation study on offline testing across 8 environments, to compare MetaSTAR with methods that without conservative policy optimization and/or LWM .

Figure 13 and Figure 14 provide the full online and offline ablation curves across eight environments, complementing the ablation summary in the main text. The ablated variants remove either the world-model objective LWM , conservative policy optimization, or both components. These curves allow us to examine not only the final performance but also the training dynamics of different variants. We first observe that removing LWM generally weakens performance across most environments. This effect is more visible in tasks where task inference is crucial for adaptation, such as Ant-Dir and sparse-reward environments. Without the world-model dynamics objective, the task representation is mainly shaped by metric-level separation, but receives less direct supervision from transition- and reward-related prediction. Consequently, the learned embedding may be less informative about the underlying task dynamics, which can further affect downstream policy learning. Removing conservative policy optimization also leads to performance degradation in many settings, especially in online testing. This is consistent with the role of the conservative objective: when imagined rollouts are used for policy improvement, the policy may otherwise exploit unsupported state-action regions or model prediction errors. By penalizing overly optimistic values on policy-induced regions that are insufficiently supported by the offline data, conservative policy optimization 20 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

stabilizes imagination-based policy learning. When both components are removed, the model becomes a simplified metric-learning variant without latent dynamics learning or conservative imagination-based policy optimization. This variant usually suffers the largest degradation, particularly in sparse-reward environments. This suggests that metric-based representation learning alone is not sufficient for robust adaptation when task-identifying reward signals are limited and the policy must generalize from static offline data. The offline curves in Figure 14 show a similar trend, but the gaps between variants are sometimes smaller than those in online testing. This is expected because offline testing uses pre-collected contexts and therefore avoids part of the context distribution shift introduced by online exploration. In contrast, online testing in Figure 13 better reflects the deployment setting, where both task inference and policy learning are affected by the mismatch between offline data and online interaction. Finally, the contribution of conservative policy optimization is task-dependent. In some dense-reward environments, such as Hopper-Param, removing conservative policy optimization can slightly improve performance. One possible explanation is that dense rewards and relatively informative offline trajectories reduce the need for additional imagined data, while model-generated rollouts may introduce extra bias. Nevertheless, across the full set of environments, the results support the complementary roles of the two components: LWM improves task representation under context distribution shift, while conservative policy optimization stabilizes policy learning under policy distribution shift. 

D.6. Effect of Previous Reward in Observations Online  Offline      

> MetaSTAR w/o Previous Reward 𝑟 𝑡 −1
> Figure 15. Effect of removing the previous reward rt−1from the world-model observation on Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse.

We additionally ablate the use of the previous reward rt−1 in the world-model observation, where the observation is defined as ot = [ st, r t−1]. Figure 15 compares the full MetaSTAR with a variant that removes rt−1 from the observation. The results show that previous reward is an important component of MetaSTAR rather than an incidental implementation detail. On Cheetah-Vel, removing rt−1 leads to clear performance degradation in both offline and online testing, with a more pronounced drop in the online setting. On Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, the performance also decreases noticeably after removing rt−1, suggesting that previous reward still provides useful task-related cues even when rewards are sparse. On Point-Robot-Sparse, the offline testing gap is relatively small, but online adaptation becomes substantially worse without 

rt−1. These results indicate that rt−1 serves as an additional temporal signal for task inference. Although previous rewards are often zero in sparse-reward tasks, their occurrence pattern still carries information about the reward structure and helps the world model associate latent dynamics with task-specific feedback. This signal is particularly useful during online adaptation, where contexts are collected by the agent’s exploration policy rather than sampled from the offline behavior data. Without this reward signal, the task representation becomes less informative, leading to weaker adaptation under context distribution shift. 21 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

D.7. Effect of the Contrastive Loss Weight Online  Offline    

> 1.00
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 2.00
> Figure 16. Different hyperparameter settings of λon Cheetah-Vel-Sparse.

We conduct a sensitivity analysis on the contrastive loss weight λ in Eq. (8) . As shown in Figure 16, when λ > 0,different values mainly affect the convergence speed in the early stage of training, while having limited influence on the final asymptotic performance. This suggests that the world-model objective LWM already provides a stable foundation for task representation learning, while the contrastive objective mainly serves as an auxiliary regularizer that improves task discriminability and accelerates representation convergence. Even with a relatively small λ, MetaSTAR can still extract task-relevant information and support stable policy learning. As λ increases, the contrastive constraint can separate embeddings of different tasks more quickly in the early stage, leading to faster convergence. However, once the task representations become stable, its marginal contribution to final performance becomes less pronounced. 

D.8. Effect of the Conservative Penalty Weight 

We further analyze the effect of the conservative penalty weight β in conservative meta-value evaluation. Figure 17 shows the results on Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse. On Cheetah-Vel and Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, a large value such as β = 5 .0 noticeably reduces online testing performance, while smaller or moderate values, such as 

β = 0 .5 and β = 1 .0, perform better. This suggests that overly strong conservatism can suppress policy improvement by penalizing potentially useful imagined state-action regions. In contrast, the performance differences on Point-Robot-Sparse are relatively small, indicating that this task is less sensitive to the conservative penalty strength. Online  Offline     

> 𝛽 =1.0 𝛽 =5.0 𝛽 =0.5
> Figure 17. Effect of the conservative penalty weight βon Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse.

Mechanistically, β controls the strength of pessimistic regularization on unsupported state-action regions, forming a trade-off between exploiting world-model imagination and suppressing model-error propagation. When β is small, the policy can 22 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

more actively use imagined transitions for optimization, which may improve adaptation but also increases the risk of value overestimation caused by model errors. When β is large, the critic imposes stronger penalties on policy-induced regions, which can improve stability but may also lead to overly pessimistic value estimates and limit the upper bound of policy performance. This trade-off is task-dependent. In dense-reward tasks such as Cheetah-Vel, the offline data often already contain informative trajectories, so excessive conservatism may unnecessarily restrict policy improvement. In Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, imagined rollouts are more useful for extending task-relevant experience, but an overly large β can suppress the benefit of such rollouts. For Point-Robot-Sparse, the task structure is relatively simple and easier to identify from limited context, so the policy is less sensitive to the exact value of β.

D.9. Effect of the Context Length in Imagination Online  Offline     

> L=8 L=1
> Figure 18. Effect of the context length Lin contextual imagination on Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse.

We also investigate the role of the real context length L in contextual imagination by comparing L = 1 and L = 8 . As shown in Figure 18, a longer context prefix generally improves performance. On Cheetah-Vel, L = 8 clearly outperforms 

L = 1 in both offline and online testing, with a more pronounced advantage in online testing. On Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, 

L = 8 also performs better overall, although the gap is smaller. On Point-Robot-Sparse, the two settings achieve similar performance, suggesting that this environment is less sensitive to the context length. These results indicate that the real context prefix plays an important role in world-model-based task inference and imagination. A longer context provides more task-relevant evidence before imagined rollouts are generated, allowing the world model to build a more consistent latent history and reducing ambiguity about the underlying MDP. In contrast, an overly short context, such as L = 1 , may be insufficient to characterize the current task, especially in environments that require fine-grained task identification. This can lead to less stable task representations and weaker online adaptation. The effect of L also depends on the environment. In Cheetah-Vel, although single-step transitions already contain some task information, a longer context still improves the consistency of task inference and brings clearer gains during online adaptation. In Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, the reward signal is less informative, so task identification relies more on transition patterns; increasing L remains beneficial, but the improvement is smaller due to the limited task-identifying feedback. In Point-Robot-Sparse, the effective task information contained in short online contexts can be very limited under sparse rewards. Therefore, performance is less determined by context length itself and more by whether the sampled context contains informative transitions, making this environment relatively insensitive to the choice of L.

D.10. Effect of the Imagination Horizon 

We then evaluate the influence of the imagination horizon H in contextual imagination. Figure 19 shows the results on Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse. On Cheetah-Vel, larger values of H slightly slow down early-stage convergence, but different settings eventually reach similar final performance. On Cheetah-Vel-Sparse and 23 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL Online  Offline       

> H=1 H=2 H=4 H=8
> Figure 19. Effect of the imagination horizon Hon Cheetah-Vel, Cheetah-Vel-Sparse, and Point-Robot-Sparse.

Point-Robot-Sparse, the influence of H is also relatively mild, suggesting that MetaSTAR is not highly sensitive to the imagination horizon within the tested range. This result reflects the trade-off in imagination-based policy optimization. A longer horizon provides more imagined transitions for policy learning, but it may also introduce additional model bias through accumulated prediction errors. In dense-reward tasks such as Cheetah-Vel, reward signals are frequent and already provide sufficient learning feedback, so a short imagination horizon is usually enough for local model-based augmentation while reducing unnecessary error accumulation. In sparse-reward tasks, reward feedback is much less frequent, and moderately longer context-conditioned rollouts can provide additional imagined transitions that may help policy learning under limited feedback. Therefore, we can use a short horizon for dense-reward tasks and a moderately longer horizon for sparse-reward tasks. This choice reflects the different role of imagination in the two settings: dense rewards provide frequent learning signals, whereas sparse rewards can benefit from additional context-conditioned imagined transitions. Importantly, the purpose of imagination in MetaSTAR is to conservatively expand the effective support region around real offline contexts, rather than to perform deep trajectory planning as in Dreamer-style agents. Overall, the results indicate that MetaSTAR only requires short-to-moderate horizon imagination for conservative policy learning, while the world model itself still learns task-relevant latent dynamics from full historical contexts. 

D.11. Training Time Analysis 

To evaluate the computational cost of MetaSTAR, we report the total offline training time of MetaSTAR and the baseline methods under the same experimental setup. All results are measured on a single RTX 4090 GPU, as shown in Table 3. We note that the absolute wall-clock time may vary across machines due to differences in CPU performance, memory bandwidth, data loading efficiency, and software configuration. Therefore, the table should be interpreted mainly as a relative comparison under the same hardware and implementation setting.                                                                                                                               

> Table 3. Training time comparison on a single RTX 4090 GPU, measured in hours.
> Environment CORRO CSRO FOCAL UNICORN MetaSTAR
> Ant-Dir 8.5±2.411 .6±1.712 .1±2.610 .8±0.715 .2±4.4
> Cheetah-Vel 10 .6±2.518 .2±0.317 .0±0.919 .4±2.423 .5±0.5
> Hopper-Param 9.6±2.016 .1±4.013 .8±3.217 .5±4.321 .7±2.1
> Walker-Param 8.9±3.313 .2±4.712 .2±4.614 .2±4.917 .1±4.8
> Point-Robot-Sparse 6.5±2.38.8±1.88.7±1.79.2±2.713 .0±1.7
> Cheetah-Vel-Sparse 9.4±2.211 .5±1.010 .9±0.613 .3±0.717 .5±1.1
> Hopper-Param-Sparse 6.2±1.77.5±0.47.3±0.210 .3±1.313 .8±0.5
> Walker-Param-Sparse 9.4±1.016 .6±2.116 .0±0.217 .8±0.520 .9±3.5

24 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

Overall, under the same setting, MetaSTAR requires longer offline training time than the model-free baselines. This additional cost mainly comes from two components. First, MetaSTAR trains a stochastic Transformer-based world model, which introduces sequence modeling and latent dynamics prediction beyond standard context-encoder training. Second, during agent learning, MetaSTAR performs contextual imagination on the fly and optimizes the critic using both real and imagined transitions, increasing the cost of each update. This overhead reflects a trade-off between computational cost and robustness. In offline meta-RL, training is performed once using static datasets, without requiring additional environment interactions. Moreover, at meta-test time, MetaSTAR only needs to infer the task representation and execute the policy through forward passes, so the additional cost is primarily concentrated in offline training rather than deployment. Improving the efficiency of world-model training and imagination-based policy optimization is an important direction for future work. 

## E. Context-based Offline Meta-RL Baselines 

FOCAL (Li et al., 2020) employs a deterministic context encoder trained via a negative-power distance metric to learn task representations on a bounded embedding space. The framework detaches the metric learning from the Bellman update to mitigate gradient interference during training. Built on the principles of Behavior Regularized Actor-Critic (BRAC), the algorithm addresses value function divergence and distributional shift by regularizing the learned policy against the behavior policy. 

CORRO (Yuan & Lu, 2022) is designed to learn robust task representations under behavior-policy mismatch. It features a bi-level task encoder where the first level extracts latent representations from individual transition tuples, rather than full trajectories, while the second level aggregates these representations into a task embedding. The framework employs a contrastive learning objective, formalized as mutual information maximization, to separate task-relevant information from behavior policy features. To optimize this objective, CORRO generates negative pairs using generative modeling via a Conditional VAE (CVAE) or through reward randomization. These task embeddings are then used to condition the policy and value functions within an offline reinforcement learning backbone. 

CSRO (Gao et al., 2023) is proposed to address the context-shift issue. During the meta-training phase, the framework employs a max-min mutual information representation learning mechanism. This mechanism uses the CLUB (Contrastive Log-ratio Upper Bound) estimator to minimize the mutual information between task representations and behavior policies while maximizing the mutual information between representations and task-specific information. In the meta-test phase, CSRO utilizes a non-prior context collection strategy, where the agent performs initial random exploration to gather transition data before updating its task posterior, thereby reducing the influence of biased initial task priors. The framework is typically implemented with Behavior Regularized Actor-Critic (BRAC) as the offline backbone to handle value function estimation and policy regularization. 

UNICORN (Li et al., 2024) provides a theoretical consolidation of existing methodologies by framing task representation learning as the optimization of mutual information I(Z; M ) between the task variable M and its latent representation 

Z. Specifically, the framework demonstrates that prior algorithms—such as FOCAL, CORRO, and CSRO—function as mathematical upper bounds, lower bounds, or linear interpolations of this mutual information objective. UNICORN introduces two primary instantiations: UNICORN-SUP, a supervised variant that utilizes cross-entropy loss for direct estimation, and UNICORN-SS, a self-supervised variant that combines contrastive objectives with generative reconstruction-based regularization. By seeking tighter approximations of I(Z; M ), the framework aims to trade off causal and spurious correlations to enhance robustness against context shift and improve generalization in out-of-distribution scenarios. 

## F. Environments and Implementation Details 

Ant-Dir. The Ant-Dir environment requires controlling an ant robot to move along a target direction on the plane. For each task, a goal direction θ ∈ [0 , 2π) is sampled, which defines a unit direction vector d = (cos θ, sin θ). The reward encourages the agent to move along the specified direction by measuring its directional velocity. The state space contains the ant’s joint positions, joint velocities, and body posture information, while the action space consists of continuous motor torques applied to the robot joints. 25 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL  

> Table 4. Episode length and goal settings of environments used.

Environments Max steps Goal type Goal range ID tasks OOD tasks per episode Range Range 

Ant-Dir 200 Direction [0, 2π) [ π 

> 4

, 7π 

> 4

] [0, π 

> 4

) ∪ ( 7π 

> 4

, 2π)Point-Robot-Sparse 60 Position [0, π] [ π 

> 8

, 7π 

> 8

] [0, π 

> 8

) ∪ ( 7π 

> 8

, π]Cheetah-Vel 200 Velocity [0, 3] [0.5, 2.5] [0, 0.5) ∪ (2.5, 3] Cheetah-Vel-Sparse 200 Velocity [0, 3] [0.5, 2.5] [0, 0.5) ∪ (2.5, 3] Hopper-Param 200 Body mass and geom friction 

1.5[−3,3] 

/ /Hopper-Param-Sparse 200 / /Walker-Param 200 / /Walker-Param-Sparse 200 / /

Point-Robot-Sparse. The Point-Robot-Sparse environment requires a point robot to navigate to a target position randomly placed on a unit half-circle. At the beginning of each episode, a goal position is sampled on the half-circle with radius 1.The agent receives a reward only when it enters a radius of 0.2 around the target. The observation consists of the current position of the robot, and the action controls movement along the x and y directions. Since rewards are provided only near the target, the sparse reward structure makes the task challenging and requires the agent to learn effective navigation with limited feedback. 

Cheetah-Vel. The Cheetah-Vel environment requires controlling a HalfCheetah robot to reach and maintain a target velocity. For each task, the target velocity v⋆ is sampled uniformly from [0 .0, 3.0] . At each time step, the agent is rewarded according to how well its current velocity matches the target velocity, with a control regularization term. The reward is given by −| vt − v⋆| − 0.05 ∥at∥22, where vt = ( xt+1 − xt)/∆t, and the second term penalizes large actions. The state space contains the joint positions, joint velocities, and body posture information of the HalfCheetah robot, while the action space consists of continuous motor torques. 

Cheetah-Vel-Sparse. Cheetah-Vel-Sparse follows the same setting as Cheetah-Vel, except that it uses a sparse reward mechanism. Specifically, the agent receives a reward only when the difference between its current velocity and the target velocity is within a tolerance threshold, with goal radius 0.5; otherwise, the reward is zero. This sparse feedback makes velocity adaptation more challenging than in the dense-reward version. 

Hopper-Param. The Hopper-Param environment requires controlling a planar one-legged hopper to remain upright and move forward under randomized dynamics. At the beginning of each task, key physical parameters are perturbed by multiplicative log-scale factors: the body mass and ground friction coefficient are scaled by 1.5u, where u ∼ Uniform[ −3, 3] .The state space consists of the hopper’s joint positions, joint velocities, and body posture information, while the action space consists of continuous motor torques. The reward encourages efficient forward locomotion and is given by the forward velocity (xt+1 − xt)/∆t plus an alive bonus of 1.0, minus a small control penalty 10 −3∥at∥22.

Hopper-Param-Sparse. Hopper-Param-Sparse also controls a planar one-legged hopper under randomized dynamics, but uses a sparse velocity-tracking objective. Let dt = |vt − 1.5| denote the deviation between the current velocity and the target velocity 1.5. The reward is provided only when the agent is close to the target velocity: if dt > 0.5, the reward is 0;otherwise, the reward is 0.8 − dt. A control cost 10 −3∥at∥22 is subtracted, and no alive bonus is used. This sparse feedback structure provides limited guidance and makes the task more difficult. 

Walker-Param. The Walker-Param environment controls a planar Walker2D robot to remain upright and move forward under randomized dynamics. At the beginning of each task, the body mass and ground friction coefficient are scaled by 

1.5u, where u ∼ Uniform[ −3, 3] . The state space contains the Walker2D robot’s joint positions, joint velocities, and body posture information, while the action space consists of continuous motor torques. The reward encourages efficient forward locomotion and is given by the forward velocity (xt+1 − xt)/∆t plus an alive bonus of 1.0, minus a small control penalty 

10 −3∥at∥22.26 Behavior-Invariant Task Representation Learning with Transformer-based World Models for Offline Meta-RL 

Walker-Param-Sparse. Walker-Param-Sparse modifies Walker-Param by replacing the dense locomotion reward with a sparse velocity-tracking objective. The reward is determined by the deviation dt = |vt − 1.5| between the current velocity and the target velocity 1.5. If dt > 0.5, the reward is 0; otherwise, the reward is 0.8 − dt. In addition, a control cost 

10 −3∥at∥22 is subtracted to penalize large actions, and no alive bonus is used. 

## G. Hyperparameters 

Table 5. Hyperparameter settings for MetaSTAR in different environments. 

Parameter Ant-Dir Point-Robot-Sparse Cheetah-Vel Hopper-Param Walker-Param Name /-Sparse /-Sparse /-Sparse 

Number of Tasks 40 40 40 40 40 Number of Training Tasks 30 30 30 30 30 Number of Evaluation Tasks 10 10 10 10 10 Number of Offline Episodes 1 1 1 1 1Number of Online Episodes 2 2 2 2 2Number of Iterations 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 RL Updates per Iteration 200 200 200 200 200 RL Batch Size 256 256 256 256 256 Task Batch Size 16 16 16 16 16 Context Size 100 30 100 100 100 Policy Layers [256, 256] [128, 128] [256, 256] [256, 256] [256, 256] World Model Learning Rate 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 Actor Learning Rate 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 Critic Learning Rate 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 0.0003 Discount Factor ( γ) 0.99 0.9 0.99 0.99 0.99 Entropy Alpha 0.2 0.01 0.2 0.2 0.2 Transformer Hidden Size 256 128 256 256 256 Number of Transformer Layers 2 2 2 2 2Number of Transformer Heads 4 4 4 4 4Contrastive Loss Weight ( λ) 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 Conservative Penalty Weight ( β) 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Context Length of Imagination 8 8 8 8 8Imagination Horizon 1 4 1/8 1/8 1/8 Task Embedding Size 5 5 5 40 32 

27