Title: Asynchronous Probability Ensembling for Federated Disaster Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14450v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:20:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Asynchronous Probability Ensembling for Federated Disaster Detection 

Emanuel Teixeira Martins 1, Rodrigo Moreira 1, Larissa Ferreira Rodrigues Moreira 1,Rodolfo S. Villac ¸a 2, Augusto Neto 3, Fl´ avio de Oliveira Silva 4

> 1

Federal University of Vic ¸osa (UFV), Rio Parana´ ıba-MG, Brazil 

> 2

Federal University of Espirito Santo (UFES), Vit´ oria-ES, Brazil 

> 3

Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Natal-RN, Brazil 

> 4

University of Minho (UMinho), Braga, Portugal Emails: {emanuel.martins, rodrigo, larissa.f.rodrigues }@ufv.br, rodolfo.villaca@ufes.br, augusto@dimap.ufrn.br, flavio@di.uminho.pt 

Abstract —Quick and accurate emergency handling in Disaster Decision Support Systems (DDSS) is often hampered by network latency and suboptimal application accuracy. While Federated Learning (FL) addresses some of these issues, it is constrained by high communication costs and rigid synchronization require-ments across heterogeneous convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures. To overcome these challenges, this paper proposes a decentralized ensembling framework based on asynchronous probability aggregation and feedback distillation. By shifting the exchange unit from model weights to class-probability vectors, our method maintains data privacy, reduces communication requirements by orders of magnitude, and improves overall accuracy. This approach enables diverse CNN designs to col-laborate asynchronously, enhancing disaster image identification performance even in resource-constrained settings. Experimental tests demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms tradi-tional individual backbones and standard federated approaches, establishing a scalable and resource-aware solution for real-time disaster response. 

Index Terms —Federated Learning, Ensemble Learning, Prob-ability Aggregation, Stacking, MQTT. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Timely and reliable identification of disasters from field images is a critical requirement in emergency response, particularly when sensing is performed by heterogeneous edge devices, such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and smartphones, under intermittent connectivity [1], [2]. In these environments, network resources are constrained by damaged infrastructure, whereas devices vary significantly in computational and storage capacity. Federated Learning (FL) offers a natural way to leverage decentralized data without centralizing sensitive content. However, deployments face per-sistent limitations, including non-Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) data, class imbalance, detection of selfish learners, and costly parameter exchange [3]–[5]. These issues are particularly damaging in disaster response scenarios, where delayed or biased predictions can significantly affect decision-making. Although FL pioneered a vital privacy-preserving paradigm [6], its reliance on synchronized weight sharing is ill-suited for disaster identification. This core mechanism is impractical for fragile networks and vulnerable to biases from unreliable clients [5]. Traditionally, layering ensemble methods onto this framework worsens the communication bottleneck by requiring the sharing of entire models [7], [8]. This suggests that the core FL idea of client collaboration is highly beneficial, not only for the costly exchange of model weights but also as an inspiration for lightweight ensemble methods. This approach avoids the high synchronization and communication costs that render conventional techniques ineffective for time-critical disaster responses. To address this challenge, we propose a probability-level training scheme that aggregates softmax vectors instead of gra-dients or weights. Clients publish class-probability outputs to a lightweight Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) broker, and the server consumes them asynchronously to learn either a stacking meta-classifier or optimized combination weights. Operating at the prediction level, our method tol-erates heterogeneous Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) backbones, reduces payload size, and remains robust to client drop-offs by avoiding global synchronization. It also includes a knowledge distillation feedback loop that lets local models refine predictions from the aggregated ensemble distribution. Our novelty lies in the design of training and coordination, not in a new backbone or classifier, enabling asynchronous collaboration in the probability space without sharing raw data or model parameters. Although FL extensions address non-IID data, class imbal-ance, and heterogeneity, many deployments still depend on synchronized rounds and repeated parameter exchange, which is costly and brittle under intermittent connectivity. We do not replace these methods; instead, we complement them by exchanging class probability vectors rather than parameters, enabling asynchronous participation and architectural hetero-geneity with much lower payloads. The main contributions of this study are as follows: (i) we identify the key limitations of FL in disaster response, including synchronization overhead, vulnerability to poisoned or biased updates, and high communication cost; (ii) we propose an asynchronous probability-level aggregation frame-work that preserves privacy, reduces network load, and lever-ages architectural heterogeneity; (iii) we integrate ensemble 

> arXiv:2604.14450v1 [cs.LG] 15 Apr 2026

strategies, stacking, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), and a probability-level distillation loop, so local models benefit from global consensus without weight exchange; and (iv) we evaluate the Aerial Image Database for Emergency Response applications (AIDER) dataset with multiple CNN backbones, showing accuracy comparable to or exceeding centralized and federated approaches while drasti-cally reducing communication overhead. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II reviews prior work on ensemble learning in distributed settings. Section III describes our method and distillation approach, Section IV details the testbed, Section V reports results, and Section VI concludes the paper. II. R ELATED WORK 

This section reviews related work on federated ensembling and communication-efficient learning, situating our method as an asynchronous, probability-level alternative. Mabrouk et al. [7] proposed an ensemble FL for pneumo-nia detection, where hospitals trained multiple Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and shared local ensembles for global aggregation. Unlike this parameter-level exchange, our approach aggregates softmax vectors asynchronously, reducing communication and enabling heterogeneous participation. Gao et al. [9] investigated cognitive data fusing for Inter-net of Things (IoT) prognostics, combining Federated En-semble Learning (FEL) with pruning and adaptive selection to improve resilience. Our approach instead performs direct probability-level aggregation, reducing synchronization costs while supporting diverse CNN backbones for disaster re-sponse. Zhao et al. [10] proposed a byzantine-robust ensemble incentive mechanism for FL, building multiple global mod-els and aggregating them with a distance-based rule while rewarding honest clients. While their focus is on adversarial robustness at the model level, our method operates in the probability space via asynchronous softmax aggregation to enable efficient disaster identification. Sievers et al. [11] applied a mixture-of-experts architecture in FL for smart grid energy forecasting, improving accuracy and reducing training time under non-IID conditions. Akram et al. [12] introduced Personalized Conditional Federated Aver-aging (PC-FedAvg), a conditional FL scheme for post-disaster structural health monitoring. By selectively aggregating client models with low validation loss, their method improves ro-bustness for non-IID data. Our method, however, broadens scalability by shifting aggregation from weights to probability vectors, making it lightweight and tolerant to architectural heterogeneity. Xu et al. [13] presented an adaptive sampling-based FEL for aircraft remaining functional life prediction. By combining multiple deep models and prioritizing clients with lower data quality, the robustness under heterogeneous conditions was enhanced. Our approach follows a different path, employing asynchronous probability-level fusion to achieve efficiency in bandwidth-constrained disaster identification. Hajla et al. [14] proposed a hybrid FEL for intrusion detection in IoT networks, combining traditional classifiers via majority voting to improve accuracy and resilience. Although effective, reliance on conventional models limits representa-tional capacity, whereas our method exploits deep CNN back-bones and asynchronous probability aggregation to achieve scalable, communication-efficient disaster identification. Sheth et al. [15] propose an ensemble for natural disaster image classification that fuses an InceptionV3-based model with a custom CNN, trained on a Kaggle dataset with cyclone, wildfire, flood, and earthquake classes. It reports that the ensemble outperforms the individual models, achieving about 92.79 percent accuracy for this multi-class setting. Wong et al. [16] propose an optimized multi-task learning model that jointly performs disaster classification and victim detection by attaching a pruned head to a backbone network, and by selecting the branching location and the pruned head depth. It evaluates this design in federated learning environ-ments using FedAvg and production tools such as OpenFL and OpenVINO, showing reduced memory requirements and approximately 1-2% higher classification accuracy while main-taining comparable detection performance. Table I summarizes the related work with these columns: “Field” indicates the problem domain; FEL (prob.) states whether it exchanges prediction outputs, such as probabilities or logits; Client Selection indicates whether a strategy actively chooses clients. This is a design choice of our approach: by dispensing with client selection, our strategy gains robustness and fairness, naturally absorbing intermittent participation while avoiding coordination and subset-management overhead; “Async. Training” highlights whether the method supports asynchronous participation without global synchronization; “Heterogeneous Models” shows the ability to combine differ-ent CNN backbones; and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Models lists which models are used. Beyond federated ensembling, our approach aligns with decentralized classification, where agents send belief vectors to a fusion center using a maximum a posteriori rule. Since disaster imagery from heterogeneous sensors requires deep, calibrated representations, our method acts as a practical probability-level fusion and feedback mechanism for deep visual pipelines under intermittent connectivity. 

Contribution Positioning . Several communication-efficient and heterogeneity-aware FL methods, such as FedProx [17] and SCAFFOLD [18], remain important baselines when pa-rameter exchange is feasible. Related federated distillation and logit-sharing families, such as FedMD and FedDF, are also relevant points of reference for probability-level collaboration. Our contribution is positioned as a lightweight asynchronous alternative, not as a comprehensive empirical replacement for all these families under matched budgets. III. P ROPOSED METHOD 

In this section, we present the rationale of our approach, an asynchronous method for probability aggregation in distributed training scenarios. TABLE I COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORK . T HE SYMBOLS DENOTE FULL SUPPORT (○), PARTIAL OR ADAPTIVE SUPPORT (è), AND NO SUPPORT (○␣ ).                                                               

> Work Field FEL (prob.) Client Selection Async. Training Heterogeneous Models AI Models
> [7] Healthcare ○␣ ○␣ ○␣ èMultiple CNNs [9] Healthcare ○è○␣ ○␣ ResNet-20 [10] Adversarial FL ○␣ ○○␣ ○␣ Multiple CNNs [11] Smart Grids ○␣ ○○␣ ○␣ LSTM, CNN, Transformer [12] Infrastructure Monitoring ○␣ ○○␣ ○␣ EfficientNet [13] Aviation ○␣ ○○␣ ○␣ LSTM, CNN [14] IoT Security è○␣ ○␣ ○␣ MLP, RF, XGBoost [15] Disaster Response ○␣ ○␣ ○␣ ○InceptionV3, CNN [16] Disaster Response ○␣ è○␣ ○␣ YOLOv3, MobileNetV2
> Ours Disaster Response ○○␣ ○○Multiple CNNs

A. Asynchronous Architecture 

Our method is a probability-level, FL-inspired training scheme designed to enhance communication efficiency, scal-ability, and robustness. Rather than exchanging gradients or model weights standards in FL [19], clients publish only their softmax probability vectors via an MQTT broker. These lightweight vectors are aggregated asynchronously at the server. Clients may join at any time; if a client fails to send outputs in a round, training is not interrupted, and the server aggregates the available information. Optionally, the server broadcasts the stacked (aggregated) predictor to clients, en-abling them to benefit from global knowledge without sharing raw data or parameters. Our method is depicted in Fig. 1. Async.      

> Buffer
> •Averaging
> •Voting
> •Stacking
> •Stacking with GA
> •Stacking with PSO
> Local Model
> Training
> Ensemble -aggregated
> probabilities
> Aggregator

Fig. 1. General overview of our method. 

In the initial phase (1) of our methodology, clients train their models locally using their own architectures and publish the probabilities in queues. In phase two (2), the aggregator collects the probability vectors upon reaching a minimum number of contributions. During phase three (3), our approach employs various stacking methods to achieve higher accuracy on the test set. Finally, in phase four (4), the server returns the probability vector to the clients, enabling them to train their local models by targeting its loss and backpropagation to the consensus probabilities received from the server. In phase three (3), we applied our ensemble learning method in three variants. In the first step, known as stacking, the probability vectors from each model are concatenated into a feature vector and used as input to a logistic regression meta-classifier. In the second and third variants, we explored an optimization-based approach that improves accuracy over baselines while reducing communication and enabling optimal combination weights to the client models, but differ in their search strategies: GA relies on evolutionary operators such as crossover and mutation. In contrast, PSO simulates the cooperative behavior of particles adjusting their positions according to inertia, self-knowledge, and swarm knowledge. In all cases, the fitness function used to guide the search was the classification accuracy. 

B. Knowledge Distillation Feedback Loop 

Our approach operates in accordance with Algorithm 1, where the server returns an updated set of model weights to the clients. Our method (Fig. 1) enables a complementary mechanism at the level of probabilities. After aggregating the clients’ probability vectors through ensemble strategies (averaging, stacking, GA, PSO), the server produces an en-semble probability distribution Pensemble . This distribution can be interpreted as a “soft label” or distilled knowledge [20], representing a consensus that is typically more accurate and robust than the output of any single client. To make probability aggregation and distillation well de-fined, aggregated probability vectors must correspond to the same inputs. Our approach therefore operates over a shared reference set Xref , for example a public calibration split, a small set of field samples replicated across nodes, or a list of sample identifiers agreed upon by the server, such as hashes or timestamps. In each round, the server announces 

Xref or its identifiers, each client computes probabilities only for these inputs, and the server aggregates probabilities per sample, producing Pens (x) for each x ∈ Xref . The server then broadcasts these per sample distributions back to clients, enabling a consistent distillation objective. 

Algorithm 1 Knowledge Distillation with a Shared Reference Set.      

> Require: Clients {C1, . . . , C K}, local models fi, local datasets Di, reference set
> Xref

1: repeat 

2: Server broadcasts identifiers of Xref 

3: for each client Ci in parallel do 

4: Train fi on local data Di

5: Compute probabilities for the reference set,      

> P(i)(x) = fi(x),∀x∈Xref

6: Publish {P (i)(x)}x∈Xref to the server 

7: end for 

8: Server aggregates per sample into Pens (x) for all x ∈ Xref 

9: Server broadcasts {Pens (x)}x∈Xref back to clients 

10: for each client Ci in parallel do 

11: Update fi by minimizing the distillation loss over Xref ,          

> LKD =X
> x∈Xref
> CX
> c=1
> Pens (c|x) log Pens (c|x)
> P(i)(c|x)

12: end for 

13: until convergence or maximum rounds reached In the remainder of this section, K denotes the number of clients and C denotes the number of classes, avoiding overloaded symbols. Each client may then refine its local model by aligning its predictions Plocal with Pensemble using a distillation objec-tive [20]. Concretely, for a given input sample x, the local training objective becomes to minimize the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the two distributions (Eq. 1): 

LKD = X

> x∈Xref
> C

X

> c=1

Pens (c | x) log Pens (c | x)

Plocal (c | x) . (1) where C is the number of classes. This objective encourages the local model to internalize not only the final class decision but also the confidence structure across classes. Below we present the Algorithm 1 that described our proposed closed-loop. In this way, our method not only aggregates knowledge but also redistributes it, acting as a teacher in a knowledge distillation process. 

C. Asynchronous Stacking Methods 

For the stacking procedure, we used the probability distribu-tions produced by each baseline model (in phase 1) as input for a meta-classifier. Concretely, given three models m1, m 2, m 3

with softmax outputs p(mi) ∈ RC , where C is the number of classes, we built the feature vector. 

x = p(m1), p (m2), p (m3) ∈ R3C .

This vector was then used to train a logistic regression classifier fθ (x), which in Scikit-learn is optimized with cross-entropy loss and L2 regularization by default. The training was conducted using probabilities extracted from the training par-tition of the AIDER dataset, and the evaluation was performed on the validation partition. In this way, the ensemble learned to weight the models without accessing the test folder directly. Each experiment tested all possible combinations of three models among five candidates (EfficientNet, MobileNetV2, ResNet, MobileNetV3, and SqueezeNet), yielding 10 ensem-bles. The logistic regression was trained with up to 1000 iter-ations and used parallel fitting to accelerate convergence. As a result, we collected accuracy, confusion matrices (absolute and normalized), and detailed classification reports. In the case of the GA, our goal was to find the best set of weights to combine the ensemble’s models. Each solution in the population was a vector of weights w =(w1, w 2, . . . , w M ), normalized so that the sum of the weights was equal to one. The population was initialized with ran-dom weights drawn from a Dirichlet distribution to increase diversity. The fitness of each individual was measured using the classification accuracy on a validation set. We retained the top five individuals in each generation (elitism) and generated offspring via one-point crossover. Mutation was applied with a probability of pm = 0 .3 by adding Gaussian noise to one of the weights. Every ten generations, new random individuals were injected to prevent the population from becoming stuck in local optima. The algorithm was run for 100 generations                     

> TABLE II GENETIC ALGORITHM PARAMETERS .
> Parameter Value
> Population size 40 Generations 100 Selection strategy Elitism (top 5 preserved) Crossover One-point Mutation rate ( pm)0.3 (Gaussian noise) Diversity injection Every 10 generations Fitness function Validation accuracy TABLE III PARTICLE SWARM OPTIMIZATION PARAMETERS .
> Parameter Value
> Swarm size 20 Iterations 100 Inertia coefficient ( ω)0.7 Cognitive factor ( c1)1.5 Social factor ( c2)1.5 Fitness function Validation accuracy

with a population size of 40 individuals. Table II shows the parameters used in our experiments. For particle swarm optimization (PSO), the objective was similar: to learn the optimal weights for combining the mod-els. In PSO, each particle is also a weight vector w =(w1, w 2, . . . , w M ) that is updated based on its own experience and the best solution found by the swarm. The velocity update rule is 

vi(t + 1) = ωv i(t) + c1r1

 pi − xi(t) + c2r2

 g − xi(t),

where ω is the inertia coefficient, c1 and c2 are the cognitive and social factors, r1, r 2 ∼ U (0 , 1) are random numbers, pi is the best position found by particle i, and g is the global best. In practice, this means that particles try to balance exploring new solutions with following the best-known ones. We used a swarm of 20 particles for 100 iterations, with ω = 0 .7,

c1 = 1 .5, and c2 = 1 .5. The fitness function, as in GA, was the classification accuracy on the validation set. Table III shows the PSO configuration. IV. E VALUATION SETUP 

To assess our asynchronous ensemble learning method, we conducted various experiments using CNNs to extract features from the AIDER dataset [21]. It contains images across five classes: fire/smoke, floods, collapsed structures, traffic accidents, and normal scenarios. The dataset is intentionally imbalanced to reflect real-world conditions, with images of normal scenes significantly outnumbering disaster events. Our idea was to address one of the main challenges of FL: how to aggregate models with different tensor structures. Instead of forcing weight aggregation, we worked at the probability vector level, which allowed us to apply other techniques to improve accuracy in more complex scenarios. As a starting point, we trained baseline models individually using a Tree-Structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) hyperparameter search. Our experiments were conducted on a workstation with an NVIDIA RTX 4000 Ada GPU. The framework was built in Python using PyTorch for the models and Scikit-learn for the meta-classifier. For asynchronous communication, we deployed an Eclipse Mosquitto MQTT broker in Docker to ensure reproducibility. We first fine-tuned several CNN models using pre-trained weights and tuned hyperparameters. During evaluation, each model published its softmax probabilities via MQTT to a central server, where we tested three aggrega-tion methods: stacking, a GA, and PSO. We trained five CNNs (EfficientNet, MobileNetV2, ResNet, MobileNetV3, and SqueezeNet) with the best batch size, learning rate, and optimizer (Adam/SGD) using Hyperopt with TPE. These models were trained separately and used as a standard for comparison. Our implementation and scripts to reproduce the experiments are publicly available 1.V. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

To validate our approach, we initially trained five CNN backbones in a centralized manner to establish baselines. Subsequently, we trained the same models and configurations using the FL approach to serve as a second benchmark. For all our training, we used the AIDER dataset partitioned into 80/20 and employed a TPE search to select hyperparameters for each model, as detailed in Table IV. Ultimately, we trained the same models using our FEL approach using two clients over three communication rounds.                  

> TABLE IV HYPERPARAMETER SEARCH SPACE .
> Hyperparameter Distribution Search Space
> Learning Rate (LR) Log-Uniform 1×10 −5,1×10 −3
> Batch Size Categorical {16 ,32 ,64 }
> Optimizer Categorical {Adam, SGD }

Among the single-model baselines (centralized approach), ResNet achieved the highest held-out performance (accuracy 

0.9798 ), followed closely by EfficientNet (accuracy 0.9783 ). Because AIDER is class-imbalanced (e.g., the normal class is larger than others), accuracy alone may not fully capture per-class behavior. Still, it provides a stable basis for comparing centralized and federated settings. We report centralized and federated results primarily to contextualize accuracy and to contrast communication costs. We do not claim that federated training is inherently superior to centralized training with full data access. Small differences can arise from stochastic optimization, data ordering, and training dynamics. In our study, FL serves as a reference paradigm that exchanges parameters across rounds, against which our method contrasts a probability-level, asynchronous alternative. Table V compares the baseline accuracies against those obtained under an FL setup. The results show consistent improvements across all models when moving to federated training. For example, MobileNetV3 increased from 0.9666 

to 0.9767 , and both ResNet and EfficientNet reached 0.9813 ,

> 1https://github.com/romoreira/NetAI-AppEnsembeLearning/tree/ mqtt-updated

surpassing their centralized counterparts. Even the lightweight SqueezeNet, which had the lowest baseline accuracy ( 0.9465 ), benefited from federated optimization, improving to 0.9557 .These results highlight that FL not only preserves performance relative to centralized training but can also yield measurable gains, particularly in models with fewer parameters or lower baseline accuracy.                              

> TABLE V CENTRALIZED VS FL ON AIDER: A CCURACY AND MACRO -F1.
> Model Accuracy Macro-F1 Centralized FL Centralized FL
> ResNet 0.9798 0.9813 0.9668 0.9681 EfficientNet 0.9783 0.9813 0.9633 0.9633 MobileNetV2 0.9659 0.9720 0.9431 0.9533 MobileNetV3 0.9666 0.9767 0.9407 0.9584 SqueezeNet 0.9465 0.9557 0.9087 0.9270

Ensembles consistently outperform single models. Fig. 2 presents the distribution of the ensemble gain over the best individual model across all evaluated methods. The results clearly indicate that the proposed probability-level aggregation consistently outperforms the strongest single model in almost every case. All ensemble strategies exhibit positive median values, confirming the robustness of our approach. GA GA Stacking PSO PSO Stacking Stacking  

> 0.0100
> 0.0075
> 0.0050
> 0.0025
> 0.0000
> 0.0025
> 0.0050
> 0.0075
> 0.0100
> Accuracy (Ensemble  Best Individual)
> 0.0039
> 0.0047
> 0.0039
> 0.0047
> 0.0074
> Fig. 2. Distribution of accuracy gains achieved by the ensemble.

While GA and PSO deliver modest but highly stable im-provements, the stacking-based variants achieve larger gains at the cost of higher variability, highlighting their capacity to exploit complementary information across models. Notably, pure stacking achieves the largest median improvement of approximately 0.0074, demonstrating that ensembles built us-ing our method can substantially improve predictive perfor-mance. Even though a few negative outliers are observed, the overall trend is decidedly upbeat, providing strong evidence that probability-level aggregation is an effective alternative to conventional FL schemes. 

Performance gains remain stable across runs. Fig. 3 shows the cumulative distribution of ensemble gains over the best individual model. All methods lie predominantly to the right of the x-axis zero, confirming consistent improvements. 0.0100 0.0075 0.0050 0.0025 0.0000 0.0025 0.0050 0.0075 0.0100   

> Accuracy (Ensemble Best Individual)
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Cumulative Proportion of Cases  GA
> GA Stacking
> PSO
> PSO Stacking
> Stacking Fig. 3. Cumulative distribution of ensemble gains over the best individual model.

GA and PSO yield small but stable gains, while stacking and its variants achieve larger improvements with greater variability. These results demonstrate that our method reliably outperforms the strongest centralized model. 

Model complementarity drives ensemble success. In the ensemble stage, we first confirmed the foundational benefit of probability-level fusion. Even a simple average of a “weak” ensemble (MobileNetV2 + MobileNetV3 + SqueezeNet) out-performed its best individual member, achieving an accuracy of 0.9729 (compared to 0.9666), illustrating the power of variance reduction. While this trio did not surpass the top single baseline (ResNet at 0.9798), the leading ensemble (EfficientNet + MobileNetV2 + ResNet) achieved a higher score, reaching 0.9822. As shown in Table VI, this demon-strates that fusion is most effective when backbones are both accurate and complementary. Our approach framework builds on this principle, utilizing advanced methods such as stacking and evolutionary optimization to maximize these gains in a distributed setting, rather than relying on simple averaging. Even modest accuracy gains can be meaningful when ob-tained with orders-of-magnitude lower communication, be-cause they enable more frequent updates and broader partici-pation under constrained links. In disaster response, this can improve timeliness and coverage without requiring synchro-nized rounds or parameter exchange.          

> TABLE VI COMPARISON OF ENSEMBLE COMBINATIONS .
> Combination Accuracy Macro F1 Weighted F1
> EfficientNet + MobileNetV2 + ResNet 0.98216 0.96990 0.98204 MobileNetV2 + MobileNetV3 + SqueezeNet 0.97285 0.95306 0.97248

The comparative analysis highlights that ensemble models achieve highly competitive accuracy, even if they do not al-ways surpass FL in every case. For example, while ResNet and EfficientNet achieved 0.9813 under federated training, the top-3 ensemble (EfficientNet + MobileNetV2 + ResNet) achieved a very similar result of 0.9822 . In contrast, weaker combina-tions, such as MobileNetV2 + MobileNetV3 + SqueezeNet, performed slightly worse than their federated counterparts. These results indicate that ensembles may marginally under-perform in certain configurations; however, their performance remains close to that of the federated setting, particularly when strong, complementary backbones are combined. 

Our approach achieves major communication savings. 

Where ensembles clearly excel is in communication efficiency. As shown in Table VII, federated training incurs tens to hun-dreds of megabytes of data transmission per model, whereas ensemble aggregation consistently stays below 200 kB. For instance, ResNet required over 255 million Bytes under FL, compared to only ∼ 1.5 × 10 5 bytes for ensemble fusion, a difference of more than three orders of magnitude. Similar gaps are observed across all architectures. Beyond raw perfor-mance, the most striking contrast lies in network consumption. Since each client sends only a class-probability vector of size C, communication grows linearly with the number of clients  O(N ·C), unlike traditional FL, which transmits the trainable parameter vector θ ∈ RP (all weights and biases; 

|θ| = P ) each round  O(N · P ). This lightweight design supports scalability as N and model heterogeneity increase.                

> TABLE VII NETWORK CONSUMPTION (BYTES TRANSMITTED )FOR ENSEMBLE VS . FL
> Model Ensemble Federated
> SqueezeNet 149,603 8,855,868 ResNet 149,231 255,651,996 MobileNetV3 149,231 18,421,932 MobileNetV2 151,184 27,173,916 EfficientNet 148,649 48,672,804

Practical trade-off between accuracy and cost. These findings underscore the practical advantages of our method. In many settings, our approach matches or outperforms FL in accuracy while reducing communication by orders of mag-nitude and eliminating global synchronization barriers. This makes our strategy particularly suitable for deployments with intermittent connectivity, such as Disaster Decision Support Systems (DDSS), where timely and resilient updates are as important as peak accuracy. Overall, the results indicate a favorable trade-off: although FL achieves slightly higher peaks in some scenarios, our technique often delivers equal or superior accuracy at substantially lower communication cost. Thus, the reported numbers are directly connected to disaster response: more nodes can transmit practical knowledge more frequently at a lower per-contribution cost while maintaining decision quality. Our approach uses an MQTT broker as a lightweight coordination substrate in our prototype, which introduces an availability dependency in practice. This is not a conceptual requirement of our strategy; the same publish/consume pattern can be implemented with replicated brokers, fault-tolerant queues, or other messaging substrates. VI. C ONCLUDING REMARKS 

This study addresses the communication and synchroniza-tion bottlenecks that hinder timely disaster detection from heterogeneous edge devices. We introduced an asynchronous probability ensemble framework with feedback distillation, where clients exchange only class probability vectors and the server aggregates them via stacking or weight optimization. Experiments on AIDER show that our approach consistently improves over single backbones and attains accuracy com-parable to or slightly better than federated baselines, while reducing network traffic by orders of magnitude, which sup-ports more frequent updates and broader participation under intermittent connectivity. These findings suggest a practical path for DDSS deploy-ments that must trade peak accuracy for bandwidth, latency, and resilience because decision quality is preserved without exchanging model parameters. The current design assumes a shared reference set for well-defined aggregation and distilla-tion, and relies on a broker-based coordination substrate in our prototype. Future work will study adaptive and uncertainty-aware fusion, robustness, and fairness under non-IID data and adversarial or noisy clients, scalable operations with larger client pools, and fault-tolerant messaging to remove single-point dependencies. Overall, probability-level collaboration with feedback distillation offers a lightweight, scalable, and resource-aware alternative for distributed disaster image de-tection. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors thank the National Council for Scien-tific and Technological Development (CNPq) under grant number 421944/2021-8 (call CNPq/MCTI/FNDCT 18/2021), FAPEMIG (Grant #APQ00923-24), FAPESP MCTIC/CGI Re-search project 2018/23097-3 - SFI2 - Slicing Future Internet Infrastructures. FCT has also supported this work – Fundac ¸ ˜ ao para a Ciˆ encia e Tecnologia within the R&D Unit Project Scope UID/00319/Centro ALGORITMI (ALGORITMI/UM). Fapes (2023-RWXSZ). REFERENCES [1] Y. Lin, X. Yuan, H. Du, H. Ding, Q. Deng, and V. C. Leung, “Federated broad learning for unmanned aerial vehicle clusters in water monitoring,” 

IEEE Internet of Things Journal , pp. 1–1, 2025. [2] R. Moreira, L. F. R. Moreira, and F. d. O. Silva, “Unleashing ai-empowered slices on mobile networks for natively cognitive service delivery,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 147 757–147 771, 2025. [3] E. Ribeiro Gonc ¸alves, E. Teixeira Martins, R. Moreira, and L. Ferreira Rodrigues Moreira, “Federated learning on non-iid environmental images for enhanced wildfire surveillance,” Revista de Inform´ atica Te´ orica e Aplicada , vol. 33, no. 2, p. 318–325, Mar. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://seer.ufrgs.br/index.php/rita/article/view/150636 [4] R. Imandi, A. Roy, Y.-G. Kim, and P. K. B.N., “Building sustainable federated learning models in fog-enabled uav-as-a-service for aerial image classification,” Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems , vol. 46, p. 101133, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221053792500054X [5] M. Gecer and B. Garbinato, “Federated learning for mobility applications,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 56, no. 5, Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3637868 [6] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas, “Communication-Efficient Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 54. PMLR, 20–22 Apr 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/mcmahan17a.html [7] A. Mabrouk, R. P. D´ ıaz Redondo, M. Abd Elaziz, and M. Kayed, “Ensemble federated learning: An approach for collaborative pneumonia diagnosis,” Applied Soft Computing , vol. 144, p. 110500, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1568494623005185 [8] F. E. Casado, D. Lema, R. Iglesias, C. V. Regueiro, and S. Barro, “Ensemble and continual federated learning for classification tasks,” 

Machine Learning , vol. 112, no. 9, pp. 3413–3453, Sep 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-023-06330-z [9] Z. Gao, S. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “Cognitive data fusing for internet of things based on ensemble learning and federated learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 11, no. 13, pp. 22 992–23 001, 2024. [10] S. Zhao, J. Pu, X. Fu, L. Liu, and F. Dai, “Byzantine-robust federated learning with ensemble incentive mechanism,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 159, pp. 272–283, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X24002462 [11] J. Sievers, T. Blank, and F. Simon, “Advancing accuracy in energy forecasting using mixture-of-experts and federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems , ser. e-Energy ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 65–83. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.ez35.periodicos.capes.gov.br/ 10.1145/3632775.3661945 [12] J. Akram, A. Akram, P. Ingle, R. H. Jhaveri, A. Anaissi, and A. Akhun-zada, “Privacy-preserving spatial crowdsourcing drone services for post-disaster infrastructure monitoring: A conditional federated learning ap-proach,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , vol. 18, pp. 16 272–16 291, 2025. [13] A. Xu, R. Wang, X. Weng, Q. Wu, and L. Zhuang, “Strategic integration of adaptive sampling and ensemble techniques in federated learning for aircraft engine remaining useful life prediction,” Applied Soft Computing , vol. 175, p. 113067, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494625003783 [14] S. E. Hajla, E. M. Ennaji, Y. Maleh, and S. Mounir, “Hfel: A hybrid federated ensemble learning framework for intrusion detection in iot networks,” Cluster Computing , vol. 28, no. 13, p. 819, Sep 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-025-05587-4 [15] K. A. Sheth, R. P. Kulkarni, and G. K. Revathi, “Enhancing natural disaster image classification: an ensemble learning approach with inception and cnn models,” Geomatics, Natural Hazards and Risk , vol. 15, no. 1, p. 2407029, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/19475705.2024.2407029 [16] Y. J. Wong, M.-L. Tham, B.-H. Kwan, E. M. A. Gnanamuthu, and Y. Owada, “An optimized multi-task learning model for disaster classi-fication and victim detection in federated learning environments,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 115 930–115 944, 2022. [17] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos, and V. Sze, Eds., vol. 2, 2020, pp. 429–450. [18] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. Stich, and A. T. Suresh, “SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, H. D. III and A. Singh, Eds., vol. 119. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020, pp. 5132–5143. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/karimireddy20a.html [19] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data,” in Proceedings of AISTATS , ser. PMLR, vol. 54, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v54/mcmahan17a.html [20] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531 [21] C. Kyrkou and T. Theocharides, “Emergencynet: Efficient aerial image classification for drone-based emergency monitoring using atrous con-volutional feature fusion,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , vol. 13, pp. 1687–1699, 2020.