Title: Agentic Persona Generation with Critique-Refinement: An Industrial Evaluation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09637v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:49:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Agentic Persona Generation with Critique-Refinement: An Industrial Evaluation 

Mohammad Hossein Amini ∗† , David Dewar †, Shiva Nejati ∗ , Mehrdad Sabetzadeh ∗∗ University of Ottawa, Canada Email: {mh.amini, snejati, m.sabetzadeh }@uottawa.ca  

> †

Kinaxis, Canada Email: ddewar@kinaxis.com 

Abstract —Personas are widely used in software engineering to support requirements elicitation, design, and validation, but their manual creation is costly, time-consuming, and hard to scale. Recent LLM-based approaches automate persona generation from textual data; however, they typically rely on single-shot generation and subjective evaluations, limiting practical reliabil-ity. We present PerGent, an industry-grade method for persona generation built around an iterative critique-refinement loop. Specifically, PerGent uses a generator and a critic LLM agent, coordinated by an orchestrator, to iteratively refine personas using external resources such as interviews, surveys, and job postings through a critique-refinement loop with a user-defined maximum number of rounds. We deploy and evaluate PerGent in an industrial setting at Kinaxis, comparing it with three baselines, including one-shot methods. In an expert in-situ evaluation, PerGent achieved the highest expert approval rate (96.9%), exceeding all baselines. We further compare PerGent-generated personas with best-practice personas manually created by domain experts prior to the adoption of LLMs. Compared to baselines, PerGent reproduces a larger proportion of expert content while also contributing substantial new content beyond the pre-LLM personas. We conclude with lessons learned from deploying and evaluating PerGent at Kinaxis. 

Index Terms —Large Language Models (LLMs), Personas, Agentic Software Engineering, Critique-Refinement Loop. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Personas play an important role in software engineering by representing user archetypes and guiding requirements elici-tation, design decisions, and validation [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Persona templates typically include technical, demographic, and behavioural dimensions and are tailored to the domain and usage context to keep requirements grounded in real-world needs [3], [4], [1]. Persona generation is difficult in practice, as it requires extensive synthesis of heterogeneous user-research data [1]. To create a persona manually, experts must examine diverse user-research artifacts, such as interview transcripts that inform per-sona attributes, survey data that validate patterns across roles and responsibilities, and internal documentation that provides domain and organizational context. This process is tedious and costly; under tight deadlines, practitioners often produce personas that fall short, for example, by being incomplete, overly generic, or insufficiently actionable [1], [6]. Before large language models (LLMs), researchers at-tempted to automate persona generation using machine learn-ing and data analytics applied to quantitative platform metrics such as view counts, engagement frequency, audience shares, and inferred demographic attributes [7], [8]. Since this strategy depends on statistical patterning and clustering over structured numeric features, it has difficulty incorporating unstructured qualitative text (e.g., interview narratives, open-ended survey responses, and observational notes), which is essential for producing practically useful personas. LLMs mitigate the above limitation by enabling the use of rich textual data sources for automated persona generation [9], [10], [2], [1], [4]. However, existing LLM-based persona-generation methods still have two key shortcomings. First ,they generate personas in a single LLM call (single-shot) without iterative refinement, so experts must post-edit the results [6]. By comparison, recent agentic LLM approaches in software engineering iteratively improve artifacts through a critique-refinement loop, where one LLM agent evaluates a draft and identifies problems while another attempts to address them [11], [12], [13]. Empirical studies in require-ments analysis and code synthesis show these loops reduce hallucinations and improve factual grounding [14], [15], [16]. To our knowledge, LLM-based persona generation has not yet adopted this critique-refinement loop and remains single-shot. 

Second , existing evaluations of LLM-generated personas are largely perception-based, focusing on subjective judgments of plausibility or overall persona quality [2], [10]. By contrast, the practical usefulness of LLM-generated personas in real organizational contexts has not been systematically evalu-ated. In particular, there is limited practice-based evidence derived from observing how domain experts employ these personas and from controlled comparisons between LLM-generated personas and best-practice personas developed man-ually within organizations. Without such evidence, it remains unclear whether LLM-generated personas can reliably support expert decision-making or be suitable for professional use. In this paper, we introduce PerGent , an agentic method for persona generation built around a critique–refinement loop. PerGent consists of two LLM agents, a persona generator and a persona critic, coordinated by an orchestrator. Given a target persona description and relevant external resources, e.g., user interviews and surveys, the generator produces an initial persona and iteratively refines it in response to the critic’s feedback. The critic assesses each draft against criteria such as completeness, coherence, and relevance, flagging potential 

> arXiv:2606.09637v1 [cs.SE] 8 Jun 2026

gaps or inconsistencies. The critique-refinement loop runs for a user-defined number of rounds or stops earlier when the critic indicates that no major issues remain. Our evaluation has three complementary components: The first component evaluates PerGent through an in-situ industrial deployment at Kinaxis. In this deployment, PerGent alongside three baseline techniques – two of which are one-shot methods from the literature [1], [4] – were instantiated as four tools within a shared operational workflow. Four Kinaxis domain experts used these tools in their daily work for approximately one month. We examine interaction logs that record expert approvals and revisions to persona content, assessing how well the persona content aligns with expert expectations in industrial applications. The results of our in-situ deployment indicate that PerGent generates personas that closely match expert expectations and require minimal post-editing: experts approved 96.9% of the generated content unchanged, made no additions or removals, and modified only 3.1% of the content, primarily to correct outdated details. In comparison, baseline LLM-based persona generators required more expert intervention, with unchanged-content approval rates ranging from 75.8% to 93.9%, and with some baselines requiring non-trivial additions or removals. Across revisions, most changes replaced outdated details with current informa-tion and were mainly needed when no external sources were provided, underscoring the importance of grounding persona generation in up-to-date sources. Our second evaluation component compares personas gener-ated by PerGent and the three baselines against a best-practice reference set of personas authored by Kinaxis domain experts prior to the adoption of LLMs. We investigate two central questions: (i) to what extent can each automated method 

reproduce this expert-authored content? and (ii) to what extent can it contribute additional (novel) insights beyond the expert-authored content? Accordingly, we report two metrics: preser-vation (expert-material recovery) and distinctness (novel con-tent beyond the reference). To assess these metrics reliably, we evaluated seven LLMs (GPT-4o, o4-mini, GPT-5.2, Gemini-2, Gemini-3, Claude-4, and Grok-3). For every combination of a method, an LLM, and a job role, we generated five personas to reduce randomness (1,400 total persona generations). The re-sults show that PerGent consistently outperforms the baselines on both metrics, achieving up to an average of 9.5% higher preservation and up to an average of 14.2% higher distinctness than the baselines. Our third evaluation component measures the computational cost of PerGent and the baselines in terms of LLM calls per persona and input/output tokens per call. Across the seven LLMs considered, PerGent typically uses multiple calls to support its critique-refinement process (4.8 calls per persona on average, with roughly 11K input tokens and 1.7K output tokens per call), while the one-shot baselines generate personas in a single call with lower token usage. We conclude the paper by presenting the key lessons derived from our empirical findings. 

Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows: 

(1) Agentic persona generation. We present PerGent, an agentic persona generation method structured around it-erative critique and refinement. PerGent is developed as an orchestrator-mediated multi-agent system using the Microsoft AutoGen framework [17]. 

(2) In-situ expert evaluation. We evaluate PerGent and three baseline methods by deploying them in an industrial setting and studying their use by domain experts over a one-month period, using both quantitative and qualitative analyses. We show that personas generated by PerGent require minimal expert intervention, achieving a 96.9% item approval rate and outperforming the baselines. 

(3) Comparison with pre-LLM personas. We present a systematic evaluation comparing LLM-generated personas with personas created by domain experts prior to the adop-tion of LLMs. Our results show that PerGent significantly outperforms baseline methods in reproducing expert-authored content from pre-LLM personas while also introducing useful, non-redundant additions. II. I NDUSTRIAL CONTEXT 

Kinaxis provides supply-chain planning software for global enterprises across a wide range of industries. Because these industries involve complex workflows and highly specialized roles, effective requirements elicitation and structured require-ments definition require a thorough understanding of users’ tasks, the challenges they encounter, and the tools they rely on in their daily work. To support requirements-related activities, including requirements identification, prioritization, and the engineering of user experience (UX) requirements, Kinaxis employs role-based personas [3], such as demand planners and inventory managers. These personas function as repre-sentations of real users, helping ensure that defined require-ments and the resulting system capabilities remain consistently aligned with user needs, pain points, and operational contexts. At Kinaxis, a persona is structured into four sections: jobs to be done , describing what a person is responsible for and aims to achieve; pain points , outlining the challenges they face; 

required skills , capturing the capabilities needed for their role; and tools used , indicating the resources and systems they rely on. Although personas are often associated with user-interface and interaction design [5], they have increasingly been adopted to support requirements engineering (RE) activities, including requirements elicitation and analysis, requirements specifi-cation, and requirements validation [18]. The four-section structure used at Kinaxis is consistent with recurring elements of personas in the RE literature, including users’ goals and tasks, concerns or pain points, skills and domain knowledge, and interactions with tools and technologies [18], [19]. In RE, such information helps analysts reason about what users need to accomplish, where current workflows break down, what capabilities users bring to their work, and which technical and organizational constraints shape feasible require-ments. We note that persona representations are not fixed: their structure and content may vary depending on the domain, organizational practices, and intended use [19], [3]. Our goal Fig. 1: Example of a supply-planner persona; each section may include up to ten items (only three shown). Items are labelled with identifiers to facilitate referencing. here is therefore not to advance the Kinaxis structure as a general persona template, as other organizations may adopt different templates depending on their context. Instead, our aim is to examine automated persona generation in an estab-lished industrial workflow. We illustrate through an example how personas expressed in our industry partner’s template support RE tasks. Figure 1 shows a sample supply-planner persona. The jobs to be done 

items indicate that planners must assess the impact of supplier delays (J2) and reallocate inventory across regions (J3). This suggests a need for requirements concerning the comparison of alternative supply-allocation scenarios. The pain points 

further refine the considerations to be accounted for when defining such requirements: supplier updates may arrive late or inconsistently (P1), relevant demand and inventory data may be fragmented across teams (P2), and planning changes may be difficult to explain to stakeholders (P3). These items suggest that any functionality specified by the requirements should not introduce an isolated planning mechanism, but should instead consolidate supplier-status, demand, and inventory information and make changes from previous plans explicit. The skills 

and tools sections further ground requirements in the user’s expertise and existing work environment. In our example, the 

skills items indicate that the system should support scenario planning, cross-functional decision making, and stakeholder communication (S1–S3), for instance by explaining the as-sumptions and trade-offs behind alternative plans. Finally, the 

tools items indicate that the user need should be considered in relation to the existing ERP system, supplier portals and demand-planning dashboards, and BI reports and inventory-analytics tools (T1–T3). The persona-based analysis illustrated above makes require-ments elicitation and specification more concrete and context-aware. For example, based on this analysis, stakeholders could converge on the need for “the system to support scenario-based supply reallocation by integrating supplier-status, demand, and inventory data from existing tools, presenting the assumptions and trade-offs of alternative plans, and enabling planners to communicate selected changes.” This statement of need can then be further refined through subsequent RE activities, including additional elicitation and negotiation, before being translated into fine-grained requirements. Manually creating and maintaining personas requires sig-nificant time and coordination, and can become increasingly complex as customer bases and use cases grow. In 2022, Kinaxis undertook a strategic initiative to formalize and scale its persona development practice: Five senior product man-agers led the development of ten personas 1. The work spanned nearly a year and began with an intensive initial phase of scoping, drafting, cross-team reviews, refinement, and final approval. Each persona required synthesizing heterogeneous inputs (e.g., interviews, surveys, internal playbooks, and job postings), aligning terminology across roles and regions, and iteratively clarifying overlap and boundaries among personas. Following this initial phase, further expansion and ongoing updates (e.g., to reflect new industries, regions, and release cycles) would have required a comparable level of expert effort and sustained organizational commitment. Building on this past initiative, Kinaxis identified an opportunity to streamline persona generation and maintenance at scale, leading to the exploration of LLMs to support this process. This paper aims to design and systematically evaluate an agentic method for automatically generating reliable personas by drawing on a broad range of context-relevant resources from Kinaxis. III. A GENTIC PERSONA GENERATION 

In this section, we introduce PerGent, our agentic persona generation method. We begin in Section III-A by describing the agentic design adopted in our work, which is derived from Microsoft’s AutoGen framework [17]. We then detail, in Section III-B, how PerGent instantiates this design. 

A. Orchestrated Multi-Agentic Design 

Figure 2 presents a class diagram characterizing the struc-ture of our agentic design, inspired by the principles of Mi-crosoft’s AutoGen framework [17]. While AutoGen supports different agentic designs with diverse orchestration strategies and interaction patterns among agents and the orchestrator, we adopt a centralized, turn-based orchestration strategy that is sufficient for implementing the critique-refinement loop of PerGent. Our agentic design consists of a single orchestrator and a set of LLM-based agents. The orchestrator determines agent turn order using a round-robin policy and records agent outputs using its history attribute, while each agent indepen-dently selects its actions. The orchestrator terminates execution when an agent signals completion or a user-defined maximum number of round-robin cycles is reached. Our design aligns with a Level 3 goal-agentic configuration in the taxonomy of    

> 1In our paper, we refer to these personas as pre-LLM personas and compare the personas generated using PerGent against these personas in Section IV. LLM-Based Agent
> - llm
> - role
> - instructions
> - actionList
> - memory
> - history
> + Execute()
> Orchestrator
> + history
> + Initialize()
> + PickNextAgent()
> 1..* 1
> Coordinates activation of

Fig. 2: Structure of our orchestrated multi-agentic design based on Microsoft’s AutoGen framework [17]. 

Algorithm 1 EXECUTE () method of the LLM-Based Agent class 

1: function EXECUTE () 

2: history ← orchestrator.history 

3: prompt ← BUILD PROMPT (role, instructions, actionList, memory, history) 

4: output ← CALL LLM(llm, prompt) 

5: history ← history ∪{ output }

6: orchestrator.history ← history 

7: end function 

Hassan et al. [20], where agents act autonomously within an orchestrator-mediated setup. The attributes of the LLM-Based Agent class (Figure 2) collectively define how an agent is set up and how it decides which actions to perform. While agents can perform a wide range of actions defined in their actionList attribute, potentially involving external tools, each agent offers a single external interface, Execute() . When invoked, this method, whose be-haviour is outlined in Algorithm 1, determines which action to perform. Specifically, the Execute() method first synchronizes the agent’s history with that of the orchestrator, ensuring that the agent has access to outputs produced during previous invocations, whether by itself or by other agents (line 2). It then constructs a prompt using the agent’s attributes, namely 

role , instructions , actionList , memory , and history , and submits this prompt to the underlying LLM (lines 3–4). Guided by the agent’s role, instructions, memory, and history, the LLM selects and executes an appropriate action from the actionList .The resulting output is appended to the agent’s history , after which the orchestrator’s history is updated to reflect this result, ensuring that subsequent agent invocations can access the output generated in this execution (lines 5–6). 

B. PerGent 

Figure 3 provides an overview of PerGent, which takes as input a target persona description and external resources collected from practitioners (e.g., surveys and interviews). It then generates a persona through a critique-refinement loop consisting of an orchestrator, a generator, and a critic agent. The orchestrator of PerGent operates according to the process described in Section III-A. The instantiations of the attributes of PerGent’s generator and critic agents are provided in Table I. Both agents follow the implementation of the Execute() 

method, as described in Algorithm 1. Below, we outline the two agents. Further details about the implementation of Per-Gent are provided in Section IV-B. The prompts constructed by each agent’s Execute() method are provided online [21]. The generator agent creates and refines personas. Its 

instructions define the required persona format and quality 

Fig. 3: Overview of our agentic persona generator (PerGent). TABLE I: Instantiating the LLM-Based Agent in Fig. 2 for the Generator and Critic agents of PerGent.                             

> Agent Attribute Generator Agent Critic Agent
> role Persona generator and refiner Persona critic
> instructions Instructions on generating and refining personas; syntactic definition of persona (required sections, number of items, etc.) Instructions on evaluating personas; syn-tactic definition of persona (required sections, number of items, etc.)
> actionList (1) Generate apersona from scratch; (2) Refine a persona (1) Critique apersona; (2) Generate feedback
> memory External resources and target persona description
> history List of previously generated personas and feedback
> output A persona Feedback or approval declaration

guidelines. The agent’s memory stores the inputs to PerGent, namely the target persona description and external resources. The agent supports two actions: generating an initial persona when history is empty, and refining an existing persona based on critic feedback and prior drafts recorded in history . The 

critic agent evaluates the generated personas. Its instructions 

define the persona format and evaluation criteria. Like the generator agent, its memory stores PerGent’s inputs. In each execution, the critic assesses the latest persona against these inputs and either provides feedback or approves the persona. IV. E MPIRICAL EVALUATION 

Our evaluation addresses three research questions (RQs): 

RQ1 (Expert validation). How much expert revision do personas generated by PerGent require before approval? We evaluate how domain experts at Kinaxis review and refine personas generated by PerGent and by baseline methods using a one-month log of their interactions. The log records every edit, removal, addition, and approval applied to the generated personas. We analyze this review process both quantitatively 

and qualitatively . Quantitatively, we measure approval and modification frequencies and assess how closely personas from PerGent and the baselines align with expert expectations. Qualitatively, we examine the types of changes and the moti-vations behind them. 

RQ2 (Validation against pre-LLM personas). How do PerGent-generated personas compare with pre-LLM, expert-built personas? We evaluate personas generated by PerGent and the baselines against pre-LLM personas developed by do-main experts, whose development was discussed in Section II. Our comparison focuses on (i) the extent to which the LLM-generated personas reproduce (i.e., preserve ) expert-generated content present in the pre-LLM personas, and (ii) the extent to which they contribute novel information (i.e., distinct from what is already known) relative to the pre-LLM personas. The metrics we introduce to quantify (i) and (ii) are described in Section IV-E. Generate      

> Persona
> Critique the
> Persona
> Refine the
> Persona
> Any Issues
> to be Fixed?
> Generated
> Persona
> [No issues]
> [Yes]
> Draft Persona
> +
> Critique
> Persona Description
> Refined
> Persona
> Critique-Refinement Loop
> 1
> 2
> 2.1
> 2.2
> External Resources
> Only for
> OneShot+Res and PerGent
> Only for PerGentNoRes and PerGent
> LLM
> LLM LLM

Fig. 4: Workflow of P ER GENT and the baselines. P ER GENT -NORES uses both Steps 1 and 2, but without external re-sources; O NE SHOT and O NE SHOT +R ES use only Step 1, with external resources used only by O NE SHOT +R ES .

RQ3 (Cost). What is the cost of PerGent in terms of LLM calls and tokens per call? We compare PerGent and the baselines on persona-generation cost using the number of LLM calls and tokens required to generate personas. RQ3 complements the quality-focused analyses in RQ1 and RQ2 by quantifying the deployment cost of each persona-generation strategy. This cost is important from a practical standpoint because personas may need to be generated and maintained across many roles, products, and evolving resources. RQ3 provides the empirical basis for the trade-off we discuss in Lesson 1 of Section VI, namely, whether the quality gains from critique-refinement and external resources justify the additional per-persona LLM-call and token overhead. 

A. Persona Generation Workflow and Baselines 

Figure 4 presents our persona generation workflow. PerGent follows the agentic design described in Section III, with its operational steps shown in this figure. Given a persona description and a set of external resources, the generator agent first produces a persona draft (Step 1 in Figure 4). The critic agent then evaluates the draft (Step 2.1 in Figure 4). If the critic identifies issues, the generator refines the draft based on the critic’s feedback (Step 2.2 in Figure 4). This critique-refinement loop continues until the critic reports no remaining issues, or until a predefined iteration cap is reached, at which point the final persona is returned. We use P ER GENT to refer to the concrete implementation of PerGent in our evaluation. We develop three baselines – P ER GENT NORES , O NE SHOT ,and O NE SHOT +R ES – as variations of the workflow in Fig-ure 4. O NE SHOT and O NE SHOT +R ES represent single-shot LLM-based persona generation approaches from the litera-ture [4], [1]. These two approaches perform persona generation only (i.e., Step 1) without critique-refinement. ONE SHOT 

uses only the target persona description as input, whereas ONE SHOT +R ES uses both the target persona description and external resources. P ER GENT NORES is a variant of P ER GENT 

that keeps the critique-refinement loop but removes external resources, using only the target persona description as input. ONE SHOT and O NE SHOT +R ES evaluate the impact of the critique-refinement loop, whereas P ER GENT NORES isolates the effect of external resources on generated personas. P ER -GENT NORES is motivated by the fact that curating external resources, such as interviews and surveys, can be costly and may not be feasible in all contexts. Through this baseline, we evaluate the contribution of external resources to persona quality within an agentic architecture. 

B. Implementation 

PER GENT is implemented in Python 3.13 using the Mi-crosoft AutoGen 0.7.5 framework [17]. To ensure a fair com-parison with P ER GENT , we implemented our three baselines as follows: P ER GENT NORES reuses the same AutoGen-based implementation of P ER GENT but with the external resources removed from its inputs. In our experiments, we use the same LLM for both agents (generator and critic) in P ER GENT -NORES and P ER GENT . O NE SHOT and O NE SHOT +R ES , as they only execute Step 1 in Figure 4, follow a simpler implementation without AutoGen and invoke their underlying LLM directly through API calls. To ensure consistency, for ONE SHOT and O NE SHOT +R ES , we used the same persona-generation instructions, section definitions, output-format con-straints, and examples as the generator agent in P ER GENT .The prompt outlines and implementations of P ER GENT and all three baselines are provided in our online repository [21]. To support our RQ1 evaluation and facilitate company-wide adoption at Kinaxis, we developed a production-grade user interface implemented in Streamlit 1.54. The interface was iteratively refined over the course of a year in close collaboration with the Kinaxis UX team to ensure alignment with internal work practices. The same interface was used for P ER GENT as well as for the three baselines, yielding four tools: one for PerGent and three for the baselines. Each tool enables an expert to automatically generate a persona and subsequently review and refine it through edit, addition, removal, and approval actions, all of which are recorded using Python’s built-in logging module. 

C. External Resources 

In our evaluation, we consider ten job roles covering the primary supply-chain functions, from planners (e.g., supply and demand planners) to administrators and managers. These resources fall into one of the following three types: (1) One-on-one interviews : transcripts of interviews between a Kinaxis requirements analyst (domain expert) and a practitioner in the target role. The analyst asks about tasks, pain points, required skills, and commonly used tools. Interviews averaged 58.3 minutes, with 89 analyst turns and 88 practitioner turns. Ana-lysts spoke an average of 1,794 words and interviewees 7,353 words. (2) Surveys : structured questionnaires completed by practitioners, capturing self-reported tasks, challenges, skills, and tools; each survey contained 23 structured questions (the same instrument for all roles). (3) Job postings : role-specific postings curated from the supply-chain job market, reflecting industry-standard responsibilities, required skills, and com-monly used tools. Across the ten roles, Kinaxis provided a total of 25 interview transcripts, 28 surveys, and 47 job postings. We note that, when generating a persona, P ER GENT and ONE SHOT +R ES receive only resources relevant to that per-sona; for example, an interview with a supply-chain manager is never provided when generating a demand-planner persona. 

D. Pre-LLM Personas 

As described in Section II, five senior product managers at Kinaxis manually developed ten personas in 2022, without using LLMs. We refer to this set of personas as pre-LLM per-sonas and use them to answer RQ2. The pre-LLM personas all consist of the same four sections as the personas generated by PER GENT and the baselines, i.e., jobs to be done , pain points ,

skills , and tools . In total, the ten pre-LLM personas comprise 382 items (38.2 items per persona on average), with a balanced distribution across the four sections. The average and standard deviation of words per item are 13.96 and 7.43, respectively. The pre-LLM personas reflect expert knowledge at a specific point in time and constitute a reference set rooted in real industrial practice, as they were manually created through de-liberate effort by individuals with deep domain expertise. They therefore provide a meaningful basis for assessing the extent to which LLM-based approaches reproduce and expand expert knowledge. However, because the personas were developed in 2022, some items have become invalid due to changes in tools and workflows. For example, certain listed tools are no longer in use, which could affect the reliability of the RQ2 evaluation. To address this, two domain experts reviewed the personas and removed outdated or irrelevant items (less than 5% of all items) prior to our evaluation. Apart from these removals, all personas and their overall structure – including all sections – remained unchanged. 

E. Metrics Metrics for RQ1. We inspect expert interactions through the logs collected from the deployed tools for PerGent and the baselines. For each generated persona, we compute the percentage of items that are (i) edited, (ii) removed, (iii) added, and (iv) approved without modification. Percentages are cal-culated relative to the total number of items in the finalized persona. These measures capture how closely LLM-generated personas align with expert expectations in real industrial use and directly reflect the post-generation human effort required. 

Metrics for RQ2. We define two metrics to compare per-sonas generated by P ER GENT or the baselines against pre-LLM personas . Our goal here is to measure how well an LLM-generated persona preserves the original content of the pre-LLM persona and how much distinct content it adds beyond the pre-LLM persona. To our knowledge, no prior work has directly compared the content of two personas. Existing evaluation approaches [4], [1], [8], [2] typically assess individual personas in isolation (as in our RQ1), rather than measuring how well one persona covers or expands on another. As a result, no established metrics are available for comparing an LLM-generated persona against its corresponding pre-LLM persona; this gap motivates the metrics we introduce here. TABLE II: Possible relationships between an item p of a persona P and another persona Q, defined by the extent to which the persona-related concepts (jobs to be done, pain points, skills, and tools) mentioned in p are presented in Q.                                

> Relationship Definition Example
> Fully Present All persona-related concepts mentioned in pappear in
> Q,possibly across multiple items or with different wording. Item p: “Inventory levels are often too low or too high.” Persona Q
> contains: “Products run out unex-pectedly” and “Excess items re-main in storage.” Partially Present Only some of the persona-related con-cepts mentioned in p
> appear in Q; the rest are missing. Item p: “Inventory levels are often too low or too high.” Persona Q
> contains: “Products run out unex-pectedly.” Not Present None of the persona-related concepts men-tioned in pappear anywhere in Q.Item p: “Inventory levels are often too low or too high.” Persona Q
> contains no item related to inven-tory levels.

Recall that, in our setting, each persona is a set of items, each of which captures concepts from one or more of four categories: jobs to be done, pain points, skills, and tools. From now on, we refer to the concepts related to these four cate-gories as persona-related concepts . To formally define metrics for RQ2, we first describe how the persona-related concepts in an individual item of one persona can either be fully present ,

partially present or not present in the entire content of another persona. We then define two metrics, namely distinctness 

and preservation , based on the item-persona relationships to compare an LLM-generated persona with a pre-LLM persona. 

Item-Persona Relationship. Let P denote the set of items in one persona and Q denote the set of items in another persona. We characterize how a single item p ∈ P relates to the other persona as a whole (Q) using three levels: fully present , partially present , and not present . Table II defines these three levels and provides examples for each. We define the distinctness and preservation metrics between an LLM-generated persona, denoted by P , and a pre-LLM persona, denoted by Q, as follows: 

Distinctness. An item p ∈ P is counted as distinct if it is either not present or partially present in Q. Distinctness is the percentage of distinct items in the LLM-generated persona. For example, a distinctness of 30% means that 30% of the items in the LLM-generated persona contain concepts not presented in the corresponding pre-LLM persona, while the remaining 70% add nothing new compared to the pre-LLM persona. 

Preservation. To provide a more nuanced view of preserva-tion, we define two variants of this metric: (1) full preservation 

and (2) partial preservation . Full preservation is the percent-age of items in the pre-LLM persona Q that are fully present 

in the LLM-generated persona P , i.e., all persona-related concepts are retained. Partial preservation is the percentage of items in Q that are fully or partially present in P . This captures cases where some original concepts remain despite incomplete coverage, potentially cueing analysts to missing information. For example, if full preservation is 40%, then 40% of items are completely retained; if partial preservation is 70%, an additional 30% have partial coverage. TABLE III: Cross-over assignment of experts to tools across persona roles; each cell shows the tool an expert used to generate and refine the persona.               

> Role 1 Role 2 Role 3 Expert 1 Tool 1 Tool 2 Tool 3
> Expert 2 Tool 2 Tool 3 Tool 4
> Expert 3 Tool 3 Tool 4 Tool 1
> Expert 4 Tool 4 Tool 1 Tool 2

Metrics for RQ3. We measure computational cost using two metrics: (i) the number of LLM calls to generate a persona and (ii) the number of input and output tokens per call. 

F. RQ1 Experiments and Results 1) RQ1 Experiments: Figure 5 (top) shows the workflow of the RQ1 experiments. To collect expert feedback, we deployed PER GENT and the three baselines as independent tools (see Section IV-B) at Kinaxis. For the purpose of answering RQ1, we configure all four tools to use Gemini-2, Kinaxis’s primary enterprise LLM. Each persona generated with these tools follows the structure illustrated in Figure 1: a title, an avatar, and four sections containing multiple items as specified in the figure. Each tool was instrumented to automatically log all user interactions – capturing every persona generated, all modifications (edits, additions and removals) and all approvals without modifications. To keep the review and refinement workload manageable for the participating experts, persona generation in RQ1 was limited to three common supply-chain roles: supply planner , demand planner , and capacity planner .To examine how domain experts interacted with P ER GENT 

and the baselines, we provided the implemented tools to four Kinaxis experts: two senior UX specialists and two senior product managers. The experts had extensive professional experience working with clients in the three roles of our study (i.e., supply planner, demand planner, and capacity planner). All four experts further had considerable prior experience with requirements elicitation and persona development. We deployed the four tools in the experts’ operational environment, enabling them to generate and refine personas for the three aforementioned roles using fixed inputs (persona descriptions and, where applicable, external resources). To mitigate confounding effects, we adopted a cross-over design, summarized in Table III. Under this design, each of the four experts generated and refined one persona for each of the three roles, using a different tool for each role. Experts were blinded to the underlying persona-generation method associated with each tool because all tools shared an identical UI (see Section IV-B). As shown in Table III, the assignment was balanced such that (i) each tool was used by three different experts, (ii) each expert interacted with three different tools, and (iii) for each role, four personas were produced – one per tool and one per expert. To answer RQ1, we analyzed logs from a one-month period during which all four experts were expected to engage with the tools as part of their day-to-day tasks. After this period, we collected the logs generated by each tool to characterize TABLE IV: Summary statistics for expert-validated personas.                               

> Method # Generated Personas Average # Items Average # Items in Sections Jobs. Pain Pnts. Skills Tools
> ONE SHOT 3 (1 per role) 34.00 9.67 10.00 6.67 7.67 ONE SHOT +R ES 3 (1 per role) 32.33 9.33 9.00 7.00 7.00 PER GENT NORES 3 (1 per role) 34.00 8.67 10.33 7.33 7.67 PER GENT 3 (1 per role) 40.67 9.67 10.33 10.67 10.00

TABLE V: Percentage of persona items generated by PerGent and the baselines that were edited, removed, or added.                     

> Method Edit Remove Add Approval
> ONE SHOT 9.12% 3.01% 12.04% 75.83% ONE SHOT +R ES 6.11% 0% 0% 93.89% PER GENT NORES 9.03% 0% 0% 90.97% PER GENT 3.10% 0% 0% 96.90%

how each expert interacted with and improved the personas. The logs indicated that all experts had completed their tasks, yielding a total of twelve ( 4 × 3) personas. 

2) RQ1 Results: Table IV summarizes the generated per-sonas after expert validation. For each method, the table reports the total number of personas, the average number of items per persona, and the average number of items in each persona section. We analyze expert revisions in the interaction logs from two complementary perspectives: (1) review actions and (2) edits to the generated persona items. 

Review Action Analysis . Table V reports the percentage of each action (edit, removal, addition, and approval) for PER GENT and the baselines. P ER GENT achieves the high-est approval rate (96.90%), followed by ONE SHOT +R ES 

(93.89%) and P ER GENT NORES (90.97%). O NE SHOT , which lacks both the critique-refinement loop and external resources, has the lowest approval rate (75.83%). Additions and removals occur only in O NE SHOT ; O NE SHOT +R ES and both agentic approaches show 0% additions and removals across sections. Among the four tools, P ER GENT produces the fewest edits. Except for O NE SHOT , none of the persona-generation methods produced a completely invalid item requiring removal. 

Edit Content Analysis . We manually inspected experts’ edits to the generated personas and categorized them into four types: Completeness , Recency , Precision , and Redun-dancy/Logic . Figure 6 presents these categories, including their definitions, frequencies, and examples. Recency-related edits account for nearly half of all modifications, making them the most common. Notably, such edits appear only in ONE SHOT and P ER GENT NORES . This pattern is expected: pretrained LLMs are trained on data collected only up to a fixed point in time (the knowledge cutoff) [22]. Without external resources, an LLM cannot reliably incorporate events or developments that occur after this cutoff. In contrast, PER GENT and O NE SHOT +R ES prompted no recency edits because they can consult up-to-date external resources. The remaining categories (completeness, precision, and re-dundancy/logic) each account for roughly 16% of edits. These changes are comparatively minor and largely reflect contextual refinement rather than substantive issues in the personas. Completeness and precision edits often softened claims or added role-specific qualifiers, indicating that the personas were generally directionally correct but occasionally overgeneral-Experiment Setup  

> -All methods use Gemini-2

In-Situ Deployment  Interaction Logging   

> -4 Non-Author Domain Experts
> -Balanced Cross-Over Design
> Quantitative Analysis

RQ1     

> -4Persona Generation Methods
> Qualitative Analysis
> -Generated 4 ×3 = 12 Personas

Experiment Setup  Persona Generation        

> -Generate Personas for the Same 10 Roles
> as the Pre-LLM Personas
> -Total Generated Personas:
> -Same Generated Personas Used for
> Answering Both RQ2 and RQ3

RQ2  

> -Compare Each Generated Persona with
> Corresponding Pre-LLM Persona

RQ3                              

> -Measure Generation Costs for PerGent
> and Baselines
> -10 Specific Target Roles from Kinaxis for Persona Generation
> -Each Method Instantiated with a Single LLM, Separately for 7 LLMs
> -4 Persona Generation Methods
> (PerGent and baselines)
> -10 Pre-LLM Personas (One per Role)
> -5 Runs per Configuration (Method, LLM, Persona Role)
> -Metrics: Distinctness, Partial Preservation
> and Full Preservation
> -Metrics: # of LLM Calls per Persona and
> # of Input / Output Tokens per Call
> (PerGent and baselines)
> -Actions Logged for each of
> the Persona Items:
> -Edit
> -Removal
> -Add
> -Approve
> -3 Specific Target Roles from
> Kinaxis for Persona Generation
> Metrics: % of Edited, Removed,
> Added and Approved Items
> -Manual Inspection of Edits
> -Finding Patterns in Edits
> (GPT-4o, o4-mini, GPT-5.2, Gemini-2, Gemini-3, Claude-4, Grok-3)

10 ×4 ×7 ×5 = 1400  

> RQ1 Experiments RQ2 and RQ3 Experiments
> -1-Month Logging in Experts’
> Operational Environment

Fig. 5: Experiment workflows for our research questions (RQ1, RQ2 and RQ3) 1. Completeness:  Adding missing context or qualifiers to make items 

more complete 

(16.6% of all edits, observed in  PER GENT  and all baselines )

Example: 

Item:  “Perform PO sanity checks to align information from vendors with 

market data, ensuring accuracy in the procurement process” 

Revised to  “Some supply planners will also act as buyers. In those 

cases , they  perform PO sanity checks to align information from vendors 

with market data, ensuring accuracy in the procurement process.” 

2. Recency:  Updating outdated/obsolete information (e.g. renaming tools) 

(50.2% of all edits, observed only in O NE SHOT  and P ER GENT NORES )

Example: 

Item:  “Mastering  RapidResponse  for demand forecasting.” 

“RapidResponse ” was renamed to  “Maestro ” in 2024. 

3. Precision:  Adjusting scope or specificity to improve clarity/accuracy 

(16.6% of all edits,  observed in  PER GENT  and all baselines )

Example: 

Item:  “Knowledge of regulatory requirements and compliance standards in 

relevant industries.” 

Revised to  “Some  knowledge of regulatory requirements and compliance 

standards in relevant industries. ”

4. Redundancy/Logic:  Removing duplicative or illogical phrasing 

(16.6% of all edits, observed only in  ONE SHOT  and  ONE SHOT +R es )

Example: 

Item:  “Supply Planners rely heavily on task flows  and  structured task 

flows  to manage recurring monthly processes.” 

The phrase  “and  structured  task flows ” was removed. 

Fig. 6: Edit categories for generated persona items. ized. Redundancy/logic edits primarily addressed style and internal coherence rather than conceptual gaps. Overall, aside from recency-related updates, the personas required limited semantic revision, suggesting strong alignment between the generated content and expert expectations. RQ1 Answer Across the generated personas, P ER GENT achieved the highest expert approval rate (96.9%). No items were removed or added when using P ER GENT , and only 3.1% required edits. Among the baselines, O NE SHOT 

had the lowest approval rate (75.83%), underscoring the negative impact of the simultaneous absence of both external resources and a critique–refinement loop. The remaining baselines, O NE SHOT +R ES and P ER -GENT NORES , performed better than O NE SHOT but still fell short of P ER GENT . In general, we observed that most expert revisions addressed outdated informa-tion in approaches without external resource access. 

G. RQ2 Experiments and Results 1) RQ2 Experiments: Figure 5 (bottom) shows the work-flow of the RQ2 experiments. For RQ2, we generate personas using P ER GENT and the baselines for the same job roles as the ten pre-LLM personas described in Section IV-D. To generate each persona, we evaluate PerGent and each baseline with a single LLM at a time, selecting from seven LLMs: GPT-4o, o4-mini, GPT-5.2, Gemini-2, Gemini-3, Claude-4, or Grok-3. To mitigate random variation in LLM outputs, we repeat each generation five times. In total, our experiments produce 1400 personas (10 job roles × 4 methods × 7 LLMs ×

5 repetitions). We compute the distinctness and preservation metrics defined in Section IV-E by comparing each LLM-generated persona with its corresponding pre-LLM persona. Due to the large number of comparisons required, manually measuring distinctness and preservation for all 1400 generated personas is impractical. We therefore employ an LLM –commonly referred to as LLM-as-Judge [23] – to automatically perform these evaluations, following established best practices for using LLMs as automated evaluators [24], [15], [23]. Our LLM-as-Judge is implemented using Gemini-2. We recall from Section IV-E that computing distinctness and preservation hinges on item-persona relationship classification. The LLM-as-Judge performs this classification and outputs both a label (“fully present”, “partially present”, or “not present”) and a brief rationale for each item-persona pair. We use these rationales to make the classifications auditable and to quantify alignment with Kinaxis experts, as discussed next. Before deployment, we ensure that the LLM-as-Judge is a faithful proxy for human experts by calibrating it through iterative prompt refinement and validation. The full procedure is described in the supplementary material [21]. After calibra-tion, the LLM-as-Judge achieves an average Krippendorff’s α

of 0.865, indicating strong agreement with human experts [25]. TABLE VI: Distinctness and preservation results for different methods across different LLMs (averaged over five runs).                                                                                                    

> Method LLM Distinctness Full Preservation Partial Preservation
> Claude-4 0.474 0.185 0.676 Gemini-2 0.526 0.305 0.613 Gemini-3 0.784 0.215 0.672 GPT-4o 0.529 0.424 0.574 Grok-3 0.485 0.304 0.613 o4-mini 0.589 0.345 0.646 GPT-5.2 0.794 0.310 0.685
> ONE SHOT
> Average 0.598 0.299 0.640 Claude-4 0.475 0.317 0.683 Gemini-2 0.581 0.303 0.697 Gemini-3 0.848 0.321 0.705 GPT-4o 0.506 0.366 0.634 Grok-3 0.466 0.306 0.694 o4-mini 0.584 0.262 0.738 GPT-5.2 0.813 0.366 0.602
> ONE SHOT +R ES
> Average 0.611 0.320 0.679 Claude-4 0.676 0.359 0.641 Gemini-2 0.439 0.265 0.735 Gemini-3 0.927 0.150 0.463 GPT-4o 0.496 0.346 0.654 Grok-3 0.445 0.448 0.552 o4-mini 0.698 0.478 0.522 GPT-5.2 0.895 0.272 0.454
> PER GENT NORES
> Average 0.654 0.331 0.574 Claude-4 0.815 0.388 0.712 Gemini-2 0.522 0.239 0.761 Gemini-3 0.933 0.254 0.705 GPT-4o 0.510 0.433 0.667 Grok-3 0.626 0.494 0.606 o4-mini 0.614 0.496 0.604 GPT-5.2 0.917 0.435 0.691
> PER GENT
> Average 0.705 0.424 0.678

TABLE VII: Statistical tests comparing P ER GENT to base-lines; p-values evaluated at 95% confidence level.                             

> Comparing P ER GENT with: Distinctness Full Preservation Partial Preservation
> p-value ˆA12 p-value ˆA12 p-value ˆA12
> ONE SHOT 0.000 0.73 (L) 0.000 0.72 (L) 0.000 0.67 (M)
> ONE SHOT +R ES 0.000 0.72 (L) 0.000 0.72 (L) 0.976 0.50 (N)
> PER GENT NORES 0.000 0.60 (S) 0.000 0.70 (M) 0.000 0.76 (L)
> ∗

Effect sizes: Large , Medium , Small . p ≤ 0.05 in bold. 

Experts also judged, on average, 96.5% of the generated rationales as justified . These results provide confidence that our LLM-as-Judge is a reliable proxy for expert assessment. 

2) RQ2 Results: Table VI shows the distinctness and preservation scores between the personas generated by PER GENT and the baselines against their correspond-ing pre-LLM personas of the same job roles. As seen from this table, personas generated by PER GENT have the highest average distinctness and full preservation. 0.3 0.36 0.42 

> Full Preservation
> 0.6 0.66 0.72
> Distinctness
> ONE SHOT
> ONE SHOT +R ES
> PER GENT NORES
> PER GENT

Fig. 7: Distinctness vs. full preservation Relative to O NE SHOT , P ER GENT 

improves distinctness and full preservation by 10.7% and 12.5%, respectively; the corresponding gains over ONE SHOT +R ES are 9.4% and 12.4%, and over PER GENT NORES are 5.1% and 9.3%. Figure 7 further illustrates the relationship between the average distinctness and full preservation for P ER GENT and the baselines. Table VII reports the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [26] p-values (statistical significance) alongside the Vargha–Delaney 

ˆA12 effect size [27] for pairwise comparisons of P ER GENT 

against each baseline on the distinctness and preservation metrics. Following Vargha and Delaney [27], we classify effect sizes into four levels: Negligible ( 0.44 ≤ ˆA12 < 0.56 ), Small (0.56 < ˆA12 ≤ 0.64 or 0.36 ≤ ˆA12 < 0.44 ), Medium (0.64 < ˆA12 ≤ 0.71 or 0.29 ≤ ˆA12 < 0.36 ), and Large ( ˆA12 > 0.71 or ˆA12 < 0.29 ). We observe from Table VII that all comparisons between PER GENT and its baselines are statistically significant at the 95% confidence level, except for partial preservation against ONE SHOT +R ES (p = 0.976 ). P ER GENT significantly out-performs the baselines on distinctness and full preservation with medium to large effect sizes in five of the six com-parisons. It also significantly outperforms P ER GENT NORES 

on distinctness, though with a small effect size. For partial preservation, P ER GENT significantly outperforms O NE SHOT 

and P ER GENT NORES by 3.8% and 10.4%, respectively, and is virtually tied with ONE SHOT +R ES (a 0.1% advantage for ONE SHOT +R ES ), which, as noted earlier, is the only statistically insignificant comparison. Finally, Table VI shows substantial variation across underly-ing LLMs for every approach. For instance, under P ER GENT ,distinctness ranges from 51.0% to 93.3%, and full preservation ranges from 23.9% to 49.6% across LLMs. This pattern indicates that, regardless of the persona-generation approach, the choice of the underlying LLM strongly influences the quality of the generated personas. RQ2 Answer Relative to the pre-LLM personas, P ER GENT is able to reproduce a meaningful proportion of expert con-tent while also contributing substantial new content .Averaged over the ten persona roles (7 LLMs, 5 runs), PER GENT achieves ≈0.71 distinctness – i.e., much of what it generates is not already covered in the expert personas – while fully preserving ≈0.42 of expert items and partially preserving ≈0.68 (Table VI). Compared to the baselines, P ER GENT ranks the high-est on distinctness and full preservation among all methods, while its partial preservation is on par with the strongest baseline (O NE SHOT +R ES ). We also ob-serve considerable variation across LLMs , indicating that model choice strongly affects outcomes. Finally, preservation remains well below 1.0, indicating that 

pre-LLM personas contain a non-negligible amount of expert information not covered by LLM generation ; we return to this gap in Lessons Learned .

H. RQ3 Experiments and Results 1) RQ3 Experiments: Figure 5 (bottom) shows the work-flow of the RQ3 experiments. To answer RQ3, within the RQ2 experimental setup, we measure for P ER GENT and the baselines: (i) the number of LLM calls made to generate a persona and (ii) the number of input and output tokens consumed per call. 

2) RQ3 Results: Table VIII reports, for each method, the average number of LLM calls and the average input and output tokens per call (computed over ten roles, seven LLMs, and five repetitions). As the table shows, across all models, O NE SHOT TABLE VIII: Cost results. The average number of LLM calls and average number of tokens in the input prompt and output returned in each call for P ER GENT and its variants.                                                                                                     

> Average # Tokens Method LLM Input Output Avg. # Calls
> Claude-4 308 194.1 1Gemini-2 328 266.3 1Gemini-3 328 470.0 1GPT-4o 306 270.8 1GPT-5.2 306 491.7 1Grok-3 323 315.3 1o4-mini 306 463.1 1
> ONE SHOT
> Average 315.0 353.0 1Claude-4 3205 189.9 1Gemini-2 3239 305.2 1Gemini-3 3239 519.2 1GPT-4o 3160 291.7 1GPT-5.2 3160 586.9 1Grok-3 3229 321.9 1o4-mini 3160 515.1 1
> ONE SHOT +R ES
> Average 3198.9 390.0 1Claude-4 3792.9 1656 5.7 Gemini-2 5911.8 1004.3 5.4 Gemini-3 8629.2 1739.1 5.0 GPT-4o 5694.6 976.1 3.5 GPT-5.2 13318.1 2205.6 4.47 Grok-3 8919.6 1656.3 6.1 o4-mini 11227.1 2018.9 5.5
> PER GENT NORES
> Average 8213.3 1608.0 5.1 Claude-4 6650.5 645.9 4.3 Gemini-2 9105.2 1249.5 4.9 Gemini-3 13064.2 1804.7 4.2 GPT-4o 8581.7 993.7 3.7 GPT-5.2 14601.5 2494.9 4.4 Grok-3 11091.4 2161.7 5.8 o4-mini 13506.5 2205.6 6.2
> PER GENT
> Average 10943.0 1650.9 4.8

uses only a single compact call per persona (315 input/353 output tokens on average). O NE SHOT +R ES also uses one call but, by adding external resources without critique-refinement, raises the average input size by about an order of magnitude (3,198.9 tokens) while increasing output size only modestly (390 tokens), indicating that resources mainly increase prompt length rather than response verbosity. In contrast, P ER GENT -NORES and P ER GENT use multiple generator-critic interac-tions, averaging 5.1 and 4.8 LLM calls per persona, respec-tively. This orchestration substantially increases cumulative token use: input tokens grow because each critique-refinement iteration includes the full instructions and accumulated history, and, for P ER GENT , external resources (see Section III); output tokens grow because the methods produce intermediate drafts and critiques in addition to the final persona. RQ3 Answer On average, P ER GENT requires 4.8 LLM calls per persona , with 11K input tokens and 1.7K output tokens per call (Table VIII). In contrast, the single-shot baselines use one call: O NE SHOT averages 315/353 input/output tokens, and ONE SHOT +R ES averages 3.2K/390. The agentic variant without external re-sources (P ER GENT NORES ) has a similar number of calls (5.1) but fewer input tokens (8.2K). 

I. Validity Considerations 

Internal validity. Expert-specific factors (e.g., editing style, strictness, domain focus) and learning effects could confound comparisons; we mitigate such confounding by recruiting experts with comparable seniority and using a balanced cross-over design. Measurement bias could arise if persona changes are missed; we mitigate this by logging every generation and every update/approval during the one-month in-situ study. Nevertheless, individual reviewing behaviours may still affect the observed edit and approval rates, given the limited number of expert interactions. 

Construct validity. Update rates and approvals are proxies for usefulness and post-edit effort but may not fully capture correctness; we mitigate this threat by logging all item-level actions and manually inspecting and categorizing edits to con-firm they address quality issues. Preservation and distinctness are defined relative to expert-created pre-LLM personas, which may reflect expert assumptions, organizational conventions, omissions, temporal drift, or gaps/skews from limited direct input from practitioners; we mitigate this threat to the extent possible via expert review and removal of outdated/irrelevant pre-LLM items. LLM-as-Judge is a proxy for expert judgment; we mitigate potential misalignment via iterative prompt cal-ibration and validation against experts and observing strong agreement (Krippendorff’s α = 0 .865 ). Still, the judge should be viewed as an approximation of expert assessment rather than a replacement for it. 

Conclusion validity. Our expert study is small and yielded few edits. RQ1 should therefore be interpreted as practice-based evidence from a one-month deployment rather than as a basis for strong claims. The observed differences may not replicate with other experts or roles; we mitigate this with a balanced cross-over design, but the low number of editing events limits statistical power and makes our analysis sensitive to noise. Although RQ2 evaluates 1,400 LLM-generated per-sonas, its statistical results remain tied to the studied reference roles and should not be read as supporting broader claims. 

External validity. Our results are based on one organiza-tion, domain, and persona format, and may not generalize to other industries, persona structures, or settings with dif-ferent resources. The study involved 11 experts at Kinaxis, as outlined in Sections II, IV-F, and IV-G. RQ1 involved 12 expert-reviewed personas. RQ2 used 10 pre-LLM personas as references for evaluating 1,400 LLM-generated personas. The number of reference roles is thus limited despite the larger number of evaluated personas. While our evaluation provides promising evidence from a single case study, further case studies across other organizations, domains, persona struc-tures, and systems remain essential to establish the broader applicability and usefulness of our findings. 

J. Data Availability 

All our publicly shareable artifacts, including the code for P ER GENT and its baselines (O NE SHOT , O NE SHOT +R ES ,and P ER GENT NORES ), prompt outlines, the code for our experimental procedures, evaluation results, additional expert-edited examples, sample personas generated by P ER GENT , and the detailed process for calibrating the LLM-as-Judge with experts, are available online [21]. Note that the prompts and code in our online repository correspond to the public-data version of the implementation and exclude Kinaxis-specific customizations that cannot be shared due to confidentiality. V. R ELATED WORK 

Traditional persona generation is largely manual, relying on designers and domain experts to synthesize qualitative insights into user archetypes [5]. Early automation attempts were mostly limited to data-driven techniques that infer personas from behavioural traces such as social-media analytics and in-teraction logs [7], [8], but these approaches are constrained by their reliance on predominantly quantitative data. In practice, however, personas must also capture workflow descriptions, task requirements, and cross-functional responsibilities, which are typically expressed in textual data. Therefore, methods that can process and synthesize text are needed, motivating the use of LLMs for persona construction. Recently, several approaches have used LLMs to generate personas, but they largely rely on single-shot prompting with-out a critique-refinement loop. Jung et al. [1] use one-pass LLM generation to convert clustered survey responses into per-sona narratives, while Zhang et al. [4] apply a similar single-step approach to extract persona traits from requirements-related feedback. Because LLMs can introduce plausible-sounding but ungrounded details, evaluation and validation are central to LLM-based persona generation. Existing evalu-ation of LLM-generated personas is largely perception-based: Salminen et al. [2] evaluate personas with internal evaluators and subject-matter experts using human-rated persona-quality dimensions, while Schuller et al. [10] compare LLM- and human-written personas in a human-subject study and find similar perceived quality and acceptance, with participants unable to reliably distinguish the personas’ origin. However, these perception-based evaluations provide limited evidence of real-world usefulness. Our work addresses two major gaps in prior work on LLM-based persona generation. First, we introduce an agentic critique-refinement process that iteratively evaluates and improves generated personas. Second, we ex-amine the practical usefulness of generated personas through two forms of industry evidence: (1) an in-situ deployment at Kinaxis to assess, during day-to-day use, how well generated personas meet expert expectations; and (2) a comparison with pre-LLM personas developed using industry best practices. VI. L ESSONS LEARNED AND CONCLUSION 

Our collaboration with Kinaxis and the deployment of Per-Gent in an industrial context led to some noteworthy lessons for both researchers and practitioners. 

Lesson 1: The critique-refinement loop is indispens-able when external resources are unavailable. Across both evaluations (expert in-situ review and comparison to pre-LLM expert personas), the best results arise when external resources are combined with an agentic critique-refinement loop. Nevertheless, when up-to-date domain artifacts (e.g., interviews and surveys) are available, single-shot generation already performs reasonably well, and the critique-refinement loop yields a smaller, incremental improvement. In contrast ,when such resources are absent, single-pass generation deteri-orates substantially. In this setting, the critique-refinement loop becomes key to quality. The practical take-away here, based on our findings for RQ2 and RQ3, is:  

> •

Use external resources alongside a critique-refinement loop for best results; however, when high-quality exter-nal resources exist, the improvement from the critique-refinement loop is comparatively modest. These gains should be weighed against added inference cost: PerGent averaged 4.8 LLM calls per persona, with longer prompts from critique-refinement loop and external resources, versus one LLM call for non-agentic baselines.  

> •

If high-quality external resources are unavailable or ex-pensive to curate, ensure the critique-refinement loop is used, as it compensates to a meaningful extent for the absence of external resources. 

Lesson 2: LLMs can be a double-edged sword for completeness. In our in-situ deployment (RQ1), the stronger methods produced drafts that experts largely approved, with no additions made by the experts. This suggests that reviewers perceived few (if any) major omissions during the review. Yet, the comparison with pre-LLM personas (RQ2) reveals a clear tension: preservation remains well below 1.0 (e.g., full preservation ≈ 0.42 for PerGent), even though distinctness is high ( ≈ 0.71). In other words, despite being content-rich, the LLM-generated personas fail to capture a significant portion of expert knowledge. A plausible explanation for what may have happened in the in-situ study is an interaction effect introduced by the review setting itself. Because experts were presented with a rich draft rather than starting from a blank page, the task may have implicitly shifted from elicitation to evaluation . In such settings, reviewers may naturally focus on improving and validating what is already present (e.g., refining wording or qualifiers) rather than actively searching for missing informa-tion. Consequently, omissions that might have surfaced during a blank-page analysis may remain unnoticed during draft review. While our data does not isolate the underlying root cause, it suggests an important implication for requirements completeness: expert approval of an LLM-generated artifact should not be interpreted as evidence of completeness. In practice, when LLM outputs serve as the starting point for analysis, completeness may need to be assessed as an explicit objective rather than inferred from expert acceptance alone. 

Lesson 3: The LLM you choose matters. Despite increas-ing convergence on standard benchmarks, the evaluated LLMs showed substantial task-specific variation in our setting. For example, under P ER GENT , distinctness ranged from 0.51 to 0.93, and full preservation ranged from 0.24 to 0.50 across LLMs (Table VI). This indicates that LLMs are not inter-changeable in practice: the same method can yield materially different outcomes depending on the model and the evaluation criteria. The key takeaway is that LLM selection remains an empirical decision requiring task-specific evaluation in the target context using appropriate data and metrics, rather than extrapolation from benchmark rankings. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from Mitacs, Kinaxis, and NSERC of Canada through the Discovery Pro-gram. We thank Gelu Ticala for his support and feedback. REFERENCES [1] S. Jung, J. Salminen, K. K. Aldous, and B. J. Jansen, “Personacraft: Leveraging language models for data-driven persona development,” 

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies , vol. 197, p. 103445, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2025.103445 [2] J. Salminen, C. Liu, W. Pian, J. Chi, E. H¨ ayh¨ anen, and B. J. Jansen, “Deus ex machina and personas from large language models: Investigating the composition of AI-generated persona descriptions,” in Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642036 [3] Y. Wang, C. Arora, X. Liu, T. Hoang, V. Malhotra, B. Cheng, and J. C. Grundy, “Who uses personas in requirements engineering: The practitioners’ perspective,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 178, p. 107609, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. infsof.2024.107609 [4] X. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Liu, H. Wang, A. Ren, and C. Arora, “Personagen: A tool for generating personas from user feedback,” in Proceedings of 31st IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE’23) , 2023, pp. 353–354. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/RE57278.2023.00048 [5] A. Cooper, The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High-Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity . Sams Publishing, 1999. [6] J. Shin, M. A. Hedderich, B. J. Rey, A. Lucero, and A. Oulasvirta, “Understanding human-AI workflows for generating personas,” in 

Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 2024, pp. 757–781. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10. 1145/3643834.3660729 [7] J. An, H. Kwak, S.-G. Jung, J. Salminen, M. Ahmad, and B. J. Jansen, “Imaginary people representing real numbers: Generating personas from online social media data,” ACM Transactions on the Web , vol. 12, no. 4, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3265986 [8] B. J. Jansen, S. Jung, and J. Salminen, “From flat file to interface: Synthesis of personas and analytics for enhanced user understanding,” Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology , vol. 57, no. 1, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1002/pra2.215 [9] S. Jung, J. Salminen, H. Kwak, J. An, and B. J. Jansen, “Automatic persona generation (apg): A rationale and demonstration,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2018, p. 321–324. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3176349.3176893 [10] A. Schuller, D. Janssen, J. Blumenr¨ other, T. M. Probst, M. Schmidt, and C. Kumar, “Generating personas using LLMs and assessing their viability,” in Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650860 [11] I. Bouzenia, P. Devanbu, and M. Pradel, “RepairAgent: An autonomous, LLM-based agent for program repair,” in 

Proceedings of 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’25) , 2025, p. 2188–2200. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00157 [12] F. Batole, D. O’Brien, T. N. Nguyen, R. Dyer, and H. Rajan, “An LLM-based agent-oriented approach for automated code design issue localization,” in Proceedings of 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’25) , 2025, pp. 1320–1332. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00100 [13] S. Cheng, Y. Duan, Y. Li, L. Chen, Y. Xiao, Q. Li, L. Lin, Y. Jiang, and J. Zhao, “Advanced smart contract vulnerability detection via LLM-powered multi-agent systems,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2830–2846, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2025.3597319 [14] D. Roy, X. Zhang, R. Bhave, C. Bansal, P. Las-Casas, R. Fonseca, and S. Rajmohan, “Exploring LLM-based agents for root cause analysis,” in 

Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 656–660. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3663529.3663841 [15] P. Khamsepour, M. Cole, I. Ashraf, S. Puri, M. Sabetzadeh, and S. Nejati, “The impact of critique on LLM-based model generation from natural language: The case of activity diagrams,” 

arXiv preprint , vol. abs/2509.03463, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.03463 [16] N. Ayoughi, D. Dewar, S. Nejati, and M. Sabetzadeh, “DSL or Code? Evaluating the quality of LLM-generated algebraic specifications: A case study in optimization at Kinaxis,” in Proceedings of 48th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP’26) , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2601.00469 [17] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation,” 2023, arXiv:2308.08155 [cs]. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.08155 [18] D. Karolita, J. McIntosh, T. Kanij, J. Grundy, and H. O. Obie, “Use of personas in requirements engineering: A systematic mapping study,” 

Information and Software Technology , vol. 162, p. 107264, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2023.107264 [19] D. Karolita, J. Grundy, T. Kanij, H. Obie, and J. McIntosh, “What’s in a persona? A preliminary taxonomy from persona use in requirements engineering,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software Engineering (ENASE’23) , 2023, pp. 39–51. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5220/0011708500003464 [20] A. E. Hassan, H. Li, D. Lin, B. Adams, T.-H. Chen, Y. Kashiwa, and D. Qiu, “Agentic software engineering: Foundational pillars and a research roadmap,” arXiv preprint , vol. 2509.06216, 2025, preprint. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.06216 [21] M. H. Amini, S. Nejati, and M. Sabetzadeh, “Online repository for PerGent,” https://github.com/M-H-Amini/PerGent, 2026. [22] J. Cheng, M. Marone, O. Weller, D. Lawrie, D. Khashabi, and B. Van Durme, “Dated data: Tracing knowledge cutoffs in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12958 , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.12958 [23] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica, “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (NeurIPS’23) , vol. 36, 2023, pp. 46 595–46 623. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05685 [24] J. Huang, Y. Zhong, G. Yu, Z. Jiang, M. Yan, W. Luan, T. Yang, R. Ren, and M. R. Lyu, “iKnow: An intent-guided chatbot for cloud operations with retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE’25) , 2025, pp. 958–970. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00084 [25] K. Krippendorff, Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology ,4th ed. SAGE Publications, 2018. [26] D. Rey and M. Neuh¨ auser, “Wilcoxon signed-rank test,” in International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science , M. Lovric, Ed., 2011, pp. 1658– 1659. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-04898-2 616 [27] A. Vargha and H. D. Delaney, “A critique and improvement of the CL common language effect size statistics of McGraw and Wong,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 101–132, 2000. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3102/10769986025002101