Title: DECSELFMASK: Leveraging Unlabeled Text via Self-Relevance-Guided Masking for Decoder-Only Classification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09466v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:21:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# DEC SELF MASK : Leveraging Unlabeled Text via Self-Relevance-Guided Masking for Decoder-Only Classification 

Pietro Ferrazzi 1,2 , Matteo Merler 1,

Giovanni Bonetta 1, Alberto Lavelli 1, Bernardo Magnini 1

> 1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy 

> 2

University of Padova, Italy  

> Correspondence: pferrazzi [at] fbk [dot] eu

Abstract 

Classification tasks require annotated data, which can often be expensive, time-consuming, or even unfeasible to collect. This is the case of the medical domain, where large datasets often have few annotated examples. To ad-dress this, we propose DecSelfMask (Decoder Self-learning by Masking), an approach to en-hance decoder-only performance on classifica-tion tasks. We build on common self-learning approaches by leveraging a model to create training examples from unlabeled data to pro-pose a novel relevance-guided masking strategy. We use relevance attribution methods to deter-mine what portions of unannotated texts are rel-evant for a task. We then create self-supervised training examples by masking out those por-tions, training the model to reconstruct them via next-token-prediction. We hypothesize that those examples convey knowledge about the structure and semantics of unannotated data that can be useful for downstream performance. We test our approach on 136 tasks from a col-lection of 1.9M clinical notes from an Italian hospital. We quantify DecSelfMask’s impact on downstream tasks on 5 models of differ-ent scales and families, including a probing analysis. Experiments show consistent gains, outperforming standard supervised fine-tuning approaches (+19.9 points in Macro F1), syn-thetic label generation (+12.5), and continual pretraining (+6.3), as well as common base-lines. 

Classification tasks require annotated data, which can often be expensive, time-consuming, or even unfeasible to collect. This is the case of the medical domain, where large datasets often have few annotated examples. To address this, we pro-pose D EC SELF MASK (Decoder Self-learning by Masking), an approach to enhance decoder-only performance on classification tasks. We build on common self-learning approaches by leveraging a model to create training examples from unlabeled data to propose a novel relevance-guided masking strategy. We use relevance attribution methods to determine what portions of unannotated texts are relevant for a task. We then create self-supervised training examples by masking out those portions, training the model to reconstruct them via next-token-prediction. We hypothesize that those ex-amples convey knowledge about the structure and semantics of unannotated data that can be useful for downstream performance. We test our approach on 

136 tasks from a collection of 1.9M clinical notes from an Italian hospital. We quantify D EC SELF -MASK ’s impact on downstream tasks on 5 models of different scales and families, including a prob-ing analysis. Experiments show consistent gains, outperforming standard supervised fine-tuning ap-proaches ( +19 .9 points in Macro F1), synthetic label generation ( +12 .5), and continual pretraining (+6 .3), as well as common baselines. 

1 Introduction 

Training automatic systems to perform Natural Lan-guage Processing tasks requires large amounts of high-quality annotated data (van Engelen and Hoos, 2020; Yakimovich et al., 2021). Annotations col-lection can be performed by non-experts (Snow et al., 2008), but there are cases where high degrees of expertise are required (Yang et al., 2019). Such processes can be expensive and time-consuming, and in domains like medicine they can represent a major issue (Yakimovich et al., 2021). Because of these challenges, medical applica-tions often involve an abundance of raw data, and limited annotated examples. Common ap-proaches to tackle these scenarios rely on self-training (Wang et al., 2023), where manual an-notations are first leveraged to generate synthetic ones, which are then combined with the former to train downstream models (Shi et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2025). Other approaches use raw data to per-                  

> arXiv:2606.09466v1 [cs.CL] 8 Jun 2026 Figure 1: DEC SELF MASK method overview , exemplified by the task of determining if a patient has asthma. 1) Relevancy calculation : the raw text xiis pre-pended to the target text portion sT(e.g., asthma ) and given as input to the model. A relevance score is computed for each input token with respect to sT.2) Gaussian smoothing : the relevance scores are smoothed and two thresholds are identified. 3) Groups generation : portions of relevant text
> rxi|Tare identified by all consecutive tokens with relevance higher than a lower threshold, where at least one token has relevance higher than the lower threshold. 4) Masking : training sequences x′
> iare generated by masking out relevant portions of text xi.5) Training : decoders are trained via next-token-prediction on the generated examples.

form continual pretraining , aiming to adapt models to the target domain (Singhal et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), building on the relation existing between the raw text and the downstream task. While self-learning tries to project such knowl-edge into unannotated text and expand the task-oriented training set, continual-pretraining at-tempts to gain domain-oriented knowledge from the data itself, without explicitly considering the target tasks. An interesting direction remains un-derexplored at their intersection, combining the acquisition of knowledge from raw data and the guidance that can be given by annotated examples. For instance, a target task on "asthma" classifica-tion can provide guidance to automatically identify portions of a raw text such as "frequent stitches when breathing" and "critical respiratory rate" , to learn the implicit relation existing between them, and potentially increase downstream performance on the target task itself (Figure 1). Following this hypothesis, we propose Decoder Self-learning by Masking (D EC SELF MASK ), a method to create training examples from the knowl-edge embedded in unannotated data. At its core, it is a self-learning-based technique to automatically generate masked examples to train decoder-only models, specifically targeting relevant portions of the input. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We propose D EC SELF MASK , a method to combine training-based domain adaptation (continual pretraining) with self-supervised learning, aiming to increase performance on classification tasks. • We evaluate D EC SELF MASK on 136 tasks in the medical domain, finding an increase from standard approaches of +19 .9 Macro F1 points on average among models scales and families. • We compare D EC SELF MASK to several base-lines and state-of-the-art approaches, with gains of +6 .3 over continual pretraining and 

+12 .5 over self-learning. We release the codebase to utilize our frame-work,a s well as a python package to easily use D EC SELF MASK at https://github.com/ ferrazzipietro/DecSelfMask .

2 Related Work 

Semi-supervised Learning and Self-training. 

Automatic systems can be supervised or unsuper-vised (Bishop, 2006). When labeled data is present but scarce, mixed semi-supervised approaches have shown to be effective (Zhu, 2008). With the rise of LLMs, these methods have shifted toward self-learning (Singhal et al., 2023), where models are trained on the labeled examples aiming to gen-erate synthetic-labels from unannotated data, to be then utilized for further training (Gera et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2025). While these methods have shown pos-itive impact, they do not explicitly target domain-adaptation dimensions that might be relevant for domain-specific settings. 

Medical Domain Adaptation via Continual Pre-training. With the advent of LLMs, there has been a growing interest in models adaptation to the medical domain. The main technique is con-tinual pretraining (CPT) (Ou et al., 2025), where models are exposed to large corpora of raw medi-cal data via next-token-prediction, as this requires no expert labels. Examples are BioGPT (Luo et al., 2022), MedPALM-1 (Singhal et al., 2023), PMC-LLaMA (Wu et al., 2024), MedPalm-2 (Sing-hal et al., 2025), MedPhi (Corbeil et al., 2025), MedGemma (Sellergren et al., 2026). These meth-ods have shown to be effective by aligning mod-els’ knowledge to the target domain, without di-rectly modeling downstream tasks. Notably, oth-ers have shown CPT having low-to-no impact on downstream medical tasks (Ferrazzi et al., 2026a) suggesting that alternative approaches should be explored. 

Decoder-only Masking Strategies. Duki´ c and Šnajder (2024); Huang et al. (2025) propose to act on decoders’ causal mask to improve performance on sequence labeling and question answering tasks. More similar to us, Khosla et al. (2025) present a method to enable decoders to generate sentence-level representations, enabling them to perform text in-filling using bi-directional context. By contrast, we do not modify the models’ structure in any way. 

Relevance Attribution in Transformers. Sev-eral methods have been proposed to determine the relevance of the input for a given output gener-ated by a transformer-based model (Ferrando et al., 2024). While perturbation approaches (Covert et al., 2021) and contrastive attribution (Yin and Neubig, 2022) require extensive comparisons and alternative search, gradient-based methods can be applied independently from the context. Hence, we consider AttnLRP (Achtibat et al., 2024) for input relevance attribution in the context of our method. 

3 Problem Formulation and Hypothesis 

In this work, we propose a method to leverage the structure of unlabeled, domain-specific corpora to solve downstream classification tasks. Our ap-proach relies on the hypothesis that if relevant in-formation can be automatically identified, it can be exploited to construct self-supervised learning objectives, aligned with the downstream task. 

Learning from Unlabeled Data. Let us define 

X = {xi}Ni=1 denoting a collection of sequences sampled from a domain-specific corpus, and let 

C = {ci ∈ { c1, ..., c K }} Ni=1 denote the relative class labels for the classification task T , which are unknown. Following van Engelen and Hoos (2020), we investigate whether the marginal distri-bution over the input space P( x) contains useful information for learning the posterior distribution 

P( c | x). In our setting, a decoder-only language model LLM( c | x) is used to estimate this condi-tional distribution. Our central hypothesis, similar to the one behind continual pretraining, is that the conditional distribution P( c | x) is not indepen-dent from the structure of the input distribution 

P( x). Consequently, we hypothesize that learning regularities, dependencies, and semantic structures within the unlabeled examples sampled from P( x)

can improve performance on the downstream task 

T ∼ P( c | x). However, the relationship between 

P( x) and P( c | x) is generally implicit and task-dependent (Oliver et al., 2018). In what follows, we describe our approach to verify this hypothesis. 

Linking P( c|x) and P( x) through LLM . Clas-sification tasks rely on the fact that given an input sequence xi and a task T , there are portions of xi

that are relevant to predict the task-related label ci.Let 

rxi|T (start , end ) = {xi,j }end  

> j=start

⊂ xi (1) denote a subset of tokens in xi identified as rele-vant 1 for the downstream task T . Instead of directly learning LLM( ci | xi), we define an auxiliary self-supervised objective: 

LLM( rxi|T | x′

> i

), (2) where the model predicts a relevant portion of the input rxi|T from x′ 

> i

= xi \rxi|T , the input text itself where the relevant portion has been masked out            

> 1For simplicity, in the following we refer to
> rxi|T(start ,end )as rxi|T

(Figure 1, top right). This formulation resembles self-learning, where the model itself identifies the labels to learn from. Our hypothesis is then framed as follows: the LLM can be trained on the objective defined in Equation 2 (which solely depends on the input P(x) ) to better approximate P(c |x) .In other words, we hypothesize that learning to auto-regressively predict task-relevant portions 

rxi|T from x′ 

> i

encourages the model to acquire domain-specific knowledge, linguistic structures, and latent correlations that are also beneficial for the downstream task T .

The "Two Peaks" Intuition. We aim to train models on those inputs xi that convey some rele-vant knowledge rxi|T about the downstream task 

T , according to the structure of Equation 2. On the other hand, we rely on utilizing rxi|T as a label that needs to be predicted, masking it out from the train-ing sequence x′

> i

. Then, there is no guarantee that, after masking, x′ 

> i

will convey enough task-relevant information to properly predict rxi|T in the context of T . Therefore, we include in our training set only sequences with two or more disjointed relevant portions rxi|T (s1, e 1) and rxi|T (s2, e 2) (Figure 1, bottom right). By doing so, we leverage the self-learning framework to its full extent, by training models to predict one portion of text that the model itself identified as relevant to the task, ensuring at least another one exists to provide enough context for this to be possible. We refer to this idea as the "two peaks" framework, given that we only select sequences with at least two peaks of relevance. 

Relevance Estimation. Our method relies on the ability to extract portions rx|T that are somehow 

relevant for the downstream task T , to then expose models to that information. Following the concept of self-learning , we compute such relevance by leveraging the model itself. We append to each input xi a short string sT that describes the task 

T (in the example of Figure 1, sT = “ asthma “). Then, we use AttnLRP (Achtibat et al., 2024) to quantify the relevance attributed by the model itself to each token in xi if it was generating sT . For a given sequence of input tokens xi = {xi, 1, ...x i,n },AttnLRP provides a relevance score for each token 

rel xi|sT = {rel xi, 1|sT , . . . , rel xi,n |sT }.

Training Data Selection. We define a sequence 

xi as relevant for a task T if there exist at least two disjoint subsequences where all tokens have relevance higher than a lower threshold tl, and at least one token has relevance higher than an up-per threshold tu (following the "two peaks" frame-work). Formally, each of the two disjoint subse-quences rxi|T (s, e ) complies with the following conditions:                   

> cond 1(s, e ) : G(rel xi,j |sT)≥tl∀j∈[s, e ]cond 2(s, e ) : ∃j∈[s, e ]s.t. G(rel xi,j |sT)≥tu,(3)

where G() is a gaussian smoothing function on the relevance scores (Figure 1, step 2). Since rel xi,j |sT is defined over tokens, rxi|T

spans may not align with full words and can split sub-word tokens. For smoothing purposes, we ex-tend each span to cover the complete words inter-secting the selected token range. The objective proposed in Equation 2, combined with the training data defined in this manner, acts as a form of task-oriented self-supervision: the model extracts supervision signals directly from unlabeled data by leveraging the fact that it has identified as relevant for the task at least another portion of text. 

4 Experimental Setup 

To verify the hypothesis defined in Section 3, we require a large dataset of unlabeled data together with a smaller set of expert-annotated data for medical classification tasks. We leverage the SGB dataset of medical text presented by Ferrazzi et al. (2026b), released with a permissive license. This comprises around 1.9 million anonymized clinical notes coming from the Emergency Department of the San Giovanni Bosco Hospital in Italy, including all notes produced over a three-year span. Ferrazzi et al. (2026c) further proposed the Case Report Form (CRF) filling task built on top of the SGB dataset. The task consists of filling a list of 136 medical items with the correct values, given a clinical note as input. We reshape the task to make it resemble pure classification and obtain a set of 136 individual classification tasks, one for each of the original CRF items. Each classification task is characterized by three or more possible la-bels. For instance, the classification task defined by the string sT "heart rate " consists in determining whether a patient is " bradycardic ", " normocardic ", "tachycardic ", or if there is not enough information to determine so (" unknown "). We obtain the dataset extended to 6404 notes 2, each annotated for one or more relevant tasks, resulting in 61 k pairs of                         

> 2Can be obtained via email from the CRF Shared Task org. Dataset Description Use nwords n tasks
> SGB Anonymized raw clinical notes from the emergency department of an Italian hospital. Generation of the D EC SELF -MASK training examples. 1.9M 125.7M —CRF Annotated clinical notes from the SGB dataset on 136 medical items. Each note is annotated once for each relevant item. Guidance on how to construct the D EC SELF MASK training ex-amples; main evaluation. 61k 4.7M 136 Chronicity Annotated clinical notes from the SGB dataset determining whether a patient has chronic conditions. Evaluate DEC SELF MASK on tasks not involved in its defini-tion and training. 2587 335k 1T-D Annotated clinical notes from the SGB dataset determining whether a patient is ad-mitted to the emergency department with loss of consciousness or dyspnea. Evaluate DEC SELF MASK on tasks not involved in its defini-tion and training. 1713 331k 1

Table 1: Datasets used in our experiments , with number of examples n, words , and tasks (where applicable). 

SGB is used for D EC SELF MASK learning, to improve performance on classifying notes on the 136 CRF items. 

Chronicity and T-D are not directly involved in the D EC SELF MASK process, but left for further testing. 

note-annotation in total. Each task has an average of 440 annotated examples per task (variance of 

147 ). A comprehensive list of all tasks and their label space is reported in Table 5 (Appendix). Furthermore, we define two held-out classifica-tion tasks on notes from the SGB dataset, determin-ing if a patient presents any " chronic " condition, or determining whether a patient is entering the emergency department with " dyspnea " or " loss of consciousness (tloc) ". We reserve the two tasks for evaluating whether the knowledge acquired during DEC SELF MASK training can transfer to previously unseen tasks. We believe this setting is particu-larly relevant in real-world medical environments, where new classification needs may emerge over time. All datasets are described in Table 1. 

Relevancy Calculation. We follow the proce-dure described in Section 3 to generate the masked training data (Figure 1). For each task T (out of the 136 ), we need to define the target sT to base the relevance generation on. In the datasets we use, each T comes with a short text (one to five words) that defines the dimension to classify the note on (e.g. heart rate , Table 5 for full list). Therefore, we can use it as sT , making sure the relevance calcula-tion is based on text that is relevant for T itself. For each task, we append sT to each clinical note in the SGB dataset (template is provided in Appendix C). The calculation of the relevance via AttnLRP must be performed over one single generated to-ken; however, all 136 sT texts are multi-token se-quences. While we could average the relevance calculated for each generated token, this would re-sult in repeated runs over the input, increasing the computational burden. Instead, we use the rele-vance computed on the middle token of sT as a computationally efficient proxy. See Appendix A for the validation of this choice. For the same rea-sons, we do not utilize the whole dataset, and limit to a randomly selected set of half a million clinical notes, and two tasks for each note. Overall, we run relevance calculation on one million prompts. This step takes 30 GPU hours on one NVIDIA L40S. 

DEC SELF MASK Training Sequences Genera-tion. Once the relevance is obtained for all notes, we perform Gaussian smoothing (kernel size= 3,sigma= 1), and set an upper ( 0.4) and lower ( 0.2)thresholds to identify the groups of relevant tokens. Then, we drop all sequences that do not contain at least "two peaks", and perform de-duplication, as different sT texts might have identified the same to-ken groups as relevant for different tasks T , which would result in identical training sequences. For each note containing two relevant spans, we generate training examples by masking one span at a time (Figure 1, top right). Due to the large number of generated examples, we further filter the dataset by retaining only sequences in which an-other relevant span occurs to the left of the masked region. This has two reasons: (i) two relevant se-quences from the same clinical note most likely contain similar information, and (ii) encouraging the model to infer the masked content from pre-ceding contextual information, thus mimicking the autoregressive nature of the downstream task. We collect all the sequences found to be useful for all 136 tasks in one single dataset of 1.03 M

examples. Each example is composed by a clinical Model SFT Probing ∆best 

Base DSM ∆DSM Base DSM ∆DSM 

Llama3-1B 21.9 ± 1.0 19.69 ± 1.0 -2.2 34.1 ± 1.1 47.0 ± 1.3 +12.9 +25.2 

Qwen3-1.7B 30.9 ± 1.2 22.3 ± 1.0 -8.6 33.3 ± 1.2 46.8 ± 1.3 +13.5 +15.9 

Gemma3-4B 37.5 ± 1.2 44.4 ± 1.3 +7.0 36.1 ± 1.2 47.5 ± 1.3 +11.4 +10.0 

Llama3-8B 35.3 ± 1.0 42.9 ± 1.2 +7.6 55.6 ± 1.3 55.8 ± 1.3 +0.2 +20.5 

Qwen3-8B 32.5 ± 1.2 40.4 ± 1.2 +7.9 52.5 ± 1.3 60.3 ± 1.2 +7.7 +27.8 

Table 2: Impact of D EC SELF MASK training across task-adaptation strategies. The SFT columns report performance for supervised fine-tuning of the base or DSM models, while the Probing columns report performance when using a classification head on the final layer. For each strategy, ∆DSM is the difference between the DSM model and its corresponding base model. The final column reports the performance gain of the best DSM adaptation strategy (either SFT or probing) over the standard SFT baseline applied to the base model. Results are reported as Macro F1 with 95% confidence intervals. 

note where a portion has been masked out (to be used as input ), the text sT used for the masking process, the text in the masked portion (to be used as label ), and the valid labels. 

DEC SELF MASK Training. To verify if the gen-erated training pairs of input and output can be utilized as sources of knowledge about the don-wstream classification tasks they were designed for, we analyze three model families in their in-structed versions: Llama3 , Qwen3 in their ∼1B and 

8B versions, and Gemma3-4B to represent a mid size between the previous ones. We train all parameters for one epoch using the hyperparameters described in Appendix B on two NVIDIA H200 GPUs (re-quiring a total of 68 GPU hours). The learning objective is next token prediction over the prompt structure presented in Appendix C. By doing so, we obtain 5 DEC SELF MASK -models, which can be used to analyze the effect of our method. 

5 Evaluation and Discussion 

Downstream Tasks Training. We compare the base models with their D EC SELF MASK versions, to determine the impact of D EC SELF MASK train-ing. We aim to adapt both versions to the down-stream tasks, and determine which performs better. To do so, we perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the 136 downstream tasks. We divide the CRF dataset into an 85-15 train-test split. For both set-tings, we train one single multi-task model for all tasks at once, using LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), for one epoch, with the hyperparameters described in Appendix B, for a total of 30 GPU hours. We calculate performance on all 136 tasks. As the aggregation metric, we use the macro F1 fol-lowing previous work (Ferrazzi et al., 2026c), to summarize the results on all tasks in one single met-ric. We compare the performance of base models which undergo task-oriented SFT to our D EC SELF -MASK -models that undergo the same fine-tuning. As shown in Table 2 (SFT columns), we observe that D EC SELF MASK was detrimental for small models ( ∼1B), with an average decrease of perfor-mance of −5.4. On the other hand, it resulted in a homogeneous increase for bigger models, with a 

+7 .5 positive impact. We hypothesize that this behavior is not due to small models failing to acquire useful knowl-edge with D EC SELF MASK , but rather to their limited capacity to coherently generate tokens that reflect this knowledge when prompted to generate the output. In other words, smaller models may successfully encode information that is beneficial for the downstream task, yet lack the representational capacity required to effec-tively transfer or exploit this knowledge after au-toregressive SFT. To verify this hypothesis, fur-ther analysis on DecSelfMask-Llama3-1B and 

DecSelfMask-Qwen3-1.7B is required. 

Probing. To better understand why training with DEC SELF MASK improves downstream perfor-mance only for bigger models, we perform a prob-ing analysis by training a shallow classifier on top of the last hidden layer of the small models ( ∼

1B). We add a classification head on the last hidden representation, composed by a linear layer (output size of 256 ), a ReLU activation with 0.1 dropout, and an output layer to map the 256 neurons to the output classes. We train this head with the hyper-parameters described in Appendix B, for an overall Model Tloc-Dyspnea Chronicity Average Gain SFT Base CH Base CH DSM SFT Base CH Base CH DSM ∆CH ∆SFT 

Llama3-1B 50.5 79.5 84.0 65.8 65.8 69.5 +4.1 +18.6 

Qwen3-1.7B 36.9 78.1 86.7 68.9 65.3 68.3 +5.8 +24.6 

Gemma3-4B 50.9 85.5 82.6 63.5 66.3 70.1 +0.4 +19.2 

Llama3-8B 71.6 80.2 81.3 64.9 64.5 68.1 +2.3 +6.5 

Qwen3-8B 47.2 79.3 80.3 56.9 64.7 68.8 +2.6 +22.5          

> Table 3: Transfer to Held Out Classification Tasks. We evaluate whether representations learned through DEC SELF MASK training transfer to classification tasks not used when constructing the D EC SELF MASK training sequences. For each task, we report F1 scores for supervised fine-tuning of the base model ( SFT Base ), a classification head trained on the base model ( CH Base ), and a classification head trained on the corresponding DEC SELF MASK model ( CH DSM ). ∆CH is the average F1 gain of CH DSM over CH Base across the two tasks.
> ∆SFT is the average F1 gain of CH DSM over SFT Base across the two tasks.

of 24 L40S GPU hours. The results are reported in Table 2 (last four columns). We observe a con-sistent positive effect, suggesting that D EC SELF -MASK successfully injects useful information into the learned representations, even in cases where this does not translate into improved downstream autoregressive generation performance. The mod-els that underwent our training result in a homoge-neous average increase of +13 .2 points. 

From SFT to Probing. The probing analysis sug-gests that even smaller models learn an useful rep-resentation for the downstream tasks. Furthermore, by comparing the results obtained via SFT and probing, we observed that the potential of the mod-els on these tasks goes much beyond what they exhibit after standard, auto-regressive SFT (an ef-fect that has been analyzed by Lyu et al. (2026)). In fact, Llama3-1B with a classification head before SFT achieves a Macro F1 +11 .2 points higher than after standard SFT and without the head ( +2 .4 for 

Qwen3-1.7B ). Building on this evidence, we train a classification head on top of the larger models as well, to verify if they could achieve better per-formance. We use the same structure and training parameters described above, obtaining the results shown in Table 2. We highlight two aspects: first, when adapting models to downstream tasks by adding a classi-fication head, D EC SELF MASK gives an average improvement of +9 .1 in Macro F1, showcasing that the training procedure effectively injects useful knowledge into the models’ representations from the unannotated data. Second, the average perfor-mance gain moving from auto-regressive SFT on the base model to classification heads on the D EC -SELF MASK version is +19 .9 points, showing this approach to be the most effective. 

Held Out Tasks. We reserve two tasks to evalu-ate whether the knowledge acquired during D EC -SELF MASK training on the 136 medical classifica-tion tasks can transfer to new classification settings. We employ two datasets Chronicity and T-D de-scribed in Section 4 and in Table 1. The evaluation metric for both tasks is the F1 score. We build on the finding that classification heads overperform SFT, and follow this to adapt base models and their D EC SELF MASK counterparts. In addition, we provide for comparison standard SFT results on the base models, and report all findings in Table 3. The probing strategy showcases that D EC -SELF MASK results in higher F1 ( +3 .0 on average across all models) when compared to the base, and it presents an even higher increase of +18 .3 when compared with the base with SFT. 

Baselines. We compare D EC SELF MASK to other methods, to contextualize its efficacy. The nat-ural baseline for text classification tasks are 

encoder-only models . We fine-tune on the 136 

CRF downstream tasks BERT and its multilin-gual version multilingual-BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), BioClinicalBERT (Alsentzer et al., 2019), 

ModernBERT (Warner et al., 2025), and a version of BERT explicitly trained for Italian (Schweter, 2020). The models are trained to receive as in-put a clinical note and the text describing the task 

sT (e.g., " heart rate ") with the hyperparameters defined in Appendix B. Moreover, we provide the performance of the decoder model that showed the best results in our experiments ( Qwen3-8B ), prompted 0- and 2-shot .For 0-shot, we run inference 3 times with slightly different system prompts in order to account for instabilities, following Sclar et al. (2024), and re-port the average. For 2-shot,we randomly sample the examples, and run inference 3 times to miti-gate bias due to their choice. Results are presented in Table 4, showing preference for encoders (up to +13 .4 points), which are still outperformed by DEC SELF MASK .

State of the Art Comparison. Our approach re-lies on training on the unannotated, raw data. As described in Section 2, the typical approach to ex-pose models to large amounts of raw data is contin-ual pretraining (CPT), whose underlying hypoth-esis inspires D EC SELF MASK . We then perform CPT on a model on the same (unmasked) raw clini-cal notes included in our method. We train using the same hyperparameters as in D EC SELF MASK ,with the standard next-token-prediction objective. While CPT has a positive impact, it still falls short w.r.t. D EC SELF MASK (−6.3 points). Finally, we include a standard self-learning ap-proach, which we take inspiration from to design the training objective of Equation 2. We train a model on the downstream tasks via SFT on the an-notated CRF data (similar to the SFT Base models from Tables 2 and 3), and then use it to generate synthetic labels for the unannotated SGB dataset. Then, we train the original base model on the com-bination of the original and the synthetic labeled data via SFT. While outperforming the base model adapted to the task via SFT ( +15 .3 points), it still falls behind our approach ( −12 .5). Overall, these results highlight that our approach obtains better performance than previous methods, by effectively integrating knowledge embedded in raw data and shaping it through a procedure that enhances classification performance. 

DEC SELF MASK further analysis. Our training procedure modifies the model’s parameters to en-code information extracted from unlabeled data, effectively steering the model’s internal represen-tations toward task-relevant patterns present in the raw corpus. To better understand the effect of this training procedure, we analyze how it alters the rel-evance assigned to different portions of the input. More specifically, we provide the model with the same prompt used during the relevance extraction phase of our pipeline, and compute the relevance attributed to the input tokens while generating the target item using the same AttnLRP score used when constructing the dataset. 

Model Macro F1 

ClinicalBERT 34.1 ± 1.2 

multilingual-BERT 34.2 ± 1.2 

BERT 36.8 ± 1.2 

BERT-Italian 38.2 ± 1.3 

ModernBERT 44.1 ± 1.3 

Qwen3-8B + 0-shot 27.7 ± 0.6 

Qwen3-8B + 2-shot 30.7 ± 0.7 

Qwen3-8B + SFT 32.5 ± 1.1 

Qwen3-8B + CH 32.5 ± 1.1 

Qwen3-8B + CPT + SFT 33.5 ± 1.3 

Qwen3-8B + CPT + CH 54.0 ± 1.4 

Qwen3-8B + synthetic SFT 47.8 ± 1.3 

Qwen3-8B + random mask + SFT 30.4 ± 1.2 

Qwen3-8B + random mask + CH 56.4 ± 1.1 

DEC SELF MASK -Qwen3-8B-CH 60.3 ± 1.2          

> Table 4: Comparison to baselines and state-ot-the-art for the 136 CRF tasks compared with our best per-forming model (D EC SELF MASK -Qwen3-8B-CH with a classification head CH ). We provide results for 0- and
> 2-shot; continual pretraining ( CPT ); self-learning where the model is trained via SFT on synthetic labels gen-erated by itself ( synthetic SFT ). We also showcase the performance of applying D EC SELF MASK with random mask ing instead of relying on relevance attribution.

This analysis reveals notable qualitative differ-ences between the base model and the correspond-ing D EC SELF MASK variant. In several cases, our models assign higher relevance to portions of the text that are semantically more aligned with the target concept (e.g, Figures 2 -7 in Appendix). We quantify this effect by leveraging the labeled clinical notes, where annotators also identified the portions of text considered relevant for each of the 136 classification tasks. We measure the change in relevance assigned to these ground-truth spans when moving from the base model to the corre-sponding D EC SELF MASK variant. For Qwen-8B ,we observe an average relevance increase of 37 .2% 

over the annotated spans, suggesting that the pro-posed self-supervised training objective effectively steers the model towards assigning higher impor-tance to actually relevant portions of the input. In addition, we provide results obtained by ab-lating the relevance attribution step, where we train the model to autoregressively reconstruct se-quences randomly masked. Table 4 (last three rows) highlights that the step has a significant impact. Figure 2: Impact of the D EC SELF MASK training on the relevance attributed by AttnLRP to the input for the task "Presence of pacemaker Pacemaker" . Red represents higher relevance being assign to a specific token by the base model when compared to its D EC SELF MASK version, while green the opposite. While the base model primarily focuses on terms related to dyspnea , the D EC SELF MASK model shifts its attention toward mentions of "PM " (pacemaker), which is substantially more relevant to the target condition 

6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce D EC SELF MASK , a task-oriented self-supervised framework to leverage un-labeled, domain-specific corpora to improve the downstream classification performance of decoder-only models, combining the assumptions underly-ing self-learning and continual pretraining .First, we propose to use input attribution meth-ods to mask out task-relevant portions of unlabeled text, and train to autoregressively reconstruct them, encouraging models to learn domain-specific pat-terns from raw data, guided by relations identified as relevant to the target tasks by models themselves. Second, we evaluate D EC SELF MASK on 136 

tasks derived from 1.9M clinical notes. We adapt models to the tasks with a classification head, as probing experiments show consistent improvement over standard SFT across model families and scales (+19 .9 F1 Macro points), also showing similar effectiveness on two held-out tasks ad well. Third, we compare D EC SELF MASK to standard 

continual pretraining (+6 .3) and self-learning ap-proaches ( +12 .5), where results further highlight the effectiveness of our approach. Overall, our findings suggest that D EC SELF -MASK is an effective way to transform unlabeled domain-specific corpora into useful training signals for decoder-only language models. 

Limitations 

Our experiments are limited to Italian clinical notes and relatively small decoder-only models, although results suggest that larger models may benefit more from D EC SELF MASK . Due to the computational cost of AttnLRP, we train on a subset of the original 2M-note corpus and perform joint self-supervised training across all tasks rather than task-specific training. Additionally, the proposed framework as-sumes that downstream tasks can be represented through short textual descriptions sT . Future work should explore more efficient relevance extraction methods, alternative masking objectives, and exten-sions to broader task settings and larger models. 

Ethical considerations 

Although our approach aims to reduce the depen-dency on expensive manual annotation, models trained on medical data may still inherit biases, in-completeness, or inaccuracies present in the under-lying clinical records. Consequently, the proposed models should not be considered a substitute for professional medical judgment. Additionally, relevance attribution methods may produce imperfect or misleading explanations of model behavior. Therefore, the relevance analy-ses presented in this work should be interpreted as approximations of model reasoning rather than faithful causal explanations. 

7 Acknowledgments 

This work has been partially funded by the Euro-pean Union under the Horizon Europe eCREAM Project (Grant Agreement No.101057726). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Health and Digital Executive Agency (HADEA). Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held. References 

Reduan Achtibat, Sayed Mohammad Vakilzadeh Hatefi, Maximilian Dreyer, Aakriti Jain, Thomas Wiegand, Sebastian Lapuschkin, and Wojciech Samek. 2024. AttnLRP: Attention-aware layer-wise relevance prop-agation for transformers. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , vol-ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , pages 135–168. PMLR. Emily Alsentzer, John Murphy, William Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Di Jindi, Tristan Naumann, and Matthew McDermott. 2019. Publicly available clin-ical BERT embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop ,pages 72–78, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Christopher M. Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . Springer, Berlin. Jean-Philippe Corbeil, Amin Dada, Jean-Michel At-tendu, Asma Ben Abacha, Alessandro Sordoni, Lu-cas Caccia, Francois Beaulieu, Thomas Lin, Jens Kleesiek, and Paul Vozila. 2025. A modular ap-proach for clinical SLMs driven by synthetic data with pre-instruction tuning, model merging, and clinical-tasks alignment. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 19352– 19374, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ian Covert, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. 2021. Ex-plaining by removing: A unified framework for model explanation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(209):1–90. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. David Duki´ c and Jan Šnajder. 2024. Looking right is sometimes right: Investigating the capabilities of decoder-only LLMs for sequence labeling. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 14168–14181, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Javier Ferrando, Gabriele Sarti, Arianna Bisazza, and Marta R. Costa-jussà. 2024. A primer on the in-ner workings of transformer-based language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2405.00208. Pietro Ferrazzi, Mattia Franzin, Alberto Lavelli, and Bernardo Magnini. 2026a. Small llms for medical nlp: a systematic analysis of few-shot, constraint decoding, fine-tuning and continual pre-training in italian. Preprint , arXiv:2602.17475. Pietro Ferrazzi, Mattia Franzin, Alberto Lavelli, and Bernardo Magnini. 2026b. Small llms for medical nlp: A systematic analysis of few-shot, constraint decoding, fine-tuning and continual pre-training in italian. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2026) ,pages 2440–2457, Palma, Mallorca, Spain. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Pietro Ferrazzi, Soumitra Ghosh, Alberto Lavelli, and Bernardo Magnini. 2026c. Overview of the crf 2026 shared task on clinical case report forms filling. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Patient-Oriented Language Processing (CL4Health) , pages 245–254. ELRA Language Resources Association (ELRA). 12 May 2026. Ariel Gera, Alon Halfon, Eyal Shnarch, Yotam Perlitz, Liat Ein-Dor, and Noam Slonim. 2022. Zero-shot text classification with self-training. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 1107–1119, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Shahriar Golchin, Mihai Surdeanu, Nazgol Tavabi, and Ata Kiapour. 2023. Do not mask randomly: Effective domain-adaptive pre-training by masking in-domain keywords. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP (RepL4NLP 2023) ,pages 13–21, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yuxian Gu, Zhengyan Zhang, Xiaozhi Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2020. Train no evil: Selective masking for task-guided pre-training. In Proceed-ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6966–6974, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Zixian Huang, Xinwei Huang, Ao Wu, Xiaxia Wang, and Gong Cheng. 2025. Transforming decoder-only models into encoder-only models with improved un-derstanding capabilities. Knowledge-Based Systems ,309:112907. Savya Khosla, Aditi Tiwari, Kushal Kafle, Simon Jenni, Handong Zhao, John Collomosse, and Jing Shi. 2025. MAGNET: Augmenting generative decoders with representation learning and infilling capabilities. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 27328–27346, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Junyu Luo, Xiao Luo, Xiusi Chen, Zhiping Xiao, Wei Ju, and Ming Zhang. 2025. Semi-supervised fine-tuning for large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 2795–2808, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2022. Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining. Briefings in Bioinformatics , 23(6). Jian Lyu, Jingfeng Xue, Weizhi Meng, Weijie Han, Jun-bao Chen, and Zeyang Liu. 2026. Systematic de-sign choices for fine-tuning text-classification mod-els: Projection space, task instructions, and label encoding. Applied Soft Computing , 187:114341. Bernardo Magnini, Begoña Altuna, Alberto Lavelli, Manuela Speranza, and Roberto Zanoli. 2020. The e3c project: Collection and annotation of a multi-lingual corpus of clinical cases. In Proceedings of the Seventh Italian Conference on Computational Linguistics (CLiC-it 2020) , pages 190–196. Avital Oliver, Augustus Odena, Colin Raffel, Ekin Do-gus Cubuk, and Ian Goodfellow. 2018. Realistic eval-uation of deep semi-supervised learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc. Yixin Ou, Yunzhi Yao, Ningyu Zhang, Hui Jin, Ji-acheng Sun, Shumin Deng, Zhenguo Li, and Huajun Chen. 2025. How do LLMs acquire new knowledge? a knowledge circuits perspective on continual pre-training. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 19889–19913, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Nafis Sadeq, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. 2022. InforMask: Unsupervised informative masking for language model pretraining. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 5866–5878, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Stefan Schweter. 2020. Italian bert and electra models. Melanie Sclar, Yejin Choi, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Alane Suhr. 2024. Quantifying language models'sensitivity to spurious features in prompt design or: How i learned to start worrying about prompt formatting. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , volume 2024, pages 25055–25083. Andrew Sellergren, Sahar Kazemzadeh, Tiam Jaroensri, Atilla Kiraly, Madeleine Traverse, Timo Kohlberger, Shawn Xu, Fayaz Jamil, Cían Hughes, Charles Lau, Justin Chen, Fereshteh Mahvar, Liron Yatziv, Tiffany Chen, Bram Sterling, Stefanie Anna Baby, Su-sanna Maria Baby, Jeremy Lai, Samuel Schmidgall, and 62 others. 2026. Medgemma technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.05201. Zhengxiang Shi, Francesco Tonolini, Nikolaos Aletras, Emine Yilmaz, Gabriella Kazai, and Yunlong Jiao. 2023. Rethinking semi-supervised learning with lan-guage models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 5614– 5634, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, Perry Payne, Martin Seneviratne, Paul Gam-ble, Chris Kelly, Abubakr Babiker, Nathanael Schärli, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Philip Mansfield, Dina Demner-Fushman, and 13 others. 2023. Large lan-guage models encode clinical knowledge. Nature ,620(7972):172–180. Karan Singhal, Tao Tu, Juraj Gottweis, Rory Sayres, Ellery Wulczyn, Mohamed Amin, Le Hou, Kevin Clark, Stephen R. Pfohl, Heather Cole-Lewis, Dar-lene Neal, Qazi Mamunur Rashid, Mike Schaeker-mann, Amy Wang, Dev Dash, Jonathan H. Chen, Nigam H. Shah, Sami Lachgar, Philip Andrew Mans-field, and 16 others. 2025. Toward expert-level medi-cal question answering with large language models. Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Ng. 2008. Cheap and fast – but is it good? evaluating non-expert annotations for natural lan-guage tasks. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 254–263, Honolulu, Hawaii. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jesper E. van Engelen and Holger H. Hoos. 2020. A sur-vey on semi-supervised learning. Machine Learning ,109(2):373–440. Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié, Orion Weller, Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, Griffin Thomas Adams, Jeremy Howard, and Iacopo Poli. 2025. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2526–2547, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. C. Wu, W. Lin, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. Xie, and Y. Wang. 2024. PMC-LLaMA: toward building open-source language models for medicine. Jour-nal of the American Medical Informatics Association ,31(9):1833–1843. Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. 2024. Efficient streaming lan-guage models with attention sinks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 21875–21895. Artur Yakimovich, Anaël Beaugnon, Yi Huang, and Elif Ozkirimli. 2021. Labels in a haystack: Approaches beyond supervised learning in biomedical applica-tions. Patterns , 2(12):100383. Yinfei Yang, Oshin Agarwal, Chris Tar, Byron C. Wal-lace, and Ani Nenkova. 2019. Predicting annotation difficulty to improve task routing and model perfor-mance for biomedical information extraction. In Pro-ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 1471–1480, Min-neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qinyuan Ye, Belinda Z. Li, Sinong Wang, Benjamin Bolte, Hao Ma, Wen-tau Yih, Xiang Ren, and Madian Khabsa. 2021. On the influence of masking policies in intermediate pre-training. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7190–7202, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kayo Yin and Graham Neubig. 2022. Interpreting lan-guage models with contrastive explanations. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 184–198, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaojin Zhu. 2008. Semi-supervised learning litera-ture survey. Technical Report 1530, University of Wisconsin–Madison. 

A Relevance Computation Details 

Encoder-only Masking Strategies. The method we present is inspired by language masking training strategies used for encoder-only models. It has been shown that the choice of what portions of text to mask is important when training encoders using masked language modeling (Gu et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2021; Sadeq et al., 2022; Golchin et al., 2023). We take inspiration from this paradigm, shifting it to autoregressive generative models. 

Middle Token Choice. As the cost of calculating the relevance using AttnLRP for all tokens in the output increases linearly with the length of the out-put, we approximate the average relevance if the input on a certain output using one single output token. A practical challenge arises when the target label is composed of multiple tokens: relevance can be computed using the hidden states associated with different decoding steps, potentially leading to different attribution patterns. In particular, it is unclear whether relevance should be estimated using the first generated token, the last one, or by aggregating information across all label tokens. To investigate this aspect, we conduct a valida-tion experiment on a medical Named Entity Recog-nition (NER) dataset (Magnini et al., 2020). For each annotated entity, we construct a prompt of the form: 

> You are an entity extractor. {text} {label}

and evaluate whether the relevance assigned by the model to the tokens in {text} corresponding to the target entity is significantly higher than what would be expected under a uniform relevance dis-tribution. 

AttnLRP Choice. We compare two relevance estimation methods, the average of the attention scores among all layers, and AttnLRP, by comput-ing token relevance using the hidden states associ-ated with: (i) the first token of the label, (ii) the last token of the label, and (iii) the middle token of the label. Our results show that using the middle token consistently produces the strongest localization sig-nal, yielding higher relevance scores over the entity span (Figure 3). This suggests that intermediate decoding steps provide a more stable representa-tion of the semantic content of multi-token labels compared to boundary tokens. By doing so, we also validate the usage of At-tnLRP, which shows the best performance in terms of relevance attribution to the ground truth in the original text. 

B Training parameters 

DEC SELF MASK training We train using 

deepspeed Zero2 and flash attention , on an effective batch size of 128 , using AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 4 · 10 −5 (cosine scheduler), weight decay of 0.001 , warmup ratio 

0.1.

Supervised fine-tuning For Supervised fine-tuning, we use a batch size of 64 , learning rate of 3 · 10 −4, warmup ratio 0.1, using AdamW opti-mizer with cosine scheduler and epsilon 1 · 10 −7.We use LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), with r 32 , alpha Figure 3: Comparison between the relevance at-tributed to ground truth portions of text i) by Pure Attention (i.e., average attention across all layers), and AttnLRP, ii) when utilizing different tokens of sT for the relevance calculation. The x axis represents the in-crease in relevance that each method is assigning to the ground truth textual portion with respect with uniform distribution (i.e, the more shifted to the right, the better). The best performing configuration is using the middle 

token with AttnLRP (top-right histogram). 

64 , and dropout 0.05 . We construct SFT sequences according to the template in Appendix C. 

Probing We train for 20 epochs, with learning rate 1 · 10 −3 and the AdamW optimizer. 

Encoder-only baseline Training of encoder-only baselines is performed for 10 epochs, with an AdamW optimizer, and a learning rate of 2 · 10 −5.Initial experiments showed that increasing the num-ber of epochs would not provide any benefit. 

C Prompts 

Relevance calculation We compute the rele-vance by using the following prompt template:  

> {clinical note} Given the patient’s medical history, the following is observed { sT}.

Note that models’ special tokens are added where required, but they are excluded from the rel-evance calculation, following the findings of Xiao et al. (2024), as well as the added text. 

DEC SELF MASK training The self-training is performed using he following template: 

> Fill in the masked word in the following sentence. {clinical note} Given the patient’s medical history, the following is observed {label}

Note that the simple system prompt is provided to leverage models instruction following, and mod-els’ special tokens are added where required. 

Supervised fine-tuning When fine-tuning D EC -SELF MASK models on the downstream CRF clas-sification tasks (each task identified by a short de-scription sT ), we combine the data examples ac-cording to the following template:  

> Fill in the masked word in the following sentence. {masked clinical note} <crf_item> { sT}? {masking token} <\crf_item> <options>{options}<\options> {label}

The masking token is a model-dependent special token that is used to substitute the masked text. On the other hand, when fine-tuning base mod-els (e.g., Qwen/Qwen3-8B ) on the same tasks, we initially kept a different template, removing the masking token. Then, we observed that changing the prompt did not impact the performance, and kept the previous versions for all. This finding is consistent with Lyu et al. (2026). options items 

A; V; P; unknown [’level of consciousness’] bradycardic; normocardic; tachycardic; unknown [’heart rate’] bradypneic; eupneic; tachypneic; unknown [’respiratory rate’] certainly active; possibly active; certainly not active; unknown [’active neoplasia’] certainly chronic; possibly chronic; certainly not chronic; unknown [’chronic pulmonary disease’, ’chronic respiratory failure’, ’chronic cardiac failure’, ’chronic renal failure’, ’chronic metabolic failure’, ’chronic rheumatologic disease’, ’chronic dialysis’] current; past; unknown [’presence of respiratory distress’] hypotensive; normotensive; hypertensive; unknown [’blood pressure’] hypothermic; normothermic; hyperthermic; unknown [’body temperature’] measured; unknown [’spo2’, ’ph’, ’pa02’, ’pac02’, ’hc03-’, ’lactates’, ’hemoglobin’, ’platelets’, ’leukocytes’, ’c-reactive pro-tein’, ’blood sodium’, ’blood potassium’, ’blood glucose’, ’creatinine’, ’transaminases’, ’inr’, ’troponin’, ’bnp or nt-pro-bnp’, ’d-dimer’, ’blood calcium’, ’serum creatinine kinase’, ’blood alcohol’, ’blood drug dosage’, ’urine drug test’] pos; neg; unknown [’carotid sinus massage’, ’supine-to-standing systolic blood pressure test’, ’blood in the stool’, ’sars-cov-2 swab test’] short; long; unknown ["duration of the patient’s consciousness recovery", "duration of the patient’s unconsciousness"] walking independently; walking with auxiliary aids; walking with physi-cal assistance; bedridden; unknown [’level of autonomy (mobility)’] y; n; unknown [’first episod of epilepsy’, ’known history of epilepsy’, ’his-tory of allergy’, ’history of recent trauma’, ’pregnancy’, ’his-tory of drug abuse’, ’history of alcohol abuse’, ’anticoagu-lants or antiplatelet drug therapy’, ’presence of prodromal symptoms’, ’compliance with antiepileptic therapy’, ’tloc dur-ing effort’, ’tloc while supine’, ’antiepileptic therapy already in place’, ’drowsiness, confusion, disorientation as postcriti-cal state’, ’stiffness during the episode’, ’drooling during the episode’, ’tonic-clonic seizures’, ’poly-pharmacological ther-apy’, ’pale skin during the episode’, ’eye deviation during the episode’, ’diffuse vascular disease’, ’neuropsychiatric dis-orders’, ’presence of pacemaker’, ’presence of defibrillator’, ’cardio-pulmonary resuscitation’, ’antihypertensive therapy’, ’cardiovascular diseases’, ’neurodegenerative diseases’, ’pe-ripheral neuropathy’, ’immunosuppression’, ’palliative care’, ’situation description, like coughing, prolonged periods of straining, sudden abdominal pain, phlebotomy’, ’problematic family context’, ’need but absence of a caregiver’, ’home-lessness’, ’living alone’, ’chest pain’, ’head or other districts trauma’, ’tongue bite’, ’agitation’, ’foreign body in the air-ways’, ’improvement of dyspnea’, ’presence of dyspnea’, ’de-mentia’, ’general condition deterioration’, ’ab ingestis pneu-monia’, ’further seizures in the ed’, ’improvement of patient’s conditions’, ’neurologist consultation’, ’ecg, any abnormal-ity’, ’ecg monitoring, any abnormality’, ’eeg, any abnormal-ity’, ’thoracic ultrasound, any abnormalities’, ’chest rx, any abnormalities’, ’gastroscopy , any abnormalities’, ’brain ct scan, any abnormality’, ’brain mri, any abnormality’, ’car-diac ultrasound, any abnormality’, ’chest ct scan, any ab-normality’, ’pulmonary scintigraphy, any abnormality’, ’ab-domen ct scan, any abnormality’, ’compression ultrasound (cus), any abnormality’, ’performance of thoracentesis’, ’ad-ministration of diuretics’, ’administration of steroids’, ’admin-istration of bronchodilators’, ’administration of oxygen/venti-lation’, ’blood transfusions’, ’administration of fluids’, ’heart failure’, ’pneumonia’, ’copd exacerbation’, ’acute pulmonary edema’, ’asthma exacerbation’, ’respiratory failure’, ’intoxi-cation’, ’covid 19’, ’influenza and various infections’, ’pneu-mothorax’, ’situational syncope’, ’epilepsy / epileptic seizure’, ’pulmonary embolism’, ’arrhythmia’, ’cardiac tamponade’, ’aortic dissection’, ’acute coronary syndrome’, ’hemorrhage’, ’severe anemia’, ’concussive head trauma’] 

Table 5: List of the 136 Case Report Form tasks and their respective labels’ space ( options ). Several tasks share the same labels. The elements in items are used to define the classification tasks, and as targets sT to quantify the relevance during the D EC SELF MASK relevance attribution step. Figure 4: Impact of the D EC SELF MASK training on the relevance attributed by AttnLRP to the input when generating the text "Antiepileptic therapy already in place" . Red represents higher relevance to be assign to a specific token by the base model when compared to its D EC SELF MASK version, while green the opposite. Our model assigns much more importance to "fenobarbital", whichis an antiepileptic drug, and reduces it to Alzheimer (irrelevant here). Interestingly, relvenace is lowered for "Crisi epilettica" (i.e., epileptic crisis), suggesting that the model has learnt to move attention to plausible portions to the ones containing the actual information. Epileptic crisis is obviously linked to its therapy, but gives no factual knowledge about medications being in place already. 

Figure 5: Impact of the D EC SELF MASK training on the relevance attributed by AttnLRP to the input when generating the text "SARS-CoV-2 swab test" . Red represents higher relevance to be assign to a specific token by the base model when compared to its D EC SELF MASK version, while green the opposite. Our model assigns much more importance to the token "Anti SARS CoV2", and reduces it to other tokens that are indeed not required by the target. Figure 6: Impact of the D EC SELF MASK training on the relevance attributed by AttnLRP to the input when generating the text "Compliance with antiepileptic therapy" . Red represents higher relevance to be assign to a specific token by the base model when compared to its D EC SELF MASK version, while green the opposite. Our model assigns much more importance to the tokens "compliance", "fenobarbital", which are both relevant to the target. 

Figure 7: Impact of the D EC SELF MASK training on the relevance attributed by AttnLRP to the input when generating the text "level of autonomy" . Red represents higher relevance to be assign to a specific token by the base model when compared to its D EC SELF MASK version, while green the opposite. Our model assigns much more importance to the tokens "rsa" (i.e., care home) and "Paziente non deambula da due anni" (The patient has not been able to walk for two years).