Title: DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization for Efficient Vision-Language-Action Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11572v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 02:49:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization for Efficient Vision-Language-Action Models 

# Siyuan Xu 

Tongji University Shanghai, China 2352539@tongji.edu.cn 

# Tianshi Wang 

Tongji University Shanghai, China tswang0116@163.com 

# Fengling Li 

University of Technology Sydney Sydney, Australia fenglingli2023@gmail.com 

# Lei Zhu 

Tongji University Shanghai, China leizhu0608@gmail.com 

# Heng Tao Shen 

Tongji University Shanghai, China shenhengtao@hotmail.com 

## Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) have demonstrated strong potential for embodied AI, yet their deployment on resource-limited robots remains challenging due to high memory and computational demands. While Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) provides an effi-cient solution, directly applying PTQ to VLAs often results in severe performance degradation during sequential control. We identify temporal error accumulation as a key factor, where quantization perturbations at the vision-language-to-action interface are pro-gressively amplified, leading to kinematic drift in executed trajec-tories. To address this issue, we propose Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization (DA-PTQ), which formulates quantization as a drift-aware optimization problem over sequential decision processes. DA-PTQ consists of two components: (1) Cross-Space Representa-tion Compensation, which mitigates structured distortions between multimodal representations and action space to improve action con-sistency, and (2) Motion-Driven Mixed-Precision Allocation, which assigns bit-widths by minimizing trajectory-level motion errors. Ex-tensive experiments show that DA-PTQ significantly reduces kine-matic drift and achieves comparable performance to full-precision models under low-bit settings, enabling practical deployment of VLAs on resource-limited robotic platforms. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence ; Vision for robotics .

## Keywords 

Vision-Language-Action Models, Post-Training Quantization, Kine-matic Drift, Efficient Reasoning 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

ACM Reference Format: 

Siyuan Xu, Tianshi Wang, Fengling Li, Lei Zhu, and Heng Tao Shen. 2026. DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization for Efficient Vision-Language-Action Models. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10. 1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn (a) Previous PTQ Strategies (b) Our DA-PTQ 

> Large Language Model
> Visual Encoder
> Text Tokenizer
> Corrupted Conditioning Action Head W4 W4 W4
> Catastrophic Trajectory Drift
> Large Language Model
> Visual Encoder
> Text Tokenizer
> Action Head W4 W4 BF16
> Mixed-Precision Allocation Representation Compensation
> Stable Trajectory Prediction Drift Sensitivity
> Structural Jacobian
> Action Vector Compensated Conditioning

Figure 1: Comparison between previous PTQ strategies and our DA-PTQ. (a) Conventional uniform quantization distorts the conditioning interface, resulting in trajectory drift during sequential control. (b) DA-PTQ stabilizes execu-tion through cross-space representation compensation and motion-driven mixed-precision allocation, thereby preserv-ing kinematically sensitive components. 

## 1 Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) [ 30 ] have emerged as a promising paradigm for embodied artificial intelligence, enabling robots to perform complex tasks based on visual observations and natural language instructions. By integrating large-scale vision en-coders, language backbones, and action generation modules within a unified architecture, recent models such as RT-2 [ 31 ] and Open-VLA [ 9] demonstrate strong generalization across a wide range of  

> arXiv:2604.11572v1 [cs.RO] 13 Apr 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al.

manipulation tasks. However, these capabilities come at the cost of substantial memory and computational overhead, often involving billions of parameters. Such requirements fundamentally conflict with the constraints of onboard robotic systems, where low latency, limited memory, and power efficiency are critical. Consequently, enabling efficient deployment of VLAs remains a central challenge for real-world embodied AI. Model compression offers a natural pathway to address this challenge. Among various techniques, quantization is particularly attractive due to its ability to simultaneously reduce memory foot-print and inference cost. While Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) [ 7 ] can recover accuracy through retraining, it is often impractical for large-scale VLA models due to the substantial computational cost and the limited availability of high-quality multimodal robotic data. In contrast, Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) [ 15 ] provides a lightweight alternative by calibrating models without retraining. Recent PTQ methods have achieved remarkable success in large language models and vision-language models. However, directly applying these techniques to VLAs often leads to severe perfor-mance degradation, and in some cases unstable control behaviors during sequential execution [27, 29]. We attribute this limitation to a fundamental mismatch between conventional quantization objectives and the sequential, control-sensitive nature of embodied decision-making. Existing PTQ meth-ods typically assume that quantization errors are independent and locally bounded, such that minimizing layer-wise reconstruc-tion error is sufficient to preserve downstream functionality (e.g., AWQ [ 12 ], GPTQ [ 4]). While this assumption is reasonable for static generation tasks, it becomes inadequate in embodied control settings, where decisions are executed sequentially and coupled through system dynamics. In VLA models, quantization perturbs latent representations at the vision-language-to-action interface, and these perturbations become temporally coupled and progres-sively amplified over time [ 2 , 13 ]. As accumulated errors interact with robot dynamics and feedback control loops, they manifest as kinematic drift, i.e., the deviation between the executed trajectory and the nominal trajectory induced by quantization, ultimately resulting in significant performance degradation [16]. Recent works have begun to explore quantization strategies tailored for VLAs. For example, SQAP-VLA [ 3] jointly optimizes quantization and token pruning, QuantVLA [ 29 ] stabilizes the perception-to-action interface via scale-calibrated adjustments, and QVLA [27] allocates bit-widths based on channel-wise action sen-sitivity. While these methods mitigate performance degradation to some extent, substantial gaps persist under aggressive compression. A key limitation is that existing approaches primarily rely on static or single-step approximations, failing to capture long-horizon error propagation and its interaction with robot dynamics. Consequently, they cannot effectively model or control trajectory-level error ac-cumulation, leaving kinematic drift as a fundamental bottleneck in achieving an optimal efficiency-accuracy trade-off. To address the above challenges, we propose Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization (DA-PTQ), a training-free framework that explicitly models and mitigates kinematic drift, as conceptually illustrated in Figure 1. Instead of treating quantization as a static reconstruction problem, DA-PTQ formulates it as a drift-aware op-timization process that explicitly accounts for both temporal accu-mulation and physical amplification of errors. Specifically, DA-PTQ consists of two complementary components. Cross-Space Repre-sentation Compensation mitigates structured distortions between multimodal representations and the action space via lightweight affine and low-rank transformations, improving action consistency under quantization. Motion-Driven Mixed-Precision Allocation fur-ther reduces long-horizon drift by assigning bit-widths based on trajectory-level motion error under resource constraints. Together, these components enable stable and efficient low-precision deploy-ment without introducing additional inference overhead. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We present a systematic analysis of error accumulation in VLA quantization, identifying kinematic drift as a key bot-tleneck arising from the interplay between quantization per-turbations and sequential embodied control. 

• We propose DA-PTQ, a training-free framework that refor-mulates quantization as a drift-aware optimization problem, integrating cross-space representation compensation and motion-driven precision allocation without incurring addi-tional inference overhead. 

• Experimental results show that DA-PTQ reduces kinematic drift and achieves performance comparable to full-precision models under low-bit settings, enabling deployment on resource-constrained robotic platforms. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Vision-Language-Action Models 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) have emerged as a domi-nant paradigm for generalist robotic control, learning direct map-pings from visual observations and natural language instructions to executable motor commands. Early works such as RT-2 [ 31 ]demonstrate that large-scale vision-language pretraining can be ef-fectively transferred to robotic manipulation by treating actions as language tokens, thereby enabling strong cross-task generalization. OpenVLA [ 9] further advances this direction by open-sourcing a 7B-parameter model trained on diverse manipulation data, establishing a widely adopted benchmark for embodied control. More recently, Gemini Robotics [ 22 ] extends this paradigm toward foundation-scale embodied agents by integrating large multimodal models with robotic control, demonstrating strong generalization and reasoning capabilities in real-world scenarios. A parallel line of work models actions in the continuous do-main using expressive generative decoders. Octo [ 23 ] and RDT-1B [ 14 ] adopt diffusion-based action heads to capture multimodal action distributions, while 𝜋 0 [1] employs flow matching for high-frequency dexterous control. CogACT [ 10 ] further integrates a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [ 17 ] action module into the VLA frame-work, showing that decoupling perception and action generation leads to more precise and temporally consistent control. More re-cently, OpenVLA-OFT [ 8] introduces fine-tuning strategies that improve both efficiency and task success rates. Building on these ad-vances, approaches such as DeepThinkVLA [ 28 ] incorporate explicit reasoning processes (e.g., chain-of-thought) into VLAs, enabling improved long-horizon planning and decision-making. DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Despite these advances, a common trend across VLAs is the rapid scaling of both vision-language backbones and action generation modules. This scaling substantially increases memory footprint and inference latency, particularly for diffusion-based policies with iterative decoding. Consequently, deploying VLAs on resource-constrained robotic platforms remains a fundamental challenge, motivating the need for efficient model compression techniques such as quantization. 

## 2.2 Post-Training Quantization 

Post-training quantization (PTQ) [ 15 ] has emerged as a practical and widely adopted solution for compressing large-scale models without retraining, making it particularly suitable for deployment on resource-constrained hardware. Existing PTQ methods can be broadly categorized into reconstruction-based and transformation-based approaches, both aiming to preserve model performance under low-bit precision by maintaining feature-space fidelity. Reconstruction-based methods, such as GPTQ [ 4] and BRECQ [ 11 ], minimize layer-wise or block-wise quantization error using second-order approximations, directly optimizing numerical re-construction. In contrast, transformation-based methods reshape feature distributions to facilitate quantization. SmoothQuant [ 26 ]mitigates activation outliers by shifting quantization difficulty to weights via channel-wise scaling, while AWQ [ 12 ] preserves salient weight channels based on activation statistics. OmniQuant [ 19 ] fur-ther extends this paradigm by jointly optimizing clipping thresholds and equivalent transformations to smooth both weight and activa-tion distributions. Beyond unimodal settings, Q-VLM [ 25 ] adapts PTQ to multimodal architectures by mitigating cross-modal distor-tions. Despite their methodological differences, these approaches share a common underlying principle: improving quantization per-formance by preserving feature-space fidelity through numerical reconstruction or statistical alignment. This perspective is closely related to prior findings such as AdaIN [ 6], which shows that align-ing first- and second-order statistics via affine transformations can effectively correct distributional shifts, and LoRA [ 5], which suggests that effective adaptations often lie in low-dimensional subspaces, motivating compact low-rank corrections for structured feature distortions. However, these methods fundamentally treat quantization as a static feature reconstruction problem, assuming that preserv-ing local numerical fidelity is sufficient to maintain downstream performance. While this assumption holds in language and vision-language models, it breaks down in embodied control. In VLA models, quantization errors perturb latent representations at the perception-action boundary and are progressively amplified during sequential execution. As these errors accumulate and interact with robot dynamics, they manifest as kinematic drift, which cannot be captured by conventional PTQ objectives and ultimately limits the achievable efficiency-accuracy trade-off. 

## 2.3 Quantization for VLMs 

Recent works have begun to explore quantization strategies specif-ically tailored for VLAs. QuantVLA [ 29 ] identifies the perception-to-action interface as a critical bottleneck under quantization and proposes scale-calibrated affine adjustments to stabilize latent rep-resentations passed to the action generation module. QVLA [ 27 ]conducts a systematic sensitivity analysis of VLA architectures, revealing pronounced channel heterogeneity and introducing a channel-wise bit allocation strategy guided by action-space sensi-tivity scores derived from Taylor expansion. SQAP-VLA [ 3] further jointly optimizes quantization and token pruning within a unified framework, targeting redundancy in both the vision encoder and the language backbone. The issue of error accumulation in sequential decision-making provides important context for understanding the limitations of these approaches. In imitation learning, Ross et al. [ 18 ] formally characterize compounding errors, showing that small perturbations can lead to quadratically increasing deviations over the task horizon. In robotics, manipulator Jacobian analysis [ 20 , 21 ] shows that errors in proximal degrees of freedom are geometrically amplified along the kinematic chain, with Jacobian column norms quantifying the amplification factor of each dimension. This geometric asymmetry is intrinsic to serial manipulator structures and is independent of specific link parameters. Despite these advances, existing VLA quantization methods ex-hibit two key limitations. First, channel sensitivity is generally estimated through static reconstruction metrics or single-step ac-tion deviations, which fail to capture how quantization errors are geometrically amplified and temporally accumulated during sequen-tial execution. Second, representational distortions at the vision-language-to-action interface are typically corrected at a coarse granularity, without explicitly modeling structured per-channel distributional shifts between full-precision and quantized feature spaces. DA-PTQ addresses these limitations through two comple-mentary components. Cross-space representation compensation performs fine-grained correction of per-channel and cross-channel distributional distortions across modalities. Motion-driven mixed-precision allocation further incorporates kinematic error propaga-tion to identify and preserve dimensions whose quantization errors most strongly accumulate into long-horizon trajectory drift. 

## 3 DA-PTQ 3.1 Problem Formulation 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) define a policy Π𝜃 that maps visual observations V𝑡 and a language instruction 𝑝 to con-tinuous actions a𝑡 :

Π𝜃 (a𝑡 | V𝑡 , 𝑝 ) = Ψ𝜃 (𝑓 𝜃 (V𝑡 , 𝑝 )) , (1) where 𝑓 𝜃 denotes the vision-language backbone and Ψ𝜃 is the action decoder. The backbone encodes multimodal inputs into a latent representation z𝑡 = 𝑓 𝜃 (V𝑡 , 𝑝 ), which serves as the conditioning signal for action generation. In modern VLA architectures, Ψ𝜃 is often implemented as a diffusion-based policy, where actions are generated via iterative de-noising conditioned on z𝑡 . While effective, this design poses unique challenges under Post-Training Quantization (PTQ), as latent-space quantization errors are repeatedly injected during decoding and fur-ther accumulate over time in sequential control. These challenges stem from two coupled mechanisms: Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al. Vision Encoder “Put spoon on the cloth” Tokens 

Action Head W4 

Cross-Space Representation Compensation 

tokenize 

Large Language Model W4 BF16 BF16 

Calibration Data 

Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation Structural Jacobian 

Action Vector 

Drift Sensitivity 

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed DA-PTQ framework. DA-PTQ enables efficient and robust diffusion-based VLA models through two key components: (1) Cross-Space Representation Compensation, which aligns distorted conditioning represen-tations with their full-precision counterparts; and (2) Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation, which leverages structural Jacobian-based sensitivity to mitigate compounding trajectory drift. Quantization Sensitivity at the Conditioning Interface. The perception-to-action interface z𝑡 acts as a tightly coupled informa-tion bottleneck through which all task-relevant signals are con-veyed to the action decoder. Under quantization, perturbations in z𝑡 directly distort the conditioning distribution. Since the de-coder depends solely on z𝑡 , these distortions propagate through all denoising steps without downstream correction, and are further amplified by the iterative diffusion process, resulting in structured distributional shifts even within a single action prediction. 

Temporal Error Accumulation in Sequential Control. Beyond single-step sensitivity, VLA policies operate in a closed-loop setting where actions affect future observations. Let 𝝐 𝑡 ∈ R7 denote the action error at timestep 𝑡 , primarily induced by quantization. The resulting end-effector deviation is: 

𝛿 e𝑡 = J(𝑡 ) 𝝐 𝑡 , (2) where J(𝑡 ) is the manipulator Jacobian. Over a horizon 𝑇 , the accu-mulated deviation becomes: 

E𝑇 =

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

J(𝑡 ) 𝝐 𝑡 . (3) This shows that quantization errors are both temporally accumu-lated and geometrically amplified via ∥J(𝑡 ) 

> :,𝑗

∥, causing small per-step errors to induce significant long-horizon drift. Taken together, quantization in VLAs induces both representation-level distortion and trajectory-level drift, which are tightly coupled yet not explicitly addressed by existing PTQ methods. 

## 3.2 Overview of DA-PTQ 

To address the coupled challenges of representation distortion and trajectory-level drift, we propose DA-PTQ, a streamlined calibration pipeline with no retraining overhead. As shown in Figure 2, it unifies cross-space representation compensation and drift-aware mixed-precision allocation into a three-stage process given a small calibration dataset. First, we perform full-precision forward passes to collect cali-bration statistics. During this stage, we extract action trajectories to estimate the manipulator Jacobian and derive temporal drift propagation scores that characterize how errors accumulate over time. In parallel, we record activation statistics at the critical vision-language-to-action interfaces, capturing the reference distribution of conditioning representations. Second, we apply cross-space representation compensation to correct distortion at the conditioning interface. After quantization, we perform a forward pass to measure activation shifts and solve for lightweight affine transformations that align quantized representa-tions with their full-precision counterparts. These transformations are analytically merged into the quantized weights and biases, in-curring no additional inference cost. Finally, we conduct drift-aware mixed-precision allocation. Based on the compensated model, we perform a lightweight sensitivity analysis to evaluate the contribution of each layer to long-horizon error accumulation. This results in a layer-wise bit-width assign-ment that preserves higher precision for drift-sensitive components while aggressively compressing less critical layers. The resulting DA-PTQ model achieves substantial compression while maintaining stable and accurate continuous control, effec-tively mitigating both conditioning distortion and long-horizon drift without incurring runtime overhead. 

## 3.3 Cross-Space Representation Compensation 

Quantization induces structured distributional distortions at the vision-language-to-action interface, where activation shifts corrupt DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

the conditioning signal for action generation. To mitigate this, we in-troduce Cross-Space Representation Compensation (CSRC), which aligns quantized activations with their full-precision counterparts through a hierarchical compensation scheme. Let zFP  

> 𝑙,𝑐

and ˆzQ 

> 𝑙,𝑐

denote the full-precision and quantized activa-tions of channel 𝑐 at interface layer 𝑙 . We first match their first- and second-order statistics computed on the calibration set. Specifically, we derive a scale factor to align the standard deviation: 

𝑔 𝑙,𝑐 = clip ©«

𝜎 FP 

> 𝑙,𝑐

𝜎 Q 

> 𝑙,𝑐

+ 𝜀 , 𝑔 min , 𝑔 max ª®¬

, (4) and a bias term to restore the mean: 

𝑑 𝑙,𝑐 = 𝜇 FP  

> 𝑙,𝑐

− 𝑔 𝑙,𝑐 · 𝜇 Q 

> 𝑙,𝑐

. (5) The corrected activation is: 

˜𝑧 𝑙,𝑐 = 𝑔 𝑙,𝑐 ˆ𝑧 Q 

> 𝑙,𝑐

+ 𝑑 𝑙,𝑐 . (6) While per-channel scaling corrects diagonal shifts, it fails to capture structured cross-channel distortion. To address this, we introduce a dense affine transformation M𝑙 that aligns second-order statistics between full-precision and quantized activations. Let 𝚺 FP 

> 𝑙

and 𝚺 Q 

> 𝑙

denote their empirical covariance matrices. We solve: 

min 

> M𝑙

𝜆 𝑓 W ⊙



𝚺 FP  

> 𝑙

− M𝑙 𝚺 Q 

> 𝑙

M⊤

> 𝑙

 2 

> 𝐹

+ 𝜆 𝑖 ∥M𝑙 − I∥2 

> 𝐹

, (7) where W is a diagonal weight matrix derived from per-channel variance ratios, and 𝜆 𝑖 regularizes the solution toward identity to preserve stability. To ensure efficiency, we parameterize M𝑙 as a low-rank update to the identity: 

M𝑙 = I + U𝑙 V⊤ 

> 𝑙

, 𝑟 ≪ 𝑑, (8) obtained via truncated SVD of the dense solution. The fully corrected activation is given by: 

˜z𝑙 = M𝑙 ˆzQ 

> 𝑙

+ d𝑙 , (9) where the bias restores the mean of the aligned distribution. All compensation parameters are analytically folded into the quantized weights during calibration, incurring zero inference overhead. 

## 3.4 Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation 

To mitigate temporally accumulated errors in continuous control, we propose a Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation (DA-MPA) strategy that explicitly accounts for how quantization noise propa-gates and amplifies over long horizons. In embodied control tasks, quantization errors introduced at each timestep accumulate through closed-loop interactions, resulting in trajectory drift and covariate shift. Directly modeling this process by unrolling environment dynamics is both computationally prohib-itive and non-differentiable. To address this, we adopt an analytical surrogate that approximates temporal drift via single-step spatial error propagation. The action vector is defined as a 7-dimensional Cartesian increment: 

a𝑡 = [Δ𝑥, Δ𝑦, Δ𝑧, Δ𝑟 𝑥 , Δ𝑟 𝑦 , Δ𝑟 𝑧 , Δ𝑔 ] ∈ R7. (10) Under the small-angle assumption ( ∥Δr∥ ≪ 1), rotational com-ponents can be approximated as angular deviations: 

Δ𝑟 𝑖 ≈ 𝛿𝜃 𝑖 . (11) For typical tabletop manipulation, drift is dominated by mo-tion in the horizontal plane. We therefore project the action into three principal components corresponding to planar translation and rotation. To model error accumulation, we reinterpret the action dimen-sions as joint increments of a virtual planar serial chain, q =

[𝑞 1, . . . , 𝑞 7]. The absolute orientation of the 𝑗 -th segment accu-mulates upstream perturbations: 

𝜃 𝑗 =

> 𝑗

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑞 𝑖 , (12) which provides a differentiable proxy for how per-dimension errors propagate and accumulate, mimicking long-horizon drift behavior. We quantify how perturbations in each action dimension affect the end-effector by deriving the structural Jacobian J ∈ R3×7 of the virtual chain: 

𝐽 ( 𝑗 ) 

> 𝑥

= −

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =𝑗

sin 𝜃 𝑘 , 𝐽 ( 𝑗 ) 

> 𝑦

=

> 6

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =𝑗

cos 𝜃 𝑘 , 𝐽 ( 𝑗 ) 

> 𝜃

= 1. (13) Stacking these components yields: 

J =



𝐽 (1) 

> 𝑥

· · · 𝐽 (7)

> 𝑥

𝐽 (1) 

> 𝑦

· · · 𝐽 (7)

> 𝑦

1 · · · 1



. (14) This structure naturally captures error amplification: earlier di-mensions influence more downstream segments, resulting in larger column norms, i.e., ∥J:,𝑗 ∥ > ∥J:,𝑗 +1 ∥. Thus, the Jacobian encodes the intrinsic topology of drift propagation without requiring task-specific supervision. To isolate the contribution of each dimension to overall drift, we compute the damped least-squares pseudo-inverse: 

J+ = J⊤  JJ ⊤ + 𝜆 I3

 −1 , (15) where 𝜆 > 0 ensures numerical stability. We further introduce axis-dependent weights to balance transla-tional and rotational sensitivities. The drift propagation score for dimension 𝑗 is defined as: 

𝑠 𝑗 = Ea∼D 

∑︁ 𝑐 ∈ { 𝑥,𝑦,𝜃 }

𝑤 𝑐 𝐽 +

> 𝑗,𝑐



. (16) We normalize these scores to obtain drift sensitivity weights: 

ˆ𝑠 𝑗 = 𝑠 𝑗 

> 17

Í7 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑠 𝑖 

. (17) These weights quantify how strongly errors in each action di-mension contribute to long-horizon drift. We incorporate the drift sensitivity weights into the calibration objective to penalize quantization noise that disproportionately amplifies drift: 

Ldrift = Ex,𝝐 ,𝑡 

" 7∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

ˆ𝑠 𝑗 ·   ˆ𝜖 𝑗 (x𝑡 , 𝑡, z) − 𝜖 𝑗 

2

#

. (18) Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al. 

Under this objective, gradients are automatically reweighted to emphasize dimensions with high drift sensitivity. For each quan-tizable layer 𝑙 , we compute its drift sensitivity score by averaging gradient magnitudes over 𝑅 calibration steps: 

𝜙 𝑙 = 1

𝑅 

> 𝑅

∑︁  

> 𝑟 =1

1

𝑑 out 

> 𝑑 out

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜕 Ldrift 

𝜕 W𝑙  

> (𝑟 )
> 𝑖

. (19) Layers are then ranked according to 𝜙 𝑙 . To tightly control tem-poral drift, the top 𝑘 % most sensitive layers are retained in high precision (BF16), while the remaining layers are quantized to low bit-width: 

𝑏 𝑙 =

(

BF16 , if 𝜙 𝑙 ≥ 𝜙 (𝑘 ) ,

W4 , otherwise . (20) 

## 3.5 Summary of the DA-PTQ Pipeline 

We summarize DA-PTQ as a three-stage calibration procedure in Algorithm 1. The pipeline is fully training-free and requires only forward passes and lightweight gradient accumulation. Given a pretrained VLA model and a small calibration dataset, the proce-dure first performs drift profiling by collecting full-precision acti-vation statistics and estimating both per-dimension drift sensitivity and layer-wise impact on error accumulation. Next, a drift-aware mixed-precision configuration is determined by retaining the most sensitive layers in high precision while aggressively quantizing the rest. Finally, cross-space representation compensation is cali-brated on the quantized model by aligning activation distributions and folding the resulting affine transformations into the weights, incurring zero inference overhead. 

## 4 Experiment 4.1 Experiment Setup 

Benchmark and Evaluation. We evaluate DA-PTQ on SimplerEnv, a standardized simulation benchmark for robotic manipulation. To ensure comprehensive evaluation, we consider two distinct embod-iments: the WidowX robot and the Google Robot. On WidowX, we report performance across four standard manipulation tasks. On the Google Robot, we focus on zero-shot cross-domain generalization, evaluating under both Visual Matching and the more challenging Variant Aggregation settings. 

Calibration Process and Dataset. As a post-training quantization framework, DA-PTQ requires only a small calibration dataset to estimate drift sensitivities and compute cross-space compensation parameters, without any model fine-tuning. We construct the cali-bration set using 512 representative trajectories sampled from the training split of BridgeData V2 [ 24 ]. Notably, this single calibra-tion set is used to quantize the model for both in-domain WidowX evaluation and zero-shot cross-domain Google Robot evaluation. This design provides a stringent test of whether the learned drift-aware and distribution-aligned quantization parameters generalize beyond the calibration domain. 

Backbone and Baseline. We apply DA-PTQ with W4A8 quantiza-tion to CogACT, a state-of-the-art diffusion-based VLA model. We compare against the following strong baselines: 

Algorithm 1 Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization (DA-PTQ) 

Input: Pretrained VLA model with DiT action head Ψ𝜃 , calibration dataset D, retained BF16 ratio 𝑘 %

Output: Quantized VLA model with W4/BF16 mixed precision and folded compensation # Stage 1: Drift Profiling  

> 1:

for each batch in D do  

> 2:

Accumulate full-precision statistics 𝝁 FP  

> 𝑙

, 𝚺 FP  

> 𝑙

at the perception-action interface  

> 3:

Compute structural Jacobian J and per-dimension drift sen-sitivities ˆ𝑠 𝑗  

> 4:

Estimate layer-wise drift sensitivities 𝜙 𝑙 under Ldrift  

> 5:

end for 

# Stage 2: Cross-Space Representation Compensation  

> 6:

Quantize the model with the initial calibration configuration  

> 7:

for each batch in D do  

> 8:

Accumulate quantized statistics 𝝁 Q 

> 𝑙

, 𝚺 Q 

> 𝑙
> 9:

end for  

> 10:

for each interface layer 𝑙 do  

> 11:

Solve for affine matrix M𝑙 and bias d𝑙 to align quantized statistics with full-precision statistics  

> 12:

Fold M𝑙 and d𝑙 into the quantized weights of layer 𝑙  

> 13:

end for 

# Stage 3: Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation  

> 14:

for each layer 𝑙 ∈ Ψ𝜃 do  

> 15:

𝑏 𝑙 ← BF16 if 𝜙 𝑙 ≥ 𝜙 (𝑘 ) else W4  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Apply the bit-width map {𝑏 𝑙 } to obtain the final quantized model  

> 18:

return Compressed VLA model 

• CogACT (FP) : The full-precision model without quantiza-tion. 

• VLA-Cache : An inference acceleration method that caches intermediate representations but does not perform weight or activation quantization. 

• QuantVLA : A recent VLA-specific quantization method based on conventional sensitivity metrics without explicit modeling of temporal drift. All metrics, including success rate (%), memory reduction (%), and inference speedup (%), are measured under identical hardware set-tings to ensure fair comparison. 

## 4.2 Comparison with Baselines 

We compare DA-PTQ with strong baselines to systematically eval-uate both computational efficiency and task performance under low-bit quantization. Our goal is to examine not only the standalone gains in efficiency, but also how well each method preserves control fidelity under aggressive compression. 

Efficiency-Performance Trade-off. Table 1 summarizes the trade-off between efficiency and task success. DA-PTQ achieves a favor-able balance, delivering a 42.5% memory reduction and a 54.8% in-ference speedup while maintaining strong task performance. Com-pared to existing approaches, our method achieves nearly the same level of efficiency as aggressive low-bit quantization, yet avoids DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

the significant degradation in control quality. Although QuantVLA attains slightly higher efficiency, with 42.7% memory reduction and 55.8% speedup, it suffers a substantial 5.4% drop in success rate, indicating a clear loss in control fidelity. This gap highlights that optimizing for efficiency alone can lead to severe degrada-tion in long-horizon decision-making. In contrast, VLA-Cache pro-vides moderate acceleration at 36.7% speedup but fails to reduce memory consumption, which fundamentally limits its deployment in memory-constrained scenarios. These results demonstrate that naive quantization or caching strategies are insufficient to balance efficiency and performance in embodied control. 

In-Domain Performance on WidowX Robot. Table 2 reports the performance comparison on the WidowX robot under the Sim-plerEnv Visual Matching setting. DA-PTQ achieves an average success rate of 48.9%, outperforming both QuantVLA at 43.5% and VLA-Cache at 46.8%, while substantially narrowing the gap to the full-precision CogACT. This indicates that DA-PTQ preserves the majority of the original model capability despite aggressive com-pression. A closer examination across individual tasks reveals con-sistent improvements on scenarios that require precise spatial co-ordination. For example, DA-PTQ achieves 65.2% on Put Spoon on Towel compared to 47.8% for QuantVLA, and 52.2% on Put Carrot on Plate compared to 39.1%. Meanwhile, it maintains competitive performance on tasks involving physical interaction, such as block stacking, where contact dynamics play a larger role. These results suggest that DA-PTQ effectively preserves fine-grained action con-trol under quantization. This improvement can be attributed to the drift-aware allocation strategy, which explicitly prioritizes dimen-sions that contribute most to long-horizon error accumulation. By protecting these critical components, the model maintains stable execution trajectories even under reduced precision. 

Cross-Domain Generalization on Google Robot. We further evaluate robustness under cross-domain transfer to unseen robot embodiments. As shown in Table 3, DA-PTQ achieves average success rates of 68.5% in Visual Matching and 51.7% in the more challenging Variant Aggregation setting, consistently outperform-ing QuantVLA across both regimes. The advantage becomes more evident under stronger distribution shift. QuantVLA exhibits sig-nificant degradation on tasks involving articulated objects or long-horizon planning, indicating sensitivity to accumulated errors. In contrast, DA-PTQ maintains stable performance on simpler tasks and reduces failures on more challenging scenarios, demonstrating improved robustness. Although a gap remains compared to the full-precision model, DA-PTQ avoids the severe collapse typically observed under aggressive low-bit quantization. This robustness is enabled by cross-space representation compensation, which aligns quantized activation statistics with their full-precision counterparts 

Table 1: Efficiency-performance trade-off on SimplerEnv. 

Method Sources Success Rate ( ↑)Memory Reduction ( ↑) Speedup ( ↑)VLA-Cache NeurIPS’25 46.8 0.0 36.7 QuantVLA CVPR’26 43.5 42.7 55.8 

Ours — 48.9 42.5 54.8 

at the vision-action interface. As a result, the conditioning signal remains stable under domain shift, preventing error propagation into downstream action generation. Across both in-domain and cross-domain settings, DA-PTQ con-sistently achieves the best balance between efficiency and perfor-mance. Compared to existing approaches, it preserves high task suc-cess while maintaining strong compression and acceleration. This advantage arises from the complementary design of the framework. Drift-aware mixed-precision allocation controls long-horizon error accumulation by protecting critical dimensions, while cross-space representation compensation corrects distributional distortions at the conditioning interface. Together, these components enable DA-PTQ to deliver robust embodied control under low-bit quantization without introducing additional runtime overhead. 

## 4.3 Ablation Study 

To systematically evaluate the contributions of each component, we conduct an ablation study on the WidowX robot under the Vi-sual Matching setting. We isolate the effects of Cross-Space Repre-sentation Compensation (CSRC) and Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation (DA-MPA), and report both efficiency and performance in Table 4, with a visual comparison in Figure 3. This study aims to clarify how each module contributes to preserving control perfor-mance under model quantization. 

Impact of Cross-Space Representation Compensation. Apply-ing Cross-Space Representation Compensation alone to a uniformly quantized model with W4A8 precision yields an average success rate of 43.8%. Although this remains below the full-precision base-line of 51.3%, it already provides a clear improvement over naive quantization. The gain is particularly evident on tasks that require accurate perception-to-action alignment, such as Put Spoon on Towel 

with 66.7% success and Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket with 54.2%. These tasks depend heavily on precise conditioning signals, and the results indicate that correcting distributional distortion at the inter-face is essential for maintaining semantic consistency. By aligning quantized activation statistics with their full-precision counterparts, this component stabilizes the input to the diffusion decoder and reduces early-stage divergence during action generation. 

Impact of Drift-Aware Mixed-Precision Allocation. When applying drift-aware mixed-precision allocation alone, the model CogACT (W4A8)      

> + CSRC
> CogACT (W4A8)
> + DA-MPA
> CogACT (W4A8)
> + DA-PTQ
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Percentage (%)
> 43.8 39.6
> 48.9
> 42.6 42.9 42.5
> 55.2 54.8 54.8
> FP Baseline Success (51.3%)
> Success Rate (%)
> Memory Reduction (%)
> Speedup (%)

Figure 3: Efficiency-performance trade-off across ablation variants on SimplerEnv. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al. 

Table 2: In-domain performance on WidowX under the SimplerEnv Visual Matching setting. 

WidowX Robot Methods Sources Tasks Average Success Rate ( ↑)Put Spoon on Towel Put Carrot on Plate Stack Green Block on Yellow Block Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket SIMPLER (Visual Matching) CogACT (FP) Arxiv’24 71.7 50.8 15.0 67.5 51.3 VLA-Cache NeurIPS’25 78.3 39.1 17.4 52.2 46.8 QuantVLA CVPR’26 47.8 39.1 17.4 69.6 43.5 

Ours — 65.2 52.2 17.4 60.9 48.9 Table 3: Cross-domain performance on Google Robot under SimplerEnv Visual Matching and Variant Aggregation settings. 

Google Robot Methods Sources Tasks Average Success Rate ( ↑)Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Open Top Drawer and Place Apple SIMPLER (Visual Matching) CogACT (FP) Arxiv’24 91.3 85.0 71.8 50.9 74.8 VLA-Cache NeurIPS’25 92.0 83.3 70.5 51.6 74.4 QuantVLA CVPR’26 87.6 81.7 55.1 38.0 65.6 

Ours — 92.4 87.9 58.3 35.2 68.5 

SIMPLER (Variant Aggregation) CogACT (FP) Arxiv’24 89.6 80.8 28.3 46.6 61.3 VLA-Cache NeurIPS’25 91.7 79.3 32.5 45.8 62.3 QuantVLA CVPR’26 84.9 76.7 20.3 15.8 49.4 

Ours — 87.5 74.5 20.1 24.7 51.7 Table 4: Ablation study on WidowX under the SimplerEnv Visual Matching setting. 

WidowX Robot Variants Tasks Average Success Rate ( ↑)Memory Reduction ( ↑) Speedup ( ↑)Put Spoon on Towel Put Carrot on Plate Stack Green Block on Yellow Block Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket SIMPLER (Visual Matching) CogACT (FP) 71.7 50.8 15.0 67.5 — — —+ W4A8 + CSRC 66.7 41.7 12.5 54.2 43.8 42.6 55.2 + W4A8 + DA-MPA 50.0 45.8 12.5 50.0 39.6 42.9 54.8 

+ W4A8 + DA-PTQ 65.2 52.2 17.4 60.9 48.9 42.5 54.8 

achieves an average success rate of 39.6%. Although lower than the representation compensation variant, this result reflects a dis-tinct and complementary effect. As illustrated in Figure 3, this variant maintains strong efficiency while selectively improving per-formance on tasks sensitive to accumulated control errors. The un-derlying reason is that allocating higher precision to drift-sensitive layers effectively limits the propagation of quantization noise. Even when the conditioning representation is not fully corrected, the kinematic-aware allocation strategy constrains spatial error ampli-fication along the execution trajectory, thereby improving stability in long-horizon control. 

Synergy of the Complete Framework. Combining both com-ponents yields the full DA-PTQ framework, which achieves the highest average success rate of 48.9% while preserving the same level of efficiency, including 42.5% memory reduction and 54.8% in-ference speedup. As illustrated in Figure 3, the complete model lies on the optimal Pareto frontier, outperforming both individual com-ponents without sacrificing efficiency. This result demonstrates a clear synergy between the two modules. Representation compensa-tion corrects distributional distortion at the conditioning interface and preserves semantic alignment, while drift-aware allocation sup-presses error accumulation during execution. By jointly addressing representation-level misalignment and trajectory-level drift, the combined framework provides a more complete and robust solution for embodied control under low-bit quantization. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We present DA-PTQ, a training-free post-training quantization framework for vision-language-action models. We identify tem-poral error accumulation as a key challenge in VLA quantization, where perturbations at the vision-language-to-action interface are DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

progressively amplified during sequential control, leading to kine-matic drift. To address this issue, DA-PTQ formulates quantization as a drift-aware optimization problem with two complementary components: cross-space representation compensation, which cor-rects structured distortions across modalities, and motion-driven mixed-precision allocation, which mitigates trajectory-level error accumulation. Both components are applied during calibration and introduce no additional inference overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our DA-PTQ significantly reduces kinematic drift and achieves performance comparable to full-precision models under low-bit settings, enabling efficient deployment on resource-constrained robotic platforms. Despite these advances, our approach relies on approximations of error propagation and simplified kinematic, which may not fully capture complex dynamics in highly nonlinear or contact-rich sce-narios. Moreover, the calibration process assumes a fixed data dis-tribution, potentially limiting robustness under significant domain shifts. Future work will extend drift-aware quantization to broader VLA architectures and develop more adaptive calibration strategies for diverse real-world environments. 

## References 

[1] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. 2024. 𝜋 0:A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 (2024). [2] Yi-Chung Chen, Zhi-Kai Huang, and Jing-Ren Chen. 2024. Stepbaq: Stepping backward as correction for quantized diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024), 54054–54078. [3] Hengyu Fang, Yijiang Liu, Yuan Du, Li Du, and Huanrui Yang. 2025. Sqap-vla: A synergistic quantization-aware pruning framework for high-performance vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09090 (2025). [4] Elias Frantar, Saleh Ashkboos, Torsten Hoefler, and Dan Alistarh. 2022. Gptq: Accurate post-training quantization for generative pre-trained transformers. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.17323 (2022). [5] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Liang Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al . 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (2022), 1–12. [6] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. 2017. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision . 1501–1510. [7] Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and Dmitry Kalenichenko. 2018. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .2704–2713. [8] Moo Jin Kim, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang. 2025. Fine-tuning vision-language-action models: Optimizing speed and success. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19645 

(2025). [9] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakr-ishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al .2024. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 (2024). [10] Qixiu Li, Yaobo Liang, Zeyu Wang, Lin Luo, Xi Chen, Mozheng Liao, Fangyun Wei, Yu Deng, Sicheng Xu, Yizhong Zhang, et al . 2024. Cogact: A foundational vision-language-action model for synergizing cognition and action in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19650 (2024). [11] Yuhang Li, Ruihao Gong, Xu Tan, Yang Yang, Peng Hu, Qi Zhang, Fengwei Yu, Wei Wang, and Shi Gu. 2021. Brecq: Pushing the limit of post-training quantization by block reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05426 (2021). [12] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen Wang, Guangxuan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2024. Awq: Activation-aware weight quantization for on-device llm compression and accel-eration. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6 (2024), 87–100. [13] Chenghao Liu, Jiachen Zhang, Chengxuan Li, Zhimu Zhou, Shixin Wu, Song-fang Huang, and Huiling Duan. 2026. Ttf-vla: Temporal token fusion via pixel-attention integration for vision-language-action models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . 18452–18459. [14] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2024. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 (2024). [15] Zhenhua Liu, Yunhe Wang, Kai Han, Wei Zhang, Siwei Ma, and Wen Gao. 2021. Post-training quantization for vision transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2021), 28092–28103. [16] Minho Park, Kinam Kim, Junha Hyung, Hyojin Jang, Hoiyeong Jin, Jooyeol Yun, Hojoon Lee, and Jaegul Choo. 2025. ACG: Action Coherence Guidance for Flow-based VLA models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22201 (2025). [17] William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable diffusion models with trans-formers. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision .4195–4205. [18] Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. 2011. A reduction of imi-tation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .627–635. [19] Wenqi Shao, Mengzhao Chen, Zhaoyang Zhang, Peng Xu, Lirui Zhao, Zhiqian Li, Kaipeng Zhang, Peng Gao, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. 2023. Omniquant: Omni-directionally calibrated quantization for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13137 (2023). [20] Bruno Siciliano, Lorenzo Sciavicco, Luigi Villani, and Giuseppe Oriolo. 2009. 

Robotics: modelling, planning and control . Springer. [21] Mark W Spong, Seth Hutchinson, and Mathukumalli Vidyasagar. 2020. Robot modeling and control . Wiley. [22] Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokzijl, et al . 2025. Gemini robotics: Bring-ing ai into the physical world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20020 (2025). [23] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al . 2024. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 (2024). [24] Homer Rich Walke, Kevin Black, Tony Z Zhao, Quan Vuong, Chongyi Zheng, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Andre Wang He, Vivek Myers, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, et al . 2023. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning . 1723–1736. [25] Changyuan Wang, Ziwei Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Yansong Tang, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. 2024. Q-vlm: Post-training quantization for large vision-language models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2024), 114553–114573. [26] Guangxuan Xiao, Ji Lin, Mickael Seznec, Hao Wu, Julien Demouth, and Song Han. 2023. Smoothquant: Accurate and efficient post-training quantization for large language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning . 38087–38099. [27] Yuhao Xu, Yantai Yang, Zhenyang Fan, Yufan Liu, Yuming Li, Bing Li, and Zhipeng Zhang. 2026. QVLA: Not All Channels Are Equal in Vision-Language-Action Model’s Quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03782 (2026). [28] Cheng Yin, Yankai Lin, Wang Xu, Sikyuen Tam, Xiangrui Zeng, Zhiyuan Liu, and Zhouping Yin. 2025. Deepthinkvla: Enhancing reasoning capability of vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15669 (2025). [29] Jingxuan Zhang, Yunta Hsieh, Zhongwei Wang, Haokun Lin, Xin Wang, Ziqi Wang, Yingtie Lei, and Mi Zhang. 2026. QuantVLA: Scale-Calibrated Post-Training Quantization for Vision-Language-Action Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 1–11. [30] Yifan Zhong, Fengshuo Bai, Shaofei Cai, Xuchuan Huang, Zhang Chen, Xiaowei Zhang, Yuanfei Wang, Shaoyang Guo, Tianrui Guan, Ka Nam Lui, et al . 2025. A survey on vision-language-action models: An action tokenization perspective. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01925 (2025). [31] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al . 2023. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning . 2165–2183. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al. 

## A Detailed Experimental Setup 

To ensure full reproducibility of our DA-PTQ framework, we detail the exact hyperparameters used in our calibration pipeline. Our framework is implemented in PyTorch and deployed on NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPUs, executing entirely post-training with zero fine-tuning overhead. All intermediate calibration activations are cast to BFloat16 to maintain numerical stability. A comprehensive sum-mary of all core hyperparameters is provided in Table 5. 

Calibration Dataset and Statistics Collection. We construct our calibration set D using data sampled from the Bridge V2 dataset, which provides a rich and representative distribution of diverse tabletop manipulation trajectories. To prevent the calibration statis-tics from overfitting to a specific spatial region or a narrow subset of trajectories, we enable spatial balanced calibration . This parti-tions the 3D workspace into spatial bins, applying a warmup phase to ensure the accumulated statistical moments ( 𝝁 FP  

> 𝑙

, 𝚺 FP  

> 𝑙

and later 

𝝁 Q 

> 𝑙

, 𝚺 Q 

> 𝑙

) robustly reflect the global activation distribution. 

Temporal Drift-Aware Allocation (DA-MPA). The MPA module specifically targets the MLP blocks within the Diffusion Trans-former (DiT) action head, skipping the final 2 blocks which are naturally preserved due to their proximity to the continuous output layer. The layer-wise drift sensitivity 𝜙 𝑙 is dynamically profiled over consecutive probe steps. When calculating the per-dimension drift propagation scores via the structural Jacobian, we apply a Tikhonov damping factor for stable matrix inversion. Recognizing that spatial deviations are highly asymmetric in physical tabletop manipula-tion—where minor translation errors often lead to catastrophic grasp failures, whereas rotational deviations can be partially ab-sorbed by the mechanical compliance of the gripper—we heavily penalize translational errors. Based on the profiled sensitivities, we establish a high-precision retention ratio of 𝑘 = 30% . Thus, the top 30% most drift-sensitive DiT layers are safely retained in 16-bit (BF16), while the remaining 70% are aggressively quantized to 4-bit (W4) to maximize inference efficiency. 

Table 5: Summary of core hyperparameters used in the DA-PTQ calibration pipeline. Module Parameter Value 

Calibration 

Calibration Steps 512 

Batch Size 1

Spatial Bins 6

Warmup Steps 128 

DA-MPA 

Probe Steps 16 

Damping Factor ( 𝜆 ) 3 × 10 −4

Translation Weight ( 𝑤 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 ) 1.8

Rotation Weight ( 𝑤 𝑟𝑜𝑡 ) 0.15 

Scaling Gain 1.6

Retention Ratio ( 𝑘 ) 30% 

CSRC 

SVD Block Size 16 × 16 

Smoothing Factor ( 𝜆 𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑜𝑡ℎ ) 0.15 

Group Size 32 

Shrinkage Factor 0.55 

Cross-Space Representation Compensation (CSRC). To align the cross-space distributions without introducing any inference latency overhead, we apply our compensation strategy coupled with an outlier pre-rotation mechanism. LLM-based architectures typically suffer from massive activation outliers; thus, the input and output activations are orthogonalized using block-wise rotations computed via SVD. To avoid over-correcting and distorting the underlying feature semantics, we apply a smoothing factor to the singular values. All derived affine compensation matrices ( M𝑙 ) and bias terms ( d𝑙 ) are algebraically folded back into the quantized weights prior to real-world deployment. 

## B Qualitative Trajectory Analysis 

To comprehensively validate the generalizability and control fidelity of DA-PTQ, we visualize the spatial execution and the underlying continuous control commands generated by our quantized policy. We select three distinct, long-horizon manipulation tasks spanning two completely different robotic embodiments: Put Spoon on Towel 

and Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket on the WidowX robot, along-side Move Near on the Google Robot. The qualitative results are presented in Figures 4, 5, and 6. As shown in the top panels (filmstrips) of these figures, the DA-PTQ quantized policy successfully completes the tasks with fluid, precise, and human-like movements. Despite operating pre-dominantly at an aggressive 4-bit precision (W4), the robotic end-effector exhibits no observable hesitation, kinematic drift, or erratic grasping behaviors. It faithfully handles the objects and navigates complex workspace configurations, demonstrating that DA-PTQ effectively neutralizes the geometric amplification of quantization noise that typically plagues low-bit embodied control. To provide a granular view of this kinematic stability, the bottom panels detail the step-by-step action predictions across all 7 degrees of freedom (3D translation, 3D rotation, and gripper state) during the entire episode. A hallmark of severe quantization degradation in continuous control is the emergence of high-variance, high-frequency oscillations in the predicted actions. However, as evident in the temporal plots, DA-PTQ ensures that the generated motor commands remain remarkably smooth and dynamically stable. The translational ( 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 ) and rotational (roll, pitch, yaw) commands converge smoothly to their target states without overshooting, while the discrete gripper actions are executed decisively. These highly coherent 7-DoF control curves confirm our method’s robust capacity to maintain near-lossless, high-fidelity continuous control across diverse physical environments and kinematic structures. DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA x y zTime in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode roll pitch yaw grasp Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode 

Figure 4: Task: Put Spoon on Towel (WidowX Robot). The top panel illustrates the seamless sequential execution by the DA-PTQ quantized model. The bottom panel displays the generated temporal action curves across 7 degrees of freedom, highlighting the absence of quantization-induced oscillations and the smoothness of the low-bit control signals. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Xu et al. x y zTime in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode roll pitch yaw grasp Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode 

Figure 5: Task: Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket (WidowX Robot). DA-PTQ maintains precise and dynamically stable motor commands throughout the episode, guiding the end-effector to successfully complete the manipulation without kinematic drift. DA-PTQ: Drift-Aware Post-Training Quantization Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA x y zTime in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode roll pitch yaw grasp Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode Time in one episode 

Figure 6: Task: Move Near (Google Robot). This qualitative result demonstrates the cross-embodiment generalizability of DA-PTQ. Even deployed on a completely different robotic kinematic structure, the 4-bit framework generates highly accurate and coherent continuous control commands.