Title: Test-Time Safety Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26167v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:21:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Test-Time Safety Alignment 

Baturay Saglam Dionysis Kalogerias 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Yale University {baturay.saglam , dionysis.kalogerias }@yale.edu 

# Abstract 

Recent work has shown that a model’s input word embeddings can serve as effective control variables for steering its behavior toward outputs that satisfy desired prop-erties. However, this has only been demonstrated for pretrained text-completion models on the relatively simple objective of reducing surface-level profanity in short continuations. A natural and practically important question is how well input embeddings can control aligned models, which produce an imbalanced bimodal refuse-or-comply output distribution rather than the smooth distribution characteris-tic of open-ended generation. We explore this in the context of safety, showing that input word embeddings can be optimized in a sub-lexical manner to minimize the semantic harmfulness of aligned model responses. Our approach uses zeroth-order gradient estimation of a black-box text-moderation API with respect to the input embeddings, and then applies gradient descent on these embeddings to minimize the harmfulness of the generated text. Experiments show that the proposed method can neutralize every safety-flagged response on standard safety benchmarks. 

# 1 Introduction 

Large language models deployed for user-facing tasks undergo safety training—typically reinforce-ment learning from human feedback (RLHF) [ 46 , 4] and direct preference optimization [ 29 ]—to handle requests that violate their developers’ safety policies. Despite this training, adversarial prompts can reliably bypass safety mechanisms and elicit harmful content from otherwise well-aligned mod-els [ 47 , 7]. These prompts wrap harmful requests in structural framing—roleplay scenarios, hypothet-ical narratives, obfuscating instructions—that exploits the gap between the model’s safety training distribution and the space of possible inputs. The vulnerability is fundamental: alignment is learned from a finite set of examples, while the input space is effectively unbounded. A growing body of test-time defenses addresses this gap without modifying the target model’s weights. Prompt-level strategies [ 38 , 36 , 45 ], randomized smoothing [ 30 , 15 ], guard models [ 14 , 11 ], and activation-steering methods [ 43 , 8] have all demonstrated meaningful reductions in attack success rates. Yet these approaches share a structural limitation: they either apply undirected perturbations to discrete tokens, require separately offline-trained auxiliary modules, or impose fixed interventions derived from a static calibration set. None directly optimizes a continuous safety objective at the model’s input level. A qualitatively different approach is to operate on the continuous representation the model actually conditions on: the prompt embedding matrix. Because the model reads this matrix rather than the tokens themselves, perturbations in embedding space can steer the output distribution without altering the human-readable input. Saglam and Kalogerias [31] demonstrated this principle for detoxification, showing that iterative optimization over prompt embeddings can reduce the toxicity of base pretrained models as scored by a surface-level profanity classifier. Whether embedding-level control extends 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2604.26167v1 [cs.CL] 28 Apr 2026

to the safety of aligned models is, however, an open question—and there is reason to expect that it may not transfer straightforwardly. Aligned models produce a bimodal output distribution—refuse or comply—rather than the smooth continuation distribution over which toxicity reduction was demonstrated; the relevant notion of harm is semantic (violence, self-harm, illicit activity) rather than lexical (profanity, slurs); and the prompts of interest are adversarially constructed to circumvent safety training, a qualitatively different regime from the naturally occurring toxic prompts studied previously. We show that the transfer does hold. Given any prompt, we apply zeroth-order gradient estimation to approximate the gradient of a black-box text-moderation oracle with respect to the prompt embed-dings, and descend along the estimated gradient to minimize the harmfulness of the generated text. The oracle—the OpenAI Moderation API [ 21 , 25 ]—scores completions across 13 harm categories; we take the maximum over these categories as our objective, so that a model response is considered safe only if it scores low along every axis of harm. The entire procedure operates at test time: it requires no retraining and no auxiliary models, and treats the language model as a black box—only its input word embeddings need to be accessible. The optimization is applied unconditionally, with-out knowledge of whether a prompt is harmful or benign, and does not force refusals; the model determines the form of its own response. Experiments on five instruction-tuned models spanning 1B to 20B parameters, evaluated on two standard red-teaming benchmarks comprising adversarial jailbreak prompts and direct harmful queries, show that the method nearly eliminates every safety-flagged completion, typically converging within two gradient steps. On an adversarial benign control split, already-safe responses are left substantively intact—moderation scores do not increase for any model—confirming that the optimization does not impose a blanket refusal bias. A finding of broader interest is that the optimized embeddings decode back to the original prompt tokens in every case: the perturbation is sub-lexical, adjusting the continuous representation within the nearest-neighbor cell of each token, yet it reliably redirects the model toward safe outputs. This observation suggests that the conventional view of embeddings as inert token lookups understates the control surface available at the model’s input layer. Our codebase includes a demo notebook illustrating the proposed method in action. 1

# 2 Related Work 

We review inference-time methods for defending aligned language models without modifying the target model’s weights. Approaches that improve safety through training [ 5] or fine-tuning [ 46 , 4, 29 ]are complementary but outside our scope. 

Prompt-level and input-transformation defenses. The earliest test-time defenses operate on the discrete text the model receives. System-prompt strategies wrap user queries with safety re-minders [ 38 ] or prepend in-context refusal demonstrations [ 36 ], while more principled variants optimize defensive suffixes offline through minimax adversarial objectives [ 45 ] or adversarial prompt training [ 23 ] and deploy the result as a fixed textual guard. A complementary direction randomizes the input to disrupt adversarial structure [ 30 , 15 ] or targets systematic token erasure [ 18 ]. All of these methods manipulate discrete tokens or strings. Our method instead operates in the continuous embed-ding space and employs directed gradient-based optimization rather than undirected perturbation or fixed textual controls. 

Safety classifiers and detection. A second line of work interposes auxiliary models or analyses between the user and the LLM. Llama Guard [ 14 ] and WildGuard [ 11 ] finetune language models into safety classifiers that filter harmful inputs or outputs at deployment. Other methods extract detection signals directly from the target model, such as perplexity-based filtering [ 3], gradient-based methods for pattern identification [ 39 ] and refusal-loss thresholding [ 13 ], or linear probing for jailbreak detection [ 42 ]. These approaches share a detect-then-filter paradigm: they classify the input and block or reclassify it. Our method instead steers generation fully autonomously in an input-driven manner, without having to predict intent and therefore without requiring a separate classification model or detection step. 

> 1https://github.com/baturaysaglam/instant-alignment

2Activation steering and decoding-time interventions. A third family intervenes on the model’s internal computation during inference. Activation-steering methods add safety-relevant directions to hidden states—either as fixed vectors transferred from an aligned donor model [ 35 ], with per-input adaptive coefficients derived from a calibration set [ 43 ], or by constraining activations to lie within empirically estimated safety boundaries [ 8 ]. At the decoding level, SafeDecoding [ 40 ] contrasts the output distributions of the frozen model and a lightweight safety expert to amplify safe tokens, and RAIN [ 20 ] integrates self-evaluation and rewind mechanisms during generation. These approaches require access to hidden states or output logits and, in the case of activation steering, derive directions from a fixed calibration set that must transfer across prompts. Our method instead treats the model as a black-box system—assuming only that the input word embeddings are available—and, thanks to its black-box optimization, adapts its intervention at the instance level, targeting only the prompt at hand. 

Embedding-space methods. The work most closely related to ours operates at the embedding level. RESTA [ 12 ] injects isotropic Gaussian noise into token embeddings and aggregates multiple perturbed copies via majority vote—randomized smoothing in embedding space, with no directed optimization and therefore no ability to target a specific safety objective as we do. DRO [ 44 ] optimizes continuous soft-prompt embeddings to shift representations toward higher-refusal regions, achieving directed control but requiring an offline training phase and producing a fixed prompt that is applied uniformly at deployment. In contrast, we optimize the embeddings against a semantic moderation objective rather than perturbing them at random, and we apply this optimization directly to the word embeddings of the prompt at hand, fully at test time, without any offline training or additional data. The algorithmic foundation of our approach is based on [ 31 ], which showed that iterative optimization over prompt embeddings can reduce the toxicity of base pretrained (non–instruction-tuned) models in open-ended generation, using a surface-level profanity scorer. We apply this framework to a fundamentally different regime: safety-aligned chat models, a multi-category semantic moderation oracle, and adversarial or malicious prompts designed to circumvent safety training through semantic manipulation, rather than naturally occurring short, toxic continuations. 

# 3 Problem Formulation 

Modern large language models intended for user-facing deployment are aligned : in addition to next-token pretraining on web-scale corpora, they undergo a post-training stage designed to make their outputs helpful, honest, and harmless. Alignment is typically achieved through some combination of supervised instruction fine-tuning [ 28 ], RLHF [ 46 , 4], and direct preference optimization [ 29 ]. The resulting models are capable of following natural-language instructions across a wide range of tasks—answering questions, writing code—while refusing requests that violate the safety policies of their developers, such as instructions to facilitate violence or assist in illicit activity. Let f denote an aligned autoregressive language model based on the transformer architecture [ 34 ]. A prompt is a string P that a tokenizer maps to a sequence of token indices 

t1: T = ( t1, . . . , t T ), ti ∈ V ,

drawn from a finite vocabulary V. Each token ti is associated with a fixed d-dimensional embedding vector xi ∈ Rd, so the full prompt is represented by the embedding matrix 

X = x⊤ 

> 1

x⊤ 

> 2

· · · x⊤

> T

⊤ ∈ RT ×d.

Given a prefix (t1, . . . , t i−1), the model defines a distribution over the next token, 

f (ti | t1, . . . , t i−1) ≡ pf (ti | t<i ).

We denote by y = f (X) the response obtained by sequentially sampling from this distribution when 

f is conditioned on the prompt P—equivalently, on its token sequence t1: T and embedding matrix 

X.

3.1 Measuring Harmful Generations 

Despite alignment, models can still produce harmful content—whether through residual training gaps, distribution shift, or adversarial prompts specifically designed to elicit such responses. This content 3may carry no surface-level markers: a response can be polite and profanity-free yet provide detailed instructions for illicit activity. Detecting such failures requires evaluating the generated response , not the prompt. We measure the harmfulness of y = f (X) using the OpenAI Moderation API [ 21 , 25 ], a black-box content classifier deployed so that hosts and users can take corrective action—filtering outputs, flagging accounts, or blocking responses—when potentially harmful content is detected. The API returns a continuous score in [0 , 1] for each of 13 categories: harassment, harassment/threatening, hate, hate/threatening, illicit, illicit/violent, self-harm, self-harm/intent, self-harm/instructions, sexual, sexual/minors, violence, and violence/graphic. Each category additionally carries a binary “flagged” indicator; the threshold mapping scores to flags is internal to the API and not exposed. We abstract this oracle as 

h : Y → [0 , 1] , h(y) = max  

> c

sc(y), (1) where Y is the space of output strings and sc(y) is the score in category c. Taking the maximum en-sures that a response is considered safe only if it scores low across every harm category—minimizing 

h therefore always targets the worst-offending category. 

3.2 Objective 

Our goal is to intervene at test time—without modifying the target model or learning any additional parameters—so that the harmfulness of the model’s output is minimized for any prompt, regardless of its intent or construction. The method is applied unconditionally: it has no access to whether a prompt is benign or harmful, and it does not force refusals—the model determines the form of its own response. Concretely, we optimize the prompt embedding matrix X to reduce the harmfulness of the resulting response Φ( X) := h (f (X)) , treating both the language model f and the moderation oracle h as black boxes. Because backpropagating through f is prohibitively expensive at the scale of modern LLMs, we restrict ourselves to forward passes alone. Since minimizing h already targets the worst-offending category at every step, the result is a fully automated mechanism that steers the model toward safe responses precisely when caution is warranted, while leaving already-safe responses substantively intact. 

# 4 Methodology 

Overview. The composite objective Φ( X) = h (f (X)) exposes no usable gradient; f is an autore-gressive generator and h is a black-box cloud API. We therefore substitute a stochastic surrogate: at iteration k we form an estimator gk—derived in the next subsection from a Gaussian-smoothed reformulation of Φ—and apply the update 

Xk+1 ← Xk − η g k,

which approximately decreases Φ and thereby drives the resulting response toward lower-harmfulness regions of embedding space, typically converging within a handful of iterations (in practice, K < 4). 

4.1 Zeroth-Order Gradient Estimator 

Unless noted otherwise, the development in this subsection follows the foundation in [ 24 ]. Our objective is to estimate ∇X Φ( X) given only forward (zeroth-order) access to Φ.We begin by perturbing X with i.i.d. Gaussian noise applied independently to each token embedding: 

X + μU, U = u⊤ 

> 1

u⊤ 

> 2

· · · u⊤

> T

⊤ ∈ RT ×d, u1, . . . , u T

> i.i.d.

∼ N (0 , I d).

Since U has the same shape as X, every token is perturbed in its own direction, allowing the resulting estimator to capture token-specific sensitivities of Φ and to adjust the prompt at a fine-grained level. Averaging Φ over these perturbations defines the Gaussian-smoothed objective 

Φμ(X) = EU [Φ( X + μU )] .

Smoothing has two convenient consequences. First, whenever Φ is Lipschitz-continuous—i.e., 

|Φ( X) − Φ( Y )| ≤ L∥X − Y ∥—the smoothed surrogate Φμ is differentiable for every μ > 0 while 4remaining Lipschitz itself. Second, replacing Φ with Φμ incurs only a controlled approximation error of order O(μ√T d ).A key result of Nesterov and Spokoiny [24] expresses the gradient of the smoothed objective in closed form as a directional finite difference: 

∇Φμ(X) = EU

 Φ( X + μU ) − Φ( X)

μ U



. (2) This identity requires only Lipschitz continuity of Φ; differentiability of Φ itself is not assumed. Intuitively, ∇Φμ(X) is a weighted average of perturbation directions, each scaled by the relative change Φ exhibits along it. The subtracted baseline EU [Φ( X) U/μ ] leaves the expectation unchanged, since EU [U ] = 0 and Φ( X) is independent of U , yet it reduces the variance of any Monte Carlo approximation. To relate ∇Φμ back to ∇Φ, one additional regularity assumption is useful. If Φ is also Lipschitz-smooth—that is, if its gradient is itself L-Lipschitz—then Φμ inherits the same smoothness, and the gap between the two gradients is bounded: 

∥∇ Φμ(X) − ∇ Φ( X)∥ ≤ C μL (T d )3/2,

for a constant C. Lipschitz continuity stabilizes the finite difference, while smoothness controls how rapidly ∇Φμ itself can vary. Together they make ∇Φμ(Xk) a controlled approximation of ∇Φ( Xk),with μ governing the residual bias. We stress that these conditions are invoked only to motivate the bound; in a fully black-box setting they cannot be verified from query access to Φ. The method itself requires nothing beyond forward evaluations and access to input embeddings, and can therefore be applied empirically regardless of whether the underlying constants are known. We should note that the maximum in (1) is not differentiable, so Φ may be Lipschitz-continuous but not Lipschitz-smooth, and therefore the bound above does not apply as stated. A smooth surrogate— for instance, a softmax-weighted average P 

> c

wc sc with weights wc ∝ exp( β s c)—would restore the required regularity. In practice, however, we omit this substitution; across our experiments the highest-scoring harm category remains stable throughout optimization for each prompt, so the maximum effectively reduces to a single smooth category score along the optimization path. Finally, we replace the expectation in (2) with a Monte Carlo average over N independent perturba-tions, yielding the practical estimator used throughout this work: 

gk = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Φ( Xk + μU i) − Φ( Xk)

μ Ui ≈ ∇ Φμ(Xk).

The estimator sits on top of ordinary model inference and requires no changes to the model internals. Its variance grows with the ambient dimension T d and shrinks with N , while μ controls a bias– variance tradeoff. Larger μ smooths Φ more aggressively and stabilizes the estimate, whereas smaller 

μ sharpens the approximation at the cost of noisier evaluations. In the joint limit μ → 0 and N → ∞ ,and under the regularity conditions discussed above, gk recovers the true gradient direction of Φ; in practice, moderate values of both suffice for stable and effective test-time updates. 

4.2 Regularization 

The zeroth-order descent procedure described so far must be regularized to keep the updated embed-dings from drifting into regions of the latent space that the model has not encountered during training. We use a few deliberately simple mechanisms and introduce no auxiliary modules—no momentum, no learned projection, no external reward shaping. This isolates the effect of the zeroth-order updates themselves, so that any improvement we observe is attributable to the test-time intervention alone. 

Gradient normalization. A single fixed learning rate applied to the raw estimate can produce erratic updates—some too timid to make progress, others large enough to push embeddings off-manifold. We sidestep this by normalizing the estimate before each step, replacing gk with gk/∥gk∥2

in the update rule. The effective step magnitude is then governed entirely by η, yielding a single learning rate that behaves consistently across prompts. 5Cosine similarity. To preserve fidelity to the original prompt, we additionally constrain the updated embedding to remain close to X0 in direction. Cosine similarity is well suited here because it measures alignment independently of magnitude. At the end of each iteration, if the current embedding falls below a cosine similarity threshold κ relative to X0, we project it back onto the boundary of the corresponding cosine ball before proceeding. We refer to the resulting end-to-end test-time defense as Test-Time Safety Alignment (TSA); pseu-docode is provided in Algorithm 1 (Appendix A). 

# 5 Experiments 

Models. Experiments are conducted on several aligned, instruction-tuned models from a range of developers and across several scales: Gemma 3 (1B) [ 33 ], Phi-3.5-mini (4B) [ 1], Llama 3.1 (8B) [ 9 ], Qwen3 (14B) [41], and GPT-OSS (20B) [27]. 

Benchmarks. To elicit responses that contain harmful information, we select red-teaming bench-marks where test prompts vary along two independent axes: construction (direct natural-language phrasing vs. adversarial framing such as roleplay scenarios or obfuscating instructions) and intent 

(benign vs. harmful). These axes are independent: a direct prompt may be harmful (an explicit request for dangerous information), and an adversarial prompt may be benign (a creative writing exercise with unusual framing). Adversarially framed harmful prompts constitute the most challenging condition, since their structural framing (i.e., a prompt injection) is specifically designed to elicit harmful content from aligned models. For adversarial prompts, we use the evaluation set of the WildJailbreak benchmark [ 17 ], which contains 210 adversarial benign prompts (as a sanity check) and 2,000 adversarial harmful prompts. We also include HarmBench [ 22 ], which provides 400 direct harmful queries. Details about the benchmark datasets are provided in Appendix B.1. 

Generation. Models are queried over three trials at temperature 0.1, generating 128 tokens per response. A budget of 128 tokens is sufficient because the moderation oracle is saturated by any harmful span within the window. Given the safety-sensitive nature of the prompts, a low temperature concentrates sampling on the modal completion that a typical user would receive in deployment, making it a realistic regime in which to measure output harmfulness. 

Metrics. We report the mean, median, and maximum of the highest-category score, averaged over the three completions. These continuous scores are accompanied by the number of flagged (i.e., classified as dangerous) scenarios. The classifier remains a black box but is believed to balance precision and recall [ 21 ]. The optimization runs for 10 iterations with early stopping triggered when the top-scoring category falls below 0.1. This threshold is chosen because the developers have found moderation scores above 0.1 to be actionable [ 2]. Error bars are omitted since the magnitude of the proposed method’s effects far exceeds any plausible variance from stochastic generation, as our experiments will show. 

Baselines. We compare against three inference-time defenses: SmoothLLM [ 30 ], AdaSteer [ 43 ], and RESTA [ 12 ]. SmoothLLM randomly perturbs copies of the input at the character level and returns the majority-safe completion; AdaSteer adaptively steers hidden-state activations along safety-relevant directions derived from a small calibration set; and RESTA injects Gaussian noise into the prompt embeddings and aggregates over the perturbed completions. Baseline comparisons are conducted on Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct as it is the only model shared between our evaluations and the original papers. This choice allows the published configurations to be applied directly, avoiding the confounds of the independent per-model hyperparameter search that AdaSteer and RESTA would otherwise require due to their method-specific calibration parameters. To our knowledge, no other test-time defense directly optimizes a continuous safety objective; these baselines represent the closest available inference-time alternatives and ensure an apples-to-apples comparison. Further experimental details are provided in Appendix B. 65.1 Main Results 

Results are reported in Table 1. A useful starting point for interpretation is what the oracle actually captures. The moderation score quantifies the harmfulness of the generated text, not whether the model complied with or refused the request. A refusal that reproduces the harmful query scores high because the harmful content is present regardless of intent; a substantive but harmless answer scores low. Post-TSA responses are therefore not forced into blanket refusals but remain free to engage substantively with the prompt, with the guarantee that the content they produce will be harmless. The method’s effectiveness tracks the quality of the underlying model’s safety training, not merely its parameter count. Llama 3.1 (8B) converges in a single descent step while the larger Qwen3 (14B) requires roughly two. These iteration averages are conditioned on entering the optimization loop —on Llama 3.1 and the adversarial harmful split, only 218 of 2,000 prompts trigger optimization at all—so the amortized per-prompt cost on a mixed, realistic workload is substantially lower than the timing figures suggest. The sole exception is Gemma 3, for which the optimization fails to recover a fraction of harmful prompts—plausibly because either its smaller embedding dimension leaves insufficient room to locate a low-harm direction inside the cosine ball, or its safety training is too thin for any nearby embedding to decode into harmless content. The three baselines span text-level (SmoothLLM), activation-level (AdaSteer), and embedding-level (RESTA) interventions, which we compare against the dynamic embedding optimization of TSA. The decisive difference is that zeroth-order optimization ties the harmfulness objective directly to the model’s inputs , rendering the intervention agnostic to the attack mechanism. The baselines instead rely on the brittleness of adversarial suffixes (SmoothLLM, RESTA) or on steering directions derived from a fixed calibration distribution (AdaSteer). When these assumptions are violated—e.g., when adversarial intent is embedded semantically, or when harmful queries carry no adversarial suffix at all—the baselines falter; on HarmBench, AdaSteer and RESTA produce more flagged completions than the undefended model. The do-no-harm check on the adversarial benign split passes cleanly. TSA is applied uncondition-ally—it is not concerned with the prompt’s intent, so no refusal bias is imposed. Early stopping further prevents any detrimental changes from being applied to the embeddings. Hence, these two properties together ensure that the model’s behavior on benign prompts remains intact. On the runtime side, oracle latency rather than inference is the binding constraint, which can account for roughly 20% of the total per-prompt runtime. This suggests that a local moderation classifier or batched API requests would be an impactful deployment-time optimization. 

5.2 Sensitivity Analysis 

The end-to-end calibration depends on three key variables: the Monte Carlo sample count N , the perturbation strength μ, and the moderation threshold. The 0.1 moderation threshold is borrowed from common practice among the API developers, so we also examine how the calibration behaves as the threshold varies. Results are visualized in Figure 1. Llama 3.1 is largely invariant to both μ and N because the prompts that enter the optimization loop typically sit near a broad safe basin where even a crude descent direction suffices. This is consis-tent with a recent observation [ 32 ] that the representations of benign and harmful prompts—once adversarially framed—lie very close to each other in the hidden space, allowing a single gradient direction to readily steer the input representation back onto the malicious manifold and elicit a more cautious response. Gemma 3’s thinner alignment and lower embedding dimensionality, on the other hand, present a narrower target, explaining its greater sensitivity. Larger N helps slightly, though gradient normalization ensures that only the direction of the estimate governs the update, so even a single perturbation sample can provide sufficient directional signal. Notably, N = 8 suffices across embedding dimensions from 1152 to 5120, despite estimator variance scaling with the ambient dimension T d , suggesting the safety-relevant optimization direction need not be especially precise. Neither model displays a monotonic trend in μ, confirming a mild bias–variance tradeoff across the tested range. The early stopping threshold is the only parameter with a monotonic effect (by construction), but the more informative observation is that Llama reaches a mean score of 0.001 at the 0.01 threshold in fewer than two iterations—a single gradient step typically overshoots the default threshold by a wide margin, indicating a steep moderation-score landscape near the safety boundary. 7Table 1: Text moderation results for five instruction-tuned language models on two red-teaming benchmarks. Responses are generated at a sampling temperature of 0.1 with three independent trials per prompt. Scores report statistics of the maximum over the 13 OpenAI Moderation API harm categories per prompt, in [0 , 1] ; lower is safer. Optimization runs for up to 10 iterations or until the maximum score across the 13 categories falls below 0.1. Flagged counts the prompts whose completions the API classifies as harmful. Time reports the average per-prompt optimization wall-clock duration, and Net excludes moderation API latency. Within each (model, benchmark) pair, the best value for each metric is shown in bold .

Score ↓

Model Flagged ↓ Mean Med. Max # Iterations Time (s) Net (s) WildJailbreak (Adv. Harmful) 

> n = 2 ,000

GPT-OSS-20B 17 0.023 0.004 0.849 – – –+ TSA 0 0.009 0.003 0.099 1.2 12.1 10.2 Qwen3-14B 165 0.097 0.028 0.944 – – –+ TSA 0 0.023 0.016 0.100 2.1 28.3 25.4 Llama 3.1-8B 218 0.106 0.020 0.951 – – –+ SmoothLLM 122 0.068 0.006 0.954 – – –+ AdaSteer 85 0.057 0.016 0.947 – – –+ RESTA 199 0.098 0.010 0.944 – – –+ TSA 0 0.012 0.002 0.098 1.0 12.2 10.5 Phi-3.5-4B 126 0.081 0.020 0.921 – – –+ TSA 0 0.019 0.008 0.099 1.8 12.4 9.8 Gemma 3-1B 278 0.137 0.063 0.946 – – –+ TSA 59 0.065 0.031 0.844 5.7 21.1 13.7 WildJailbreak (Adv. Benign) 

> n = 210

GPT-OSS-20B 0 0.011 0.003 0.270 – – –+ TSA 0 0.009 0.003 0.097 1.0 8.0 6.3 Qwen3-14B 2 0.014 0.001 0.253 – – –+ TSA 0 0.010 0.001 0.098 2.1 29.2 26.3 Llama 3.1-8B 1 0.017 0.003 0.356 – – –+ SmoothLLM 2 0.018 0.004 0.358 – – –+ AdaSteer 3 0.022 0.002 0.359 – – –+ RESTA 2 0.013 0.004 0.351 – – –+ TSA 0 0.009 0.002 0.098 1.0 12.6 10.9 Phi-3.5-4B 0 0.015 0.001 0.205 – – –+ TSA 0 0.009 0.001 0.098 1.3 10.2 8.2 Gemma 3-1B 3 0.023 0.006 0.354 – – –+ TSA 0 0.019 0.004 0.199 3.1 12.4 8.4 HarmBench 

> n = 400

GPT-OSS-20B 16 0.046 0.004 0.947 – – –+ TSA 0 0.015 0.003 0.098 1.3 9.5 7.5 Qwen3-14B 8 0.053 0.020 0.448 – – –+ TSA 0 0.025 0.010 0.096 1.9 20.5 17.9 Llama 3.1-8B 17 0.055 0.004 0.706 – – –+ SmoothLLM 13 0.035 0.001 0.811 – – –+ AdaSteer 22 0.065 0.017 0.943 – – –+ RESTA 25 0.072 0.006 0.852 – – –+ TSA 0 0.009 0.001 0.100 1.1 10.7 9.0 Phi-3.5-4B 8 0.050 0.017 0.523 – – –+ TSA 0 0.020 0.006 0.097 1.8 12.0 9.4 Gemma 3-1B 42 0.102 0.031 0.846 – – –+ TSA 14 0.062 0.029 0.623 6.3 19.5 11.3 

810 2 10 1           

> Perturbation scale ( )
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> Mean score (a) Perturbation scale ( μ)10 010 1
> Monte Carlo samples ( N)
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> Mean score (b) Number of samples ( N)10 210 1
> Early stopping threshold
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> 0.12
> Mean score (c) Early stopping threshold (mean score) 10 210 1
> Early stopping threshold
> 1.00
> 2.00
> 3.00
> 4.00
> 5.00
> 6.00
> 7.00
> Average iterations
> (d) Early stopping threshold (number of iterations)

Figure 1: Sensitivity analysis on Gemma 3-1B and Llama 3.1-8B in terms of the average mean moderation score on the adversarial harmful split ( n = 2 ,000 ) of the WildJailbreak benchmark. The average number of iterations to convergence is also shown for the early stopping threshold. The 

x-axis is on a logarithmic scale. Tested values: μ ∈ { 0.005 , 0.01 , 0.025 , 0.05 , 0.075 , 0.1, 0.15 },

N ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 }, and threshold ∈ { 0.01 , 0.025 , 0.05 , 0.1, 0.2, 0.5}.

# 6 Discussion 

How can a sub-lexical intervention be so effective? This is a joint consequence of the regulariza-tion and the geometry of the embedding space. Gradient normalization keeps the cumulative update small in magnitude, while the vocabulary—on the order of 10 5 points in Rd for d ≥ 1152 —occupies a vanishingly sparse subset of the embedding space, so each token’s Voronoi cell is large relative to the step sizes involved. The perturbation therefore stays within each cell, yet the model receives genuinely different continuous inputs—inputs that share a discrete token identity but differ in the sub-lexical representation the transformer actually conditions on. These differences propagate through the network layers, producing materially different hidden states and output distributions—confirming that autoregressive generation is sensitive to continuous variation within a single token’s embedding subspace. 

Can the optimization be reversed to produce jailbreaks? Reversing the descent direction to maximize harmfulness failed to produce meaningfully harmful outputs in our earlier experiments. We attribute the asymmetry to the effects of safety training. The moderation scores of aligned models’ default responses are typically already low, so the finite-difference numerator collapses into estimator noise and the ascent direction carries no usable signal. Safety training further shapes a broad refusal basin in which most local perturbations continue to refuse, while the narrow compliance regions exploited by known jailbreaks lie beyond the reach of small isotropic Gaussian probes. The failure of local ascent is therefore less a limitation of the optimizer than indirect evidence that safety training has rendered the neighborhood of aligned behavior geometrically inhospitable to low-budget attacks. 

Practical profile. Across four of the five models evaluated, every safety-flagged response is eliminated on all benchmarks. Achieving this requires only the input word embeddings and a black-box moderation oracle—once the embeddings are in hand, the method operates fully black-box with no access to model internals. Inference engines such as vLLM [ 19 ] can batch the N + 1 perturbations into a single call, reducing the overhead to a small constant factor over standard single-pass generation. The moderation oracle—the OpenAI Moderation API—is freely available, and oracle latency rather than model inference is the binding runtime constraint (Table 1). In effect, the method serves as a drop-in safety layer that asks nothing of the practitioner beyond the ability to run inference and call a public API, making it straightforwardly deployable in real-world scenarios. 

Limitations. The optimization loop introduces per-prompt latency (typically on the order of seconds, given convergence in one or two gradient steps) which is the most visible deployment consideration. The oracle’s network round-trip is the only irreducible component of this cost. The method also requires access to the input word embeddings, a condition satisfied by any open-weight model but not by purely API-gated services. Finally, the Gemma 3 results indicate that effectiveness scales with the quality of the model’s existing safety training: when alignment is thin or the embedding dimension is small, the optimizer may not easily find a nearby direction that decodes into harmless content. The method amplifies existing safety alignment; it does not fully substitute for it. 97 Conclusion 

Embedding-level behavioral control, previously demonstrated for reducing surface-level profanity in open-ended completion models, extends to the fundamentally harder regime of safeguarding aligned models against prompts that elicit harmful content. By estimating the gradient of a black-box content-moderation oracle with respect to the prompt embeddings and descending along it, the proposed method minimizes the semantic harmfulness of generated text—without retraining, auxiliary modules, or any knowledge of prompt intent—and adapts its intervention to each input through a handful of gradient steps. Applicable to any off-the-shelf instruction-tuned model as a drop-in safety layer, the method eliminates nearly all safety-flagged completions across five models and standard red-teaming benchmarks while leaving already-safe responses intact. Beyond the immediate safety application, our results reveal the embedding layer as a richer control surface for aligned models than its standard role as a discrete token lookup would suggest. In every case, the optimized embeddings decode back to the original prompt tokens—the perturbation is entirely sub-lexical—yet the model’s output distribution shifts reliably toward safe behavior. This sensitivity to continuous variation below the granularity of discrete tokens implies that the embedding space encodes behavioral degrees of freedom invisible to any method operating at the token level. Whether sub-lexical embedding optimization generalizes as a mechanism for test-time behavioral control beyond safety—to objectives such as instruction-following or policy compliance, to other model families, or to other modalities—is a natural direction for future work. 

# References 

[1] Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jianmin Bao, Harkirat Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko, Johan Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Qin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Dong Chen, Dongdong Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Hao Cheng, Parul Chopra, Xiyang Dai, Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Victor Fragoso, Jianfeng Gao, Mei Gao, Min Gao, Amit Garg, Allie Del Giorno, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar, Emman Haider, Junheng Hao, Russell J. Hewett, Wenxiang Hu, Jamie Huynh, Dan Iter, Sam Ade Jacobs, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin Jin, Nikos Karampatziakis, Piero Kauffmann, Mahoud Khademi, Dongwoo Kim, Young Jin Kim, Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Yunsheng Li, Chen Liang, Lars Liden, Xihui Lin, Zeqi Lin, Ce Liu, Liyuan Liu, Mengchen Liu, Weishung Liu, Xiaodong Liu, Chong Luo, Piyush Madan, Ali Mahmoudzadeh, David Majercak, Matt Mazzola, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Arindam Mitra, Hardik Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra, Daniel Perez-Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant, Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Liliang Ren, Gustavo de Rosa, Corby Rosset, Sambudha Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin Saied, Adil Salim, Michael Santacroce, Shital Shah, Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Swadheen Shukla, Xia Song, Masahiro Tanaka, Andrea Tupini, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chunyu Wang, Guanhua Wang, Lijuan Wang, Shuohang Wang, Xin Wang, Yu Wang, Rachel Ward, Wen Wen, Philipp Witte, Haiping Wu, Xiaoxia Wu, Michael Wyatt, Bin Xiao, Can Xu, Jiahang Xu, Weijian Xu, Jilong Xue, Sonali Yadav, Fan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Yifan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu, Lu Yuan, Chenruidong Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan Zhang, and Xiren Zhou. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14219 .[2] Abubakar. Moderation boundaries with openai api. https://dev.to/thatechmaestro/ moderation-boundaries-with-openai-api-333g , May 2025. DEV Community. Accessed: 2026-04-10. [3] Gabriel Alon and Michael Kamfonas. Detecting language model attacks with perplexity, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14132 .[4] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05862 .10 [5] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Carol Chen, Catherine Olsson, Christopher Olah, Danny Hernandez, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Ethan Perez, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Kamile Lukosuite, Liane Lovitt, Michael Sellitto, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robert Lasenby, Robin Larson, Sam Ringer, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Conerly, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Samuel R. Bowman, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann, Dario Amodei, Nicholas Joseph, Sam McCandlish, Tom Brown, and Jared Kaplan. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212. 08073 .[6] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. [7] Patrick Chao, Alexander Robey, Edgar Dobriban, Hamed Hassani, George J. Pappas, and Eric Wong. Jailbreaking Black Box Large Language Models in Twenty Queries . In 2025 IEEE Conference on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML) , pages 23–42, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, April 2025. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/SaTML64287.2025.00010. URL 

https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/SaTML64287.2025.00010 .[8] Lang Gao, Jiahui Geng, Xiangliang Zhang, Preslav Nakov, and Xiuying Chen. Shaping the safety boundaries: Understanding and defending against jailbreaks in large language models. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 25378–25398, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1233. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1233/ .[9] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ah-mad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Va-suden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kam-badur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao 11 Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hos-seini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, 12 Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Con-stable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783 .[10] Seungju Han, Kavel Rao, Allyson Ettinger, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Nathan Lam-bert, Yejin Choi, and Nouha Dziri. Wildguard: Open one-stop moderation tools for safety risks, jailbreaks, and refusals of llms. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Bel-grave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 8093–8131. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/ 0f69b4b96a46f284b726fbd70f74fb3b-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.pdf .[11] Seungju Han, Kavel Rao, Allyson Ettinger, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Nathan Lambert, Yejin Choi, and Nouha Dziri. Wildguard: Open one-stop moderation tools for safety risks, jailbreaks, and refusals of LLMs. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= Ich4tv4202 .[12] Ryo Hase, Md Rafi Ur Rashid, Ashley Lewis, Jing Liu, Toshiaki Koike-Akino, Kieran Parsons, and Ye Wang. Smoothed embeddings for robust language models. In Neurips Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024 , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GkBRng3Hl9 .[13] Xiaomeng Hu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Tsung-Yi Ho. Gradient cuff: Detecting jailbreak attacks on large language models by exploring refusal loss landscapes. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=vI1WqFn15v .[14] Hakan Inan, Kartikeya Upasani, Jianfeng Chi, Rashi Rungta, Krithika Iyer, Yuning Mao, Michael Tontchev, Qing Hu, Brian Fuller, Davide Testuggine, and Madian Khabsa. Llama guard: Llm-based input-output safeguard for human-ai conversations, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2312.06674 .[15] Jiabao Ji, Bairu Hou, Alexander Robey, George J. Pappas, Hamed Hassani, Yang Zhang, Eric Wong, and Shiyu Chang. Defending large language models against jailbreak attacks via se-mantic smoothing. In Kentaro Inui, Sakriani Sakti, Haofen Wang, Derek F. Wong, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Biplab Banerjee, Asif Ekbal, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Dhirendra Pratap Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-ing and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 7–40, Mumbai, India, December 2025. The Asian Federation of Natural Lan-guage Processing and The Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-299-2. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.ijcnlp-short.2. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.ijcnlp-short.2/ .[16] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mixtral of experts, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088 .[17] Liwei Jiang, Kavel Rao, Seungju Han, Allyson Ettinger, Faeze Brahman, Sachin Kumar, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Ximing Lu, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Nouha Dziri. Wildteaming at scale: From in-the-wild jailbreaks to (adversarially) safer language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=n5R6TvBVcX .13 [18] Aounon Kumar, Chirag Agarwal, Suraj Srinivas, Aaron Jiaxun Li, Soheil Feizi, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Certifying LLM safety against adversarial prompting. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Ik05cycLq .[19] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large lan-guage model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2023. [20] Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Jinjing Zhao, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. RAIN: Your language models can align themselves without finetuning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pETSfWMUzy .[21] Todor Markov, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Tyna Eloundou, Teddy Lee, Steven Adler, Angela Jiang, and Lilian Weng. A holistic approach to undesired content detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03274 , 2022. [22] Mantas Mazeika, Long Phan, Xuwang Yin, Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Norman Mu, Elham Sakhaee, Nathaniel Li, Steven Basart, Bo Li, David Forsyth, and Dan Hendrycks. Harmbench: a standardized evaluation framework for automated red teaming and robust refusal. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024. [23] Yichuan Mo, Yuji Wang, Zeming Wei, and Yisen Wang. Fight back against jailbreaking via prompt adversarial tuning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=nRdST1qifJ .[24] Yurii Nesterov and Vladimir Spokoiny. Random gradient-free minimization of convex functions. 

Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 17(2):527–566, 2017. doi: 10.1007/s10208-015-9296-2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10208-015-9296-2 .[25] OpenAI. Moderation. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/moderation .Accessed: 2026-04-09. [26] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 .[27] OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, Che Chang, Kai Chen, Mark Chen, Enoch Cheung, Aidan Clark, Dan Cook, Marat Dukhan, Casey Dvorak, Kevin Fives, Vlad Fomenko, Timur Garipov, Kristian Georgiev, Mia Glaese, Tarun Gogineni, Adam Goucher, Lukas Gross, Katia Gil Guzman, John Hallman, Jackie Hehir, Johannes Heidecke, Alec Helyar, Haitang Hu, Romain Huet, Jacob Huh, Saachi Jain, Zach Johnson, Chris Koch, Irina Kofman, Dominik Kundel, Jason Kwon, Volodymyr Kyrylov, Elaine Ya Le, Guillaume Leclerc, James Park Lennon, Scott Lessans, Mario Lezcano-Casado, Yuanzhi Li, Zhuohan Li, Ji Lin, Jordan Liss, Lily, Liu, Jiancheng Liu, Kevin Lu, Chris Lu, Zoran Martinovic, Lindsay McCallum, Josh McGrath, Scott McKinney, Aidan McLaughlin, Song Mei, Steve Mostovoy, Tong Mu, Gideon Myles, Alexander Neitz, Alex Nichol, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Dana Palmie, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Jongsoo Park, Leher Pathak, Carolina Paz, Ludovic Peran, Dmitry Pimenov, Michelle Pokrass, Elizabeth Proehl, Huida Qiu, Gaby Raila, Filippo Raso, Hongyu Ren, Kimmy Richardson, David Robinson, Bob Rotsted, Hadi Salman, Suvansh Sanjeev, Max Schwarzer, D. Sculley, Harshit Sikchi, Kendal Simon, Karan Singhal, Yang Song, Dane Stuckey, Zhiqing Sun, Philippe Tillet, Sam Toizer, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Nikhil Vyas, Eric Wallace, Xin Wang, Miles Wang, Olivia Watkins, Kevin Weil, Amy Wendling, Kevin Whinnery, Cedric Whitney, Hannah Wong, Lin Yang, Yu Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Kristen Ying, Wojciech Zaremba, Wenting Zhan, Cyril Zhang, Brian Zhang, Eddie Zhang, and Shengjia Zhao. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925 .[28] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human 14 feedback. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2022/file/b1efde53be364a73914f58805a001731-Paper-Conference.pdf .[29] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 53728–53741. Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2023/file/a85b405ed65c6477a4fe8302b5e06ce7-Paper-Conference.pdf .[30] Alexander Robey, Eric Wong, Hamed Hassani, and George J. Pappas. SmoothLLM: Defending large language models against jailbreaking attacks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=laPAh2hRFC .[31] Baturay Saglam and Dionysis Kalogerias. Test-time detoxification without training or learning anything, 2026. [32] Baturay Saglam, Paul Kassianik, Blaine Nelson, Sajana Weerawardhena, Yaron Singer, and Amin Karbasi. Large language models encode semantics and alignment in linearly separable representations. In Kentaro Inui, Sakriani Sakti, Haofen Wang, Derek F. Wong, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Biplab Banerjee, Asif Ekbal, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Dhirendra Pratap Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2282–2303, Mumbai, India, December 2025. The Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing and The Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-298-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.ijcnlp-long.124. URL https://aclanthology.org/ 2025.ijcnlp-long.124/ .[33] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Gaël Liu, Francesco Visin, Kathleen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopalnikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Kumar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Bendebury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, András György, André Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cormac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cattle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Divyashree Shivakumar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Pluci´ nska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Harshal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John Wieting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi Orbay, Joseph Fernandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh, Kat Black, Kathy Yu, Kevin Hui, Kiran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Marcella Valentine, Marina Coelho, Marvin Ritter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael Moynihan, Min Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Nilay Chauhan, Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Phil Culliton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Pingmei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya Tafti, Rakesh Shivanna, Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu, Ryan Mullins, Sammy Jerome, Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti Sheth, Siim Põder, Sijal Bhatnagar, Sindhu Raghuram Panyam, Sivan Eiger, Susan Zhang, Tianqi Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty, Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent Roseberry, Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam Chow, Yuvein Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta, Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Kat 15 Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Moreira, Luiz Gustavo Martins, Omar Sanseviero, Lucas Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan Senter, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav Petrov, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Rohan Anil, Dmitry, Lepikhin, Sebastian Borgeaud, Olivier Bachem, Armand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, and Léonard Hussenot. Gemma 3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786 .[34] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, ed-itors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/ 3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf .[35] Pengyu Wang, Dong Zhang, Linyang Li, Chenkun Tan, Xinghao Wang, Mozhi Zhang, Ke Ren, Botian Jiang, and Xipeng Qiu. InferAligner: Inference-time alignment for harmlessness through cross-model guidance. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors, 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 10460–10479, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.585. URL https://aclanthology.org/ 2024.emnlp-main.585/ .[36] Zeming Wei, Yifei Wang, Ang Li, Yichuan Mo, and Yisen Wang. Jailbreak and Guard Aligned Language Models with Only Few In-Context Demonstrations . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence , (01):1–12, January 2023. ISSN 1939-3539. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2026.3660147. URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ TPAMI.2026.3660147 .[37] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/ anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.6 .[38] Yueqi Xie, Jingwei Yi, Jiawei Shao, Justin Curl, Lingjuan Lyu, Qifeng Chen, Xing Xie, and Fangzhao Wu. Defending ChatGPT against jailbreak attack via self-reminders. Nature Machine Intelligence , 5(12):1486–1496, December 2023. [39] Yueqi Xie, Minghong Fang, Renjie Pi, and Neil Gong. GradSafe: Detecting jailbreak prompts for LLMs via safety-critical gradient analysis. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 507–518, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.30. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.30/ .[40] Zhangchen Xu, Fengqing Jiang, Luyao Niu, Jinyuan Jia, Bill Yuchen Lin, and Radha Pooven-dran. SafeDecoding: Defending against jailbreak attacks via safety-aware decoding. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5587–5605, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.303. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.303/ .[41] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang 16 Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388 .[42] Shenyi Zhang, Yuchen Zhai, Keyan Guo, Hongxin Hu, Shengnan Guo, Zheng Fang, Lingchen Zhao, Chao Shen, Cong Wang, and Qian Wang. Jbshield: defending large language models from jailbreak attacks through activated concept analysis and manipulation. In Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium , SEC ’25, USA, 2025. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-52-6. [43] Weixiang Zhao, Jiahe Guo, Yulin Hu, Yang Deng, An Zhang, Xingyu Sui, Xinyang Han, Yanyan Zhao, Bing Qin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Ting Liu. AdaSteer: Your aligned LLM is inherently an adaptive jailbreak defender. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24559–24577, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-332-6. doi: 10.18653/v1/ 2025.emnlp-main.1248. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.1248/ .[44] Chujie Zheng, Fan Yin, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, Kai-Wei Chang, Minlie Huang, and Nanyun Peng. On prompt-driven safeguarding for large language models. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 61593–61613. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zheng24n.html .[45] Andy Zhou, Bo Li, and Haohan Wang. Robust prompt optimization for defending language mod-els against jailbreaking attacks. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=jXs6Cvpe7k .[46] Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08593 .[47] Andy Zou, Zifan Wang, Nicholas Carlini, Milad Nasr, J. Zico Kolter, and Matt Fredrikson. Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2307.15043 .17 A Algorithm Pseudocode 

Algorithm 1 provides the complete pseudocode for the test-time safety alignment procedure described in Section 4. When early stopping does not trigger, each iteration requires N + 1 forward passes through the language model and N + 1 moderation oracle queries—one base-point evaluation and N

perturbed evaluations—all independent and batchable into a single inference call. When the base-point score already falls below the early stopping threshold, the gradient computation is skipped entirely, reducing that iteration to a single forward pass. Πκ denotes projection onto {Z : cos( Z, X 0) ≥ κ}.

Algorithm 1 Test-Time Safety Alignment (TSA) 

Require: Prompt P; language model f ; moderation oracle h 

> 1:

Pchat ← CHAT TEMPLATE (P) ▷ Format with role markers  

> 2:

t1: T ← TOKENIZE (Pchat ) ▷ Token sequence (t1, . . . , t T ) 

> 3:

X0 ← EMBED (t1: T ) ▷ Word embeddings X0 ∈ RT ×d 

> 4:

Φ∗ ← ∞ ; X∗ ← X0 ▷ Track best embedding  

> 5:

for k = 0 , . . . , K − 1 do  

> 6:

yk ← f (Xk) ▷ Generate response  

> 7:

Φk ← h(yk) ▷ Moderation score Φk = h(f (Xk))  

> 8:

if Φk < Φ∗ then ▷ Update best  

> 9:

Φ∗ ← Φk; X∗ ← Xk 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

if Φk < 0.1 then ▷ Early stopping  

> 12:

break  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

for i = 1 , . . . , N do ▷ N perturbations  

> 15:

Ui ∼ N (0, I ) ∈ RT ×d 

> 16:

yi ← f (Xk + μ U i) 

> 17:

Φi ← h(yi) 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

gk ← 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Φi − Φk

μ Ui ▷ Zeroth-order gradient estimate  

> 20:

gk ← gk / ∥gk∥2 ▷ Gradient normalization  

> 21:

Xk+1 ← Xk − η g k ▷ Descent step  

> 22:

if cos( Xk+1 , X 0) < κ then ▷ Cosine similarity constraint  

> 23:

Xk+1 ← Πκ(Xk+1 , X 0) 

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

return X∗

18 B Experimental Details 

Table 2: Sample counts and token-level statistics for each safety-alignment dataset. No preprocessing is applied. # Tokens 

Dataset # Samples Max Min Mean Median WildJailbreak (adversarial benign) 210 601 14 191.15 157 WildJailbreak (adversarial harmful) 2,000 614 18 141.97 126 HarmBench (direct harmful) 400 39 6 17.86 17 

B.1 Benchmarks 

Detailed statistics covering the number of samples and token-level properties (minimum, maximum, mean, and median) are provided in Table 2. The selected benchmarks were originally designed for red-teaming evaluation; we repurpose them as sources of prompts that span a range of conditions under which aligned models may produce harmful content. WildJailbreak was additionally proposed for safety training and validation tasks. We also considered its sister dataset, WildGuardMix [ 10 ], from the same developer, which is designed primarily for moderation —that is, teaching models to refuse harmful queries appropriately. Since WildGuardMix is derived from WildJailbreak, we proceeded with the latter. 

Direct Harmful (HarmBench). The authors used GPT-4 [ 26 ] to distill the acceptable use policies of major AI companies into a set of guidelines, and then manually designed behaviors that violate laws or norms while filtering out “dual-intent” behaviors with plausible benign uses. They prioritized 

differential harm —behaviors that LLMs can enable beyond what a person could readily obtain through a search engine—particularly for contextual and multimodal cases. 

Harmful Injections (WildJailbreak). Harmful requests framed adversarially as prompt injections in more convoluted and stealthy forms. The authors’ WildTeaming framework was applied to rewrite direct harmful queries using 2–7 randomly sampled in-the-wild jailbreak tactics, with Mixtral-8×7B [ 16 ] and GPT-4 serving as the rewriters. After filtering out low-risk and off-topic prompts, each adversarial prompt was paired with the refusal response of its direct counterpart, yielding 82,728 items. 

Benign Injections (WildJailbreak). Prompt injections that resemble jailbreaks but carry no harmful intent. Jiang et al. [17] generated 78,710 such prompts with WildTeaming from direct benign queries, using GPT-3.5 [6] to produce the direct prompts. 

B.2 Hyperparameters 

We swept μ and the learning rate η on a small representative subset of 75 samples consisting mostly of adversarial harmful prompts, together with a small number of adversarial benign and direct harmful prompts as a sanity check. For each model, we typically grid-searched four to five values of μ and six to seven values of η, yielding 24 to 35 configurations in total. Most configurations with aggressive learning rates performed similarly, differing only modestly in the average number of iterations. The final tuned values are listed in Table 3. 

B.3 Implementation 

Since our method operates purely through forward passes, we use vLLM [ 19 ] for both the test-time optimization and the base-model generations. Through continuous batching across prompts and decoding steps, vLLM enables concurrent processing while sharing model execution and KV-cache management, making the overhead of batching negligible relative to single-input inference. Our 19 Table 3: Model configurations and tuned TSA hyperparameters, along with the embedding (i.e., hidden) dimensionality and the number of hidden layers. For each model, the same hyperparameters are used across all benchmarks. A moderation threshold of 0.1 is used throughout. 

Parameter GPT-OSS Qwen3 Llama 3.1 Phi-3.5 Gemma 3 Size 20B 14B 8B 4B 1B Dimensionality d 2880 5120 4096 3072 1152 # Layers 24 40 32 32 26 # Monte Carlo samples 8 8 8 8 8Perturbation scale μ 0.01 0.05 0.1 0.05 0.075 Step size η 1.5 2.5 1.3 2.5 1.75 Cosine similarity threshold 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 test-time procedure therefore reduces to a small number of standard forward passes, effectively proportional to the number of optimization iterations in practice. For the baselines, SmoothLLM is implemented on top of vLLM (the same inference backend used by our method) and applies random character swaps at a 10% perturbation rate across k=10 copies per prompt, with the returned completion selected by majority vote over a substring-based jailbreak judge. For AdaSteer, per-layer Rejection Direction (RD) and Harmfulness Direction (HD) steering vectors are extracted via difference-in-means over 256 harmful–benign contrast pairs drawn from the WildJailbreak training split. At inference time, adaptive per-input steering coefficients are computed from piecewise-linear maps evaluated at layer 8 (RD) and layer 13 (HD) for Llama 3.1-8B-Instruct, following the original hyperparameters reported for this architecture. RESTA adds isotropic Gaussian noise to the user-content token embeddings; the original paper uses σ = 0 .05 for Llama 2-7B, but we found σ = 0 .08 to work better with Llama 3.1-8B. The perturbed embeddings yield k=10 

noisy copies, which are aggregated via majority vote over a smoothed prefix of length l=10 , after which generation proceeds greedily from the agreed-upon prefix. AdaSteer and RESTA require embedding- or activation-level model access and therefore use HuggingFace transformers [ 37 ], whereas SmoothLLM operates at the character level. 

B.4 Compute 

All experiments were conducted on a single local machine equipped with two NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs (49 GiB each). Models were served via vLLM with tensor parallel size 2 and GPU memory utilization set to 95%. Per-prompt wall-clock timing under this configuration, including and excluding moderation API latency, is reported in Table 1. 20