Title: Generative Simulation for Policy Learning in Physical Human-Robot Interaction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08664v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:04:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Generative Simulation for Policy Learning in Physical Human-Robot Interaction 

Junxiang Wang ∗, Xinwen Xu ∗, Tiancheng Wu ∗, Julian Millan, Nir Pechuk, Zackory Erickson Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 

{junxiang, xinwenx, tcwu, jmillan, npechuk, zackory }@cmu.edu Simulation  Real World Textual Prompt 

"bathe a person's left 

forearm from elbow to 

wrist" 

"scratch a spot itch 

somewhere on a person's 

left forearm"  

> Fig. 1. Overview of our proposed “text2sim2real” pipeline for learning physical human-robot interaction (pHRI) policies. From a high-level textual prompt, we generate diverse scenarios in simulation, collect data, and train policies that can be deployed zero-shot in the real world.

Abstract — Developing autonomous physical human-robot in-teraction (pHRI) systems is limited by the scarcity of large-scale training data to learn robust robot behaviors for real-world applications. In this paper, we introduce a zero-shot “text2sim2real” generative simulation framework that auto-matically synthesizes diverse pHRI scenarios from high-level natural-language prompts. Leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs), our pipeline procedurally generates soft-body human models, scene layouts, and robot motion trajectories for assistive tasks. We utilize this framework to autonomously collect large-scale synthetic demonstration datasets and then train vision-based imitation learning policies operating on segmented point clouds. We evaluate our approach through a user study on two physically assistive tasks: scratching and bathing. Our learned policies successfully achieve zero-shot sim-to-real transfer, attaining success rates exceeding 80% and demonstrating resilience to unscripted human motion. Overall, we introduce the first gen-erative simulation pipeline for pHRI applications, automating simulation environment synthesis, data collection, and policy learning. Additional information may be found on our project website: https://rchi-lab.github.io/gen_phri/ .

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Robots that can autonomously make physical contact with humans have the potential of unlocking breakthroughs in areas such as healthcare, home assistance, and collaborative manufacturing. However, a critical bottleneck in developing robust physical human-robot interaction (pHRI) systems lies in the scarcity of large-scale data for training autonomous robot behaviors. Furthermore, since physical contact with humans is inherently safety-critical, these systems demand rigorous validation across highly diverse simulation environ-ments prior to real-world deployment. Recent works have achieved impressive zero-shot sim-to-real transfer for robotic manipulation [1], [2], [3] by design-ing highly diverse and randomized simulation environments; however, these setups rely on manual construction rather than 

> ∗Equal contribution.

automated generation from high-level inputs. Conversely, while recent advances in generative scene synthesis [4], [5], [6] have greatly improved the automated creation of diverse, photorealistic environments from text inputs, their utilization in sim-to-real policy learning remains limited. Most crucially, neither of these lines of research specifically addresses the field of pHRI, leaving a gap in scalable data generation for assistive robotics. We introduce a generative simulation framework designed specifically to synthesize diverse pHRI scenarios and au-tomatically collect large-scale demonstration data for sim-to-real learning. Our framework operates as a zero-shot “text2sim2real” pipeline (see Fig. 1), requiring only a high-level natural-language prompt as input—such as “scratching an itch on the left arm.” We leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to procedu-rally generate diverse scenarios consistent with the prompt. A scenario includes task-suitable scene configurations, human body shapes and poses, as well as robot motions to achieve the task objective. We further demonstrate that policies trained from large-scale data obtained from these scenarios can be transferred zero-shot into the real world, for two assistive tasks tested in a user study. Overall, our framework enables large-scale data synthesis for training pHRI systems with generative simulation technologies and the deployment of learned policies zero-shot in the real world. In summary, our contributions in this paper are as follows:  

> •

We introduce a generative simulation framework for physical human-robot interaction (pHRI) scenarios, with zero-shot “text2sim2real” capabilities. Given a textual prompt, our pipeline first performs a text-to-sim process, generating scenarios in a simulation environment with an actuated soft human and diverse scene variations.  

> •

We demonstrate that large-scale data collected from these diverse scenarios can be used to train robot 

> arXiv:2604.08664v1 [cs.RO] 9 Apr 2026

policies for zero-shot sim-to-real deployment.  

> •

We conduct a user study to test the real-world per-formance of two assistive policies trained entirely in simulation: scratching and bathing, where both policies achieve success rates greater than 80%. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Sim-to-Real Robot Learning 

Improving the fidelity of simulation has been key for zero-shot sim-to-real transfer. Recent works use Gaussian Splatting to improve simulation realism for RGB-based poli-cies [7], [8], [9], but these approaches require real-world data collection and are not able to feasibly simulate the wide variety of human shapes necessary for pHRI tasks. Others have shown zero-shot transfer using 3D geometric representations of objects such as point clouds [1], [10], [2]. Our method adopts point clouds for their generalizable sim-to-real capacity and extends previous zero-shot transfer from rigid or articulated objects to the dense, deformable geometry of human bodies in pHRI tasks. Generating realistic training data presents another signifi-cant challenge. Existing works [11], [12], [13], [14] extract one-shot robotic trajectories from human video demonstra-tions. Yet, these “real2sim2real” methods still depend on physical video seeds and often suffer from the human-to-robot kinematic embodiment gap. Unlike these approaches, we present a purely synthetic “text2sim2real” pipeline, which generates realistic trajectories for imitation learning from only a text seed. 

B. Generative Simulation 

Recent advances in generative simulation leverage depth estimation, VLMs, and LLMs to construct highly realistic, interactive 3D environments [4], [6], [15]. While these frame-works excel at generating complex architectural layouts, they are largely task-agnostic and lack automated spatial grounding for human actors. Conversely, human-centric sim-ulation platforms [16], [17] enable pHRI modeling, but rely on manually scripted human placements and predefined scenarios. Our framework bridges this gap by automatically co-generating the scene and a parameterized soft human to construct task-conditioned interaction environments. To scale policy training, recent works also automate demonstration generation. Existing methods utilize LLMs to propose tasks and generate simulation code [18], [19], rely on LLMs to write reward functions for reinforcement learning [20], [21], or apply spatial augmentations to multiply human seed demonstrations [22], [23]. However, these paradigms focus strictly on rigid-body manipulation or require initial manual teleoperation. In contrast, our pipeline synthesizes motion plans explicitly targeted at soft-human anatomical landmarks, generating safe imitation learning data without any human demonstrations. 

C. Physical Human-Robot Interaction 

A primary application of physical human-robot interac-tion (pHRI) is assisting individuals in activities of daily living (ADLs), such as bathing, dressing, and scratching. These tasks require continuous, contact-rich interactions with humans, introducing kinematic unpredictability due to the complexities of human tissue and potential for movement. Human-centric simulators have advanced this domain by cre-ating multi-task environments with built-in reward functions and realistic physics-enforced human motions for training and evaluating policies [16], [17], [24]. However, these platforms generally rely on manually scripted scenarios and static actor placements, lacking the variation to train and test for generalized contact-rich soft-tissue pHRI tasks. Recent ADL policies heavily rely on multi-modal percep-tion, combining RGB-D with thermal imaging or local tactile feedback [25], [26], [27]. While they are successful, training and deploying these complex policies for real-world use relies on computationally demanding sensory simulations, big expert demonstration datasets [28], or human-in-the-loop iterative real-world refinement [29], [30]. In contrast, our generative pipeline circumvents the need for physical demonstration data or complex sensor simulation. III. M ETHODS 

We introduce a generative simulation pipeline that synthe-sizes physical HRI scenarios with an actuated, deformable human model and supports sim-to-real policy learning. Our pipeline first generates natural-language scenario specifica-tions, including human, scene, and task descriptions (§ III-A). These descriptions are subsequently used by LLMs and VLMs to generate full simulation-ready environments automatically, including human body and pose (§ III-B), scene environment (§ III-C), and robot motions to achieve the task (§ III-D). We further train robot policies using data collected from diverse simulated scenarios (§ III-E) and demonstrate that they can be deployed in the real world. We provide all of our LLM and VLM prompts, along with example outputs, on our project website. 

A. Scenario Specification 

Our pipeline first queries a Large Language Model (LLM) to simultaneously generate three natural-language descrip-tions that together specify a scenario: 1) human description, 2) environment description, and 3) task description. These descriptions condition subsequent modules for synthesizing humans, scenes, or robot motions in simulation. A textual prompt may be provided to constrain the process of generating scenario specifications, as shown in the upper-left of Fig. 2. For example, in order to generate diverse scenarios corresponding to a particular task of interest, the prompt could specify the task (e.g., “scratch someone’s back”), and the LLM would generate plausible specifications for the human and the scene environment. Alternatively, a prompt could be used to constrain a preferred room type, particular human attributes, or not provided at all to let the LLM generate an arbitrary, reasonable assistive scenario. 

1) Human Description: The human description encodes physical attributes—such as body morphology and general posture—required to instantiate the actuated soft human D) Robot Motion Generation C) Scene Generation  

> 2) Environment Description 3) Task Description

LLM 

LLM 

> Trajectory Demonstrations
> 1) Human Description

A) Scenario Specification 

B) Human Generation 

E) Policy Training 

Textual Prompt 

(e.g. "a tall older adult", "inside the bedroom", 

or "scratching an itch on a person's left forearm") 

Real-World Deployment    

> Scratching Itch Bathing Arm
> ARCHITECT
> high-level
> policy
> Target
> Gripper Gripper
> Target
> Goal
> gripper
> low-level
> policy
> Delta EE
> Action
> LLM
> LLM/VLM
> Human
> Placement
> LLM Robot Placement
> End-Effector Trajectory Generation Fig. 2. Detailed breakdown of our proposed generative simulation pipeline for physical human-robot interaction. An LLM first generates structured human, environmental, and task descriptions from a textual prompt. These descriptions then condition the generation of simulation environments, including deformable human instantiation, scene synthesis, and robot motion generation. The resulting simulated environment is used for generating trajectory demonstrations, from which we train policies that can be deployed zero-shot in the real world.

model (§ III-B). The morphology component dictates rel-ative body proportions (e.g., height and build) to ensure physical diversity across the simulated dataset. The posture component defines a categorical pose (e.g., sitting, standing, or lying down) and serves as a semantic prior that guides downstream modules in synthesizing fine-grained, physically plausible joint angles. 

2) Environment Description: The environment descrip-tion represents the spatial context of the interaction, typi-cally specifying a room classification and essential furniture. The subsequent scene synthesis module (§ III-C) uses this description to generate geometrically consistent 3D layouts. Since all three descriptions are simultaneously generated and hence intrinsically coupled, the environment description would contain necessary elements to support the human posture and the task. For instance, a description of “a living room with a couch” specifically includes a couch that grounds a seated human posture suitable for the related task. 

3) Task Description: The robot task description defines the specific assistive action the robot will perform. Because physical assistance inherently involves an extended period of close proximity to the human instead of free-space motions, this description must contain sufficient semantic detail to spatially ground the robot motion relative to specific target areas on the human body. For example, the trajectory for “bathing the left forearm” could be defined entirely with respect to the left wrist and the left elbow, providing the necessary grounding for the downstream motion generator (§ III-D) to synthesize such localized trajectories. 

B. Human Generation 

To translate the generated human description into a phys-ically interactive entity, we map the semantic components directly to the parameters of an actuated soft human model. Our simulated human is based on the SMPL-X [31] parame-terized body model, which is defined by a function M (θ, β )

that generates a 3D human body mesh given body pose θ

and body shape β.As established in our scenario specification, the human de-scription explicitly encodes morphology and posture, which correspond directly to the coefficients β and θ, respectively. To ensure reliable parameter generation from this high-level text, we employ a two-stage LLM prompting scheme. First, we query the LLM to expand the high-level human descrip-tion into highly detailed semantic descriptions for body shape and body pose separately. In the second stage, these detailed descriptions are mapped into concrete numerical values via in-context learning. By providing the LLM with a semantic explanation of the β parameter space and a few-shot example pairing a pose description with corresponding θ parameter values, we effectively ground the LLM in semantic context, ensuring the output parameters are physically consistent with the input description. See our project website for example outputs. To implement an actuated soft human in the simulator, we construct a URDF of the human body. From the LLM-generated body shape coefficients β, we evaluate the SMPL-X model to obtain the body mesh and positions of the body joints. We then separate the human mesh into body parts (torso, upper arms, forearms, thighs, lower legs, and head) according to the SMPL-X per-vertex body part labels, then assemble the components into a unified URDF kinematic tree. We model the shoulders, elbows, hips, knees, and neck all as ball joints, yielding a total of 27 degrees of freedom. Finally, we set each joint according to the generated body pose parameters θ to configure the human into the target posture. We import this URDF model into the Genesis [32] physics simulator as a HybridEntity . This gives a hybrid human representation with a rigid internal skeleton for kinematic motion control, surrounded by a soft-body exterior that provides visual contiguity and physical realism when en-countering contacts and deformations during interactions. On the flip side, soft-body simulation can be computationally de-manding, so we also support disabling the soft-body exterior and simulate only the rigid actuated human model, which is more efficient for parallel simulation. For improved visual realism, we texture the simulated human using the SMPLitex dataset [33]. 

C. Scene Generation 

Given the environment description, we generate an indoor scene layout using ARCHITECT, a diffusion-based scene synthesis framework [4]. ARCHITECT takes the textual description as input and produces a geometrically consistent room layout populated with furniture assets. The room layout is represented in JSON format, where each furniture entry contains information such as their mesh geometries, spatial poses, and standardized category labels (e.g., chair, sofa, table). 

1) Human Placement: To place the generated soft human into the scene, we query an LLM to interpret the JSON room representation and select furniture with the correct affordance for the target human posture. For example, if the human description specifies a seated posture, the LLM uses the category labels as the criteria for selecting furniture objects associated with a seating affordance (e.g., chairs or sofas). In practice, the zero-shot generated scene may lack posture-appropriate furniture or sufficient obstacle-free space for the robot to perform the target interaction around the human. In either of these two cases, we invoke a scene completion step to insert an appropriate asset satisfying af-fordance and accessibility. A Vision-Language Model (VLM) is provided with a top-down rendered view of the scene and prompted to propose 2D placement coordinates for a new, posture-consistent furniture asset in an empty region. These candidate insertions are validated via collision checks in the simulator before being committed to the scene. Once the target furniture instance is determined, we compute a posture-conditioned placement anchor from its mesh geometry. For seated postures, we compute the mesh extremum along the furniture’s forward axis and use the maximum vertical coordinate near this extremum to define the anchor location. The generated human model is then aligned to this anchor in the horizontal plane and translated vertically based on the human mesh geometry to prevent interpenetration. Please refer to our website for a figure illustrating this process. While the current implementation focuses on seated configurations, the anchor computation can be adapted to other postures by modifying the directional and surface selection rules accordingly. 

2) Robot Placement: To ensure the robot can successfully execute the target interaction, its base must be positioned at an appropriate location within the scene from which it can reach the relevant part of the human body. We achieve this by prompting an LLM to output executable code that calculates the robot’s initial position and orientation, condi-tioned entirely on the natural-language task description. The only simulator API provided to the LLM is one that exposes the 3D position of any human skeletal joint (e.g. left wrist, right elbow). The generated code thus defines the robot’s placement relative to the specific body parts involved in the task, guaranteeing that the robot is spatially grounded relative to the human’s pose and location in the environment. Note that we do not explicitly take into account collision with other scene furniture components here and instead assume that it was handled from the previous human placement module, so in the case of collision, the pipeline attempts to reselect a human placement and retry robot placement. 

D. Robot Motion Generation 

To synthesize the physical interaction, we query an LLM to translate the task description (§ III-A) into executable code. This code defines a function that generates an end-effector trajectory to accomplish the specified task. Success-ful executions of this trajectory can then be used to train imitation learning policies (we discuss our policy structure in § III-E). By conditioning this code generation solely on the task description, our framework can automatically synthesize specialized trajectories for arbitrary assistive tasks. 

1) Trajectory Representation: We represent the trajectory as a temporal sequence of waypoints. Each waypoint de-scribes the desired end-effector pose (position and orienta-tion), velocity, a binary flag indicating planned contact, and the specific motion planning algorithm required to reach it. To ensure both safety and efficiency, the LLM selects the planning algorithm for each waypoint between a rapidly-exploring random tree (RRT) for diverse, collision-free ma-neuvers in free space, or a straight-line Cartesian planner for close-proximity and contact-rich phases of the interaction. In practice, this often means that the first waypoint uses RRT to efficiently reach an “approach” point near the human surface, and then switches to straight-line Cartesian for safe contact with the human. 

2) Target Point: In addition to the waypoint sequence, the LLM-generated function outputs a 3D “target point”, used for downstream policy learning. We discuss how our policy interprets this point in § III-E, but conceptually, this target point serves to spatially condition the policy prediction in situations where the trajectory inferred from visual observations alone can be ambiguous. For instance, in a forearm scratching task, the intended scratch location could be any point along the arm, but the visual observation of the forearm remains similar regardless of this intended goal. Due to this inference difficulty from vision alone, specifying this 3D target point prevents perceptual ambiguity and ensures the policy learns to condition its actions on the intended goal. 3) Grounding and Diversity: To guarantee that the gen-erated trajectories are physically grounded and invariant to the specific robot kinematics, the LLM is constrained to use a predefined set of state variables and simulator APIs. The provided variables include the robot’s egocentric partial point cloud of the human, per-point surface normals, and the camera pose. Furthermore, it can call simulator APIs to query 3D skeletal joint positions (identical to the one used in robot placement) and to project 3D points onto the point cloud surface. The latter API is used to determine the location of skeletal positions (e.g., wrist, elbow) on the surface of the human body as observed through the point cloud, in order to plan accurate contacts. By instructing the LLM to exclusively use these APIs, all waypoints and target points are explicitly grounded relative to human body parts and joints rather than absolute world coordinates. Finally, to scale up data diversity for policy training, the LLM-generated function accepts a random seed that perturbs the target point (e.g., varying the specific scratch location along the arm). To ensure stable policy learning, the LLM is instructed not to include waypoint variations in the trajectory generation function beyond the necessary extent caused by this shifted target point. 

E. Policy Learning 

We train vision-based policies using segmented human point clouds as our primary visual representation. We adapt the hierarchical imitation learning architecture introduced in Articubot [1]. In this architecture, the high-level policy takes as input a collection of 3D points—a point cloud of interest (human in our case) and four points representing the current robot end-effector gripper pose—and outputs a goal pose of the robot end-effector (also as four points) through a weighted displacement model. Subsequently, a low-level 3D diffusion policy [34] conditions on this predicted goal to generate step-by-step actions (delta end-effector poses) to reach that goal. To adapt the specific needs for pHRI tasks, we modify the high-level policy to accept the 3D target point (§ III-D) that parameterizes each generated trajectory, in addition to the human point cloud and the four current gripper points. We append a one-hot encoding to the point features to explicitly differentiate each kind of point input (point cloud, gripper points, and target point). See panel E of Fig. 2 for a visualization of the policy architecture. We train the high-level policy to predict each planned waypoint—given the inputs, output four gripper points representing the next waypoint (sub-goal) to move towards. This high-level policy then serves as a predictor for the task phase, and the low-level policy predicts delta actions to move to the sub-goal. To reduce perceptual distractions and ensure efficient learning, we isolate from the point cloud only the specific body parts (e.g., limbs, torso, etc.) relevant to the target task. For instance, a forearm bathing task requires isolating the forearm, whereas a feeding task requires isolating the head. To automate this preprocessing step, we employ a lightweight LLM prompt to extract the necessary semantic body part              

> TABLE I SCORES MEASURING HOW WELL THE GENERATED SCENES MATCH THE INPUT ENVIRONMENTAL DESCRIPTION
> Scenario CLIP ↑BLIP ↑VQA ↑
> Scratching itch 0.757 0.516 0.818 Bathing arm 0.767 0.493 0.732 ARCHITECT ∗0.718 0.586 0.807
> ∗Reported in the ARCHITECT paper [4].

labels directly from the task description (§ III-A); these body part labels can then be used to perform segmentation for the corresponding links in the simulator. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We demonstrate that our pipeline can be used to train zero-shot sim-to-real policies in two different physically assistive tasks: scratching and bathing. We use Hello Robot Stretch 3 as the robot in both simulation and the real world. Below we first provide details and evaluations of generating simulation scenes with our pipeline (§ IV-A), and then we discuss the results from real-world experiments (§ IV-B). 

A. Simulation Environments 

We use the following task descriptions to seed our gen-erative pipeline, for the tasks of scratching and bathing respectively: “scratching a spot itch somewhere on a person’s left forearm,” and “bathing a person’s left forearm from elbow to wrist.” We used Gemini 3 Pro as the LLM and VLM in our pipeline. 

1) Quality of Generated Scenes: We evaluated how well the generated simulation environments match the input en-vironment descriptions using three text–image alignment metrics computed on rendered scene views: CLIP (image– text feature similarity) [35], BLIP (image–text matching head) [36], and a VQA-based scorer (the probability of an-swering “Yes” to “Does the image show the caption?”) [37] As shown in Table I, the scores suggest that the generated scenes are generally consistent with the conditioning environ-mental descriptions. Compared to the metric scores reported in ARCHITECT [4], our results are broadly on par, though the comparison is approximate due to differences in prompts and evaluation implementations. 

2) Quality of Generated Robot Motions: We evaluated the success of the trajectory generation process (§ III-D) for both scratching and bathing tasks. We query the LLM to generate 20 different motion planning functions for each task. The trajectory generated by each function was executed in simulation and marked as a success if the task was completed without encountering a failure case while achieving the fun-damental goal. This metric is based on the following failure criteria: incorrect planner usage (i.e., using RRT for human contact), maintaining contact for less than 90% of the human contact phase in the robot’s motion, and incidental contact with the human user by a part of the robot not consisting of the tool or gripper ends. Our generated trajectories had a success rate of 90% for the scratching task and 70% for the bathing task. 

3) Data Collection: For each task, we generated 25 dif-ferent scenes and 100 different human configurations (body shapes and poses). To ensure enough space for placing the robot next to the human, we utilized the human placement method of adding a furniture (chair) into the generated scene and then placing the human onto the furniture. To leverage each scene to its fullest, we attempt to perform different human placements within the same scene to achieve diversity from the robot’s perspective but without rebuilding scenes. We added on average three chairs into each scene, as some scenes have more limited open space for human placement compared to other scenes. With random combinations of scenes and human config-urations, we collected a total of 4000 demonstrations for each task of scratching and bathing. Both tasks segmented out the left forearm as the relevant body part, and at each timestep, the point cloud was downsampled to 1500 points. For efficiency in data collection, we used the rigid version of our actuated human model. For generalization, we added domain randomization on top of the LLM-generated robot placement, where the robot’s base pose, initial joint configurations, and the camera’s pose were all varied. This is a manually-defined, robot-specific range of randomization that operates relative to the LLM-generated robot pose, which is provided once prior to starting the data collection process. We use two criteria for automatically rejecting demonstra-tions during data collection: occlusion causing insufficient (less than 1500) points in the observed point cloud, and kinematic infeasibility of the planned trajectory (determined through inverse kinematics test). These are general criteria that apply to any arbitrary task, as the former leads to a policy learning failure and the latter is a motion planning failure. With 4000 valid demonstrations collected for each task, the total number of attempted demonstrations was 4232 and 6111 for scratching and bathing respectively, resulting in data rejection rates of 5.48% and 34.54%. 

4) Simulation Evaluations: We evaluated policies for both tasks in simulation, with separate metrics to measure task success. For the scratching task, we compute the min-imum distance d between the robot’s end-effector position 

pee and the target scratching position ptarget , over the entire policy roll-out horizon T . Formally, this is defined as the distance 

d(ptarget ) = min   

> t∈[0 ,T ]

∥pee (t) − ptarget ∥2 (1) A trial is classified as a success if this minimum distance falls below a proximity threshold dthresh = 10 mm, yielding a binary success metric Sscratching = I(d(ptarget ) < d thresh ).This threshold is consistent with the typical range of effective human scratching observed in relevant studies [38]. For the bathing task, we measure coverage by specifying 

N = 5 points, pi, evenly spaced from the elbow to the wrist. A point is considered “covered” if the robot end-effector Motion Trajectory  Result Scratching   

> Bathing Result Motion Trajectory
> Fig. 3. Real work setup for both bathing and scratching tasks, visualizing robot motion trajectory throughout the trial and the end result.

ever reaches within dthresh of the point. Task success is then computed as a discrete fraction of the number of points covered: 

Sbathing = 1

N

> N

X

> i

I(d(pi) < d thresh )

!

× 100% (2) We ran 200 evaluation trials for each task in simulation and computed average success rates to be 96.3% for scratching and 96.9% for bathing. This result demonstrates that our simulation environments can be used in validating trained policies prior to deployment, and that large-scale data col-lected from our simulated scenarios can be used effectively in policy training. 

B. Real-World Deployment and Evaluation 1) Hardware Setup: We deploy our policies on a Hello Robot Stretch 3 mobile manipulator equipped with a task-specific end-effector (e.g., a forearm scratcher or bathing towel) and a head-mounted Intel RealSense D435i depth camera. A separate GPU workstation runs the learned high-and low-level policies for inference, communicating wire-lessly with the robot’s onboard computer via ZMQ sockets that stream RGB-D observations and joint states from the robot and return joint-space commands. At inference time, a colored marker placed on the participant’s body serves as the target point, which is detected by color thresholding in the camera image and back-projected into 3D to condition the policy. Then, the workstation segments the left forearm from the RGB image using SAM 3 [39], constructs a point cloud from the masked depth image, and queries the hierarchical policy to produce end-effector goals and actions that are converted to joint commands and sent to the robot for execution. 

2) User Experiment: We recruited five participants to test our trained policies, in an ethics-approved user study. See Fig. 3 for an illustration of the real-world setup for each task, including task progression and end result. The participants were seated in a chair with armrests, and we performed four trials per task on each participant. For two of the four trials, the participant was asked to keep their arm stationary on the arm rest. For the other two trials, the participant was asked to do a one-time displacement of their left arm along the armrest, prior to the robot making contact with them— moving their arm forward for one trial and backward for the TABLE II AVERAGE SUCCESS METRICS AND PERCENTAGE FOR BOTH SCRATCHING AND BATHING TASKS , BASED ON THE EFFECT OF ARM MOTION             

> Arm Motion Scratching Bathing
> dSscratching nremoved Sbathing
> w/o motion 2.3 mm 100% 42/50 84% w/ motion 6.5 mm 80% 42/50 84%

other. We provided no guidance to participants on the extent of this displacement, so the amount of motion was naturally varied across participants and trials. This is to increase the difficulty of the task and to evaluate whether our policies can adapt to human motions, even when trained on only static human poses. 

3) Metrics: We adopted the simulation metrics for our real-world setup. For the scratching task, we compute 

d(ptarget ) from computer vision and depth camera readings. For the bathing task, we put N = 5 adhesive strips evenly spaced along the participant’s arm to serve as a proxy for physical coverage. Task success is then computed as the discrete number of strips successfully removed by the robot ( nremoved ) during the roll-out (we count significant displacement also as removal): 

Sbathing = nremoved 

N × 100% (3) 

4) Real-World Results: Table II presents the quantita-tive evaluation metrics averaged across all real-world trials, alongside the overall success rates for each task. Under static conditions (without arm motion), the policies demonstrate strong baseline performance, achieving a 100% success rate for the scratching task and an 84% success rate for the bathing task. This indicates that the real-world scratching policy performance is on par with the results of simulation experiments (96.2%), and the bathing policy suffers a small performance drop (simulation success 96.9%). When there was human arm movement prior to contact, the success rate for scratching drops to 80%, whereas bathing maintains an identical 84% real-world success rate. 

5) Failure Analysis—Bathing: The root cause of the performance drop of the bathing task when transferred from simulation to the real world is a lack of consistent contact with the arm surface. Since the trained policy is vision-based with no force information, the robot end-effector would occasionally move over an area of the arm with insufficient pressure to remove the adhesive strip. 

6) Analysis—Arm Motion: When evaluating the policies’ robustness to human movement prior to contact, we observe distinct behaviors reflecting the physical nature of each task. The bathing policy demonstrates resilience to spatial perturbations with an identical 84% success rate even under arm motion. Recall that the high-level policy predicts the next sub-goal (hence the task stage) based on the current gripper pose, and in bathing, the sub-goals are relatively spaced apart—one at the elbow, and one at the wrist. This spatial distance allows the high-level policy to correctly predict the current task stage even when the arm is displaced. On the other hand, the more densely-spaced sub-goals for the scratching task cause the high-level policy to make incorrect predictions of the current task stage, dropping the success rate from 100% to 80%. As a concrete example, the generated scratching motion moves from the right to the left, across the target scratching location. If immediately prior to contact (when the robot end-effector is on the right side of the scratching location), the user moved their arm to the right significantly, this would put the robot end-effector on the left side of the scratching location, and hence the policy would consider the task as in the final stage rather than in the starting stage. Even in less extreme situations where the high-level policy does not immediately make an incorrect prediction, the continuous execution of low-level actions can gradually lead to a robot state that causes the high-level policy to predict an advanced task phase prematurely. Nevertheless, the average scratching distance error under arm motion only increases to 6.5 mm, remaining within the 10 mm threshold for effective interaction. Please refer to our website for images and videos illus-trating failure cases associated with arm motion as well as with insufficient contact in bathing. 

7) Summary: Overall, the high success rates in the real world show that policies trained exclusively on synthetic data generated by our pipeline can successfully achieve zero-shot transfer to real-world pHRI applications. Furthermore, this suggests that our simulated human models produce synthetic point clouds that sufficiently bridge the visual reality gap, allowing the policy to accurately interpret real-world human point clouds without domain adaptation. Lastly, the perfor-mance under arm motion indicates that the large range of human poses generated across the simulation demonstrations offers some degree of generalization to real-world human motions. This last point also supports the use of imitation learning policies over traditional motion planners, as the latter could be error-prone under dynamics and occlusion. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we introduced the first “text2sim2real” gen-erative simulation framework designed specifically for phys-ical human-robot interaction (pHRI). By taking only a high-level natural-language prompt as input, our pipeline automat-ically synthesizes diverse, simulation-ready environments. This includes generating geometrically consistent room lay-outs, parameterized soft-body human models, and executable robot motion trajectories. We demonstrated that imitation learning policies trained exclusively on this procedurally-generated synthetic data can successfully achieve zero-shot transfer to the real world. Evaluated through a user study on two assistive tasks—scratching and bathing—our vision-based policies achieved baseline success rates exceeding 80%, validating the efficacy and scalability of our automated data generation approach. Several avenues remain for future work that can address some current limitations. First of all, our current policies are trained entirely on point cloud observations without force in-formation. Incorporating simulated tactile information would fully leverage the soft-body physics of our human model, directly addressing failure cases caused by discontinuous pressure as seen in the bathing task. Second, generating diverse human motions in simulation beyond static poses can further improve policy performance under dynamic scenar-ios. Lastly, future work also has the opportunity to explore more complex pHRI tasks to improve the generalizability of this framework. REFERENCES [1] Y. Wang, Z. Wang, M. Nakura, P. Bhowal, C.-L. Kuo, Y.-T. Chen, Z. Erickson, and D. Held, “Articubot: Learning universal articulated object manipulation policy via large scale simulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03045 , 2025. [2] M. Dalal, M. Liu, W. Talbott, C. Chen, D. Pathak, J. Zhang, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Local policies enable zero-shot long-horizon ma-nipulation,” in 2025 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 13 875–13 882. [3] W. Liu, Y. Wan, J. Wang, Y. Kuang, X. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhao, Z. Zhang, and H. Wang, “Fetchbot: Learning generalizable object fetching in cluttered scenes via zero-shot sim2real,” in 9th Annual Conf. on Robot Learning , 2025. [4] Y. Wang, X. Qiu, J. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Cai, Y. Wang, T.-H. Wang, Z. Xian, and C. Gan, “Architect: Generating vivid and interactive 3d scenes with hierarchical 2d inpainting,” Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 67 575–67 603, 2024. [5] Q. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Lin, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, W. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Fang, Q. Lyu, X. Sun, J. Yang, Z. Wang, B. C. Dang, Z. Chen, D. Ladia, Q. V. Dang, J. Liu, and C. Gan, “Virtual community: An open world for humans, robots, and society,” in The Fourteenth Intl. Conf. on Learning Representations , 2026. [6] J. Ren, Y. Zhuang, X. Ye, L. Mao, X. He, J. Shen, M. Dogra, Y. Liang, R. Zhang, T. Yue, et al. , “Simworld: An open-ended realistic simulator for autonomous agents in physical and social worlds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01078 , 2025. [7] M. N. Qureshi, S. Garg, F. Yandun, D. Held, G. Kantor, and A. Silwal, “Splatsim: Zero-shot sim2real transfer of rgb manipulation policies using gaussian splatting,” in 2025 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 6502–6509. [8] H. Zhao, C. Zeng, L. Zhuang, Y. Zhao, S. Xue, H. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Li, K. Li, S. Huang, et al. , “High-fidelity simulated data generation for real-world zero-shot robotic manipulation learning with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10637 , 2025. [9] Y. Jia, G. Wang, Y. Dong, J. Wu, Y. Zeng, H. Lin, Z. Wang, H. Ge, W. Gu, K. Ding, et al. , “Discoverse: Efficient robot simulation in complex high-fidelity environments,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 6272–6279. [10] Y. Qin, B. Huang, Z.-H. Yin, H. Su, and X. Wang, “Dexpoint: Gener-alizable point cloud reinforcement learning for sim-to-real dexterous manipulation,” in Conf. on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 594– 605. [11] T. G. W. Lum, O. Y. Lee, K. Liu, and J. Bohg, “Crossing the human-robot embodiment gap with sim-to-real rl using one human demonstration,” in 9th Conf. on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Lim, S. Song, and H.-W. Park, Eds., vol. 305. PMLR, 27–30 Sep 2025, pp. 4418–4441. [12] H. Zhou, R. Wang, Y. Tai, Y. Deng, G. Liu, and K. Jia, “You only teach once: Learn one-shot bimanual robotic manipulation from video demonstrations,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems XXI , 2025, pp. 149–170. [13] Z. Yuan, T. Wei, L. Gu, P. Hua, T. Liang, Y. Chen, and H. Xu, “Hermes: Human-to-robot embodied learning from multi-source motion data for mobile dexterous manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20085 , 2025. [14] R. G. Goswami, P. Krishnamurthy, Y. LeCun, and F. Khorrami, “Osvi-wm: One-shot visual imitation for unseen tasks using world-model-guided trajectory generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20425 , 2025. [15] L. H¨ ollein, A. Cao, A. Owens, J. Johnson, and M. Nießner, “Text2room: Extracting textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models,” in IEEE/CVF Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV) , October 2023, pp. 7909–7920. [16] Z. Erickson, V. Gangaram, A. Kapusta, C. K. Liu, and C. C. Kemp, “Assistive gym: A physics simulation framework for assistive robotics,” IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2020. [17] R. Ye, W. Xu, H. Fu, R. K. Jenamani, V. Nguyen, C. Lu, K. Dim-itropoulou, and T. Bhattacharjee, “Rcare world: A human-centric simulation world for caregiving robots,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 33–40. [18] Y. Wang, Z. Xian, F. Chen, T.-H. Wang, Y. Wang, K. Fragkiadaki, Z. Erickson, D. Held, and C. Gan, “Robogen: Towards unleashing infinite data for automated robot learning via generative simulation,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01455 , 2023. [19] L. Wang, Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, M. Shridhar, C. Bao, Y. Qin, B. Wang, H. Xu, and X. Wang, “Gensim: Generating robotic simulation tasks via large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01361 , 2023. [20] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Ja-yaraman, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar, “Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931 , 2023. [21] J. Ma, W. Liang, H.-J. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, O. Bastani, and D. Ja-yaraman, “Dreureka: Language model guided sim-to-real transfer,” in 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems XX . RSS, 2024. [22] A. Mandlekar, S. Nasiriany, B. Wen, I. Akinola, Y. Narang, L. Fan, Y. Zhu, and D. Fox, “Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17596 , 2023. [23] Z. Xue, S. Deng, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Yuan, and H. Xu, “Demogen: Synthetic demonstration generation for data-efficient visuomotor pol-icy learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16932 , 2025. [24] Y. Yuan, J. Song, U. Iqbal, A. Vahdat, and J. Kautz, “Physdiff: Physics-guided human motion diffusion model,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 16 010–16 021. [25] R. Madan, S. Valdez, D. Kim, S. Fang, L. Zhong, D. T. Virtue, and T. Bhattacharjee, “Rabbit: A robot-assisted bed bathing system with multimodal perception and integrated compliance,” in 2024 ACM/IEEE Intl. Conf. on human-robot interaction , 2024, pp. 472–481. [26] Y. Gu and Y. Demiris, “Vttb: A visuo-tactile learning approach for robot-assisted bed bathing,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5751–5758, 2024. [27] ——, “Learning bimanual manipulation policies for bathing bed-bound people,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 8936–8943. [28] X. Liang, Z. Liu, K. Lin, E. Gu, R. Ye, T. Nguyen, C. Hsu, Z. Wu, X. Yang, C. S. Y. Cheung, et al. , “Openrobocare: A multimodal multi-task expert demonstration dataset for robot caregiving,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 2661–2668. [29] S. W. Abeyruwan, L. Graesser, D. B. D’Ambrosio, A. Singh, A. Shankar, A. Bewley, D. Jain, K. M. Choromanski, and P. R. Sanketi, “i-sim2real: Reinforcement learning of robotic policies in tight human-robot interaction loops,” in Conf. on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 212–224. [30] H. Chen, Y. Xu, Y. Ren, Y. Ye, X. Li, N. Ding, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Cong, Z. Wang, et al. , “Symbridge: A human-in-the-loop cyber-physical interactive system for adaptive human-robot symbiosis,” in 

SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference , 2025, pp. 1–12. [31] G. Pavlakos, V. Choutas, N. Ghorbani, T. Bolkart, A. A. A. Osman, D. Tzionas, and M. J. Black, “Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face, and body from a single image,” in IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019, pp. 10 975–10 985. [32] G. Authors, “Genesis: A generative and universal physics engine for robotics and beyond,” December 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Genesis-Embodied-AI/Genesis [33] D. Casas and M. Comino-Trinidad, “SMPLitex: A Generative Model and Dataset for 3D Human Texture Estimation from Single Image,” in British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , 2023. [34] Y. Ze, G. Zhang, K. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Wang, and H. Xu, “3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations,” in 2nd Workshop on Dexterous Manipulation: Design, Perception and Control (RSS) , 2024. [35] J. Hessel, A. Holtzman, M. Forbes, R. Le Bras, and Y. Choi, “Clip-score: A reference-free evaluation metric for image captioning,” in 2021 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,2021, pp. 7514–7528. [36] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 19 730–19 742. [37] Z. Lin, D. Pathak, B. Li, J. Li, X. Xia, G. Neubig, P. Zhang, and D. Ramanan, “Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-to-text generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01291 , 2024. [38] V. Vierow, M. Fukuoka, A. Ikoma, A. D¨ orfler, H. O. Handwerker, and C. Forster, “Cerebral representation of the relief of itch by scratching,” 

Journal of neurophysiology , vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 3216–3224, 2009. [39] N. Carion, L. Gustafson, Y.-T. Hu, S. Debnath, R. Hu, D. Suris, C. Ryali, K. V. Alwala, H. Khedr, A. Huang, et al. , “Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 , 2025.