Title: Train-Small Deploy-Large: Leveraging Diffusion-Based Multi-Robot Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.06598v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:25:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Train-Small Deploy-Large: Leveraging Diffusion-Based Multi-Robot Planning 

Siddharth Singh 1, Soumee Guha 2, Qing Chang 1, and Scott Acton 21Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, University of Virginia 

> 2

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Virginia 

Abstract —Learning based multi-robot path planning methods struggle to scale or generalize to changes, particularly variations in the number of robots during deployment. Most existing methods are trained on a fixed number of robots and may tolerate a reduced number during testing, but typically fail when the number increases. Additionally, training such methods for a larger number of agents can be both time consuming and computationally expensive. However, analytical methods can struggle to scale computationally or handle dynamic changes in the environment. In this work, we propose to leverage a diffusion model based planner capable of handling dynamically varying number of agents. Our approach is trained on a limited number of agents and generalizes effectively to larger numbers of agents during deployment. Results show that integrating a single shared diffusion model based planner with dedicated inter-agent attention computation and temporal convolution enables a train-small deploy-large paradigm with good accuracy. We validate our method across multiple scenarios and compare the performance with existing multi-agent reinforcement learning techniques and heuristic control based methods. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) play a vital role in modern applications such as warehouse automation, material handling, surveillance, and manufacturing operations [8]. The problem of multi-agent planning has been pursued for several decades [3], with a central challenge being efficient path planning and coordination among agents, especially in dynamic envi-ronments where the number of agents may vary over time. However, most existing methods assume a fixed number of robots or agents. Traditional approaches to multi-agent planning can be broadly categorized into two broad classes: analytical or algorithmic methods and learning-based methods. Analytical methods, such as Multi Agent Path Finding (MAPF) [1] methods or Nature Inspired methods [13], typically rely on closed-form formulations and offer performance guarantees. However, these methods can struggle to scale due to computa-tional complexity, especially as the number of agents increases, and they can be brittle in dynamic or partially observed environments. Learning-based approaches, such as those based on graph architectures [24] and Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [26], have shown greater adaptability in dynamic scenarios. However, their reliance on a fixed number of agents during training constrains their ability to generalize to deployments with larger agent populations. Moreover, these methods suffer from increased non-stationarity and instability in learning when the number of agents changes dynami-cally [4]. Recent advances in generative modeling, particularly diffu-sion models, offer promising capabilities for handling com-plex, high-dimensional planning tasks under varying con-ditions [23]. Inspired by these advancements, we explore the use of diffusion-based planning for multi-robot systems operating in dynamic and variable-size team settings. Our key goal is to develop a generalizable approach that supports a 

train-small, deploy-large paradigm – training on a limited number of agents while scaling to larger teams at deployment. We leverage the same behavior to handle a system with a dynamically varying number of agents in deployment. To this end, we investigate the efficacy of diffusion models in improving generalization for multi-agent navigation tasks. Our proposed approach, Multi-Agent Diffusion Based Planner (MA-DBP) begins by leveraging pre-trained MARL policies to bootstrap diffusion model training. This allows the dif-fusion model to learn a strong prior over agent behaviors, while decoupling planning from the non-stationarity chal-lenges of MARL. Additionally, we design a semantic axial pre-processing module to encode both inter-agent interactions and temporal context, which is critical in enhancing coordination and ensuring trajectory consistency. We adopt a conditional latent diffusion framework, where the diffusion model is conditioned on tokens that encode the current environmental state, the states of active agents, and the target goals. This enables the model to up-sample effective plans even when deployed in configurations with more agents than seen during training. Most importantly, we utilize a single diffusion model to plan and upscale. A moving window planning strategy is employed to maintain goal-directed behavior throughout execution. In summary, our key contributions are as follows: 1) A novel diffusion-based planner architecture enabling scalable multi-agent coordination and robust generaliza-tion to team sizes larger than seen during training. 2) A moving window conditional diffusion framework that flexibly incorporates environment, agent count, and goal conditions to ensure dynamic interaction and scalable goal-reaching behavior in multi-agent setups. 3) A semantic axial attention pre-processor that embeds the inter-agent attention and temporal dependencies to sup-port coordinated and coherent planning. All embeddings obtained from this module have the same dimension, which ensures that the model can work with a varying 

> arXiv:2604.06598v1 [cs.RO] 8 Apr 2026 2

number of agents. We validate our approach for the navigation problem with different scenarios in simulation and compare against existing methods. Our results show that leveraging diffusion with explicit attention based encoding prior to noising step can allow us to follow the train-small deploy-large paradigm with good success and and handle dynamic setups. The rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section II dis-cusses the related work, Sec. III details the proposed method, Sec IV shows the experimental validation and comparative analysis against existing methods, followed by the conclusion in Sec V. II. L ITERATURE REVIEW 

Research in multi-agent systems can be algorithmic, ana-lytical, and learning-based [20]. Algorithmic methods address scheduling and planning tasks like path finding and conflict resolution, using an algorithmic planner with low-level con-trollers [17]. Analytical methods leverage centralized models and optimization frameworks to model objectives and con-straints, but face scalability issues as agent numbers grow [16]. Learning-based methods, including graph learning and MARL, adapt to environmental and task changes, but require retraining for varying agent counts or changing graph topologies due to non-stationarity [26]. Recent work on diffusion based planning has shown promis-ing results for utilizing diffusion for generative planning and has been further extended for planning and prediction for multi-agent systems. MotionDiffuser [7] leverages diffusion for trajectory prediction with scenario and agent context. In [25], diffusion is used for predicting the goal state of the scenario with local observations of each state, however, no planning is involved. In [19], diffusion has been leveraged for path following approach for multi-agent systems, but the planning is off-loaded from the diffusion model. In [9] score-based diffusion learning is used for the path finding problem on a continuous map; however, due to the projection in each diffusion step during optimization, this could lead to high computational cost as the number of agents increases. Similarly, [11] and [10] utilize a constrained optimiza-tion directly into the diffusion sampling process, with [11] specifically using a projection approach for multi-robot path finding and [10] focusing on utilizing existing discrete MAPF solvers improving scalability. However, these methods solve the complete offline path finding and have not been validated for dynamic environments or setups. In [12] and [18], a control-based approach is introduced to provide formal guarantees during denoising handling dy-namic obstacles, but is limited to planning for just one robot. MADiff [27] is one of the most prominent works on diffusion based planning for MAS, modeling inter-agent interactions using attention between the agents within the diffusion model. However, it is trained with a fixed number of agents limiting the ability to handle a varying number of agents in execution unless an independent denoising network is used for each agent. Similarly, [21] diffuses the coefficients of a polynomial trajectory for collision avoidance using expert demonstrations. In [22], a causal decision transformer is trained on single-robot exploration and multi-robot collision avoidance datasets, which focuses on single-robot target-driven navigation using egocentric visual observations, unlike our multi-agent coor-dination problem where multiple robots must simultaneously plan collision-free trajectories to different goals. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Problem Formulation 

We focus on the problem of 2-D robotic navigation envi-ronment with a critical focus on dynamically varying number of agents. The problem is formulated as a goal-conditioned moving horizon navigation problem with a varying number of agents. At any time t, given a set of active robots, the current positions x(t) = [ s1(t), s2(t), · · · sna (t)] ⊤, and given the final desired goal positions x∗ = [ s∗

> 1

, s∗

> 2

, · · · s∗ 

> na

]⊤, the objective is to find the trajectory Tna = [ τ1, τ 2, · · · , τ na ]⊤ for all the agents for the fixed horizon [t : tH ], where H is the length of the horizon and na represents the number of active agents for that horizon–drawing attention from real-world scenarios, the number of active agents changes dynamically. 

B. Proposed Method 

To tackle the challenges for dynamic multi-robotic planning, we adopt a moving window diffusion-based planning approach coupled with a two dimensional semantic axial attention pro-cessor and an enhanced network architecture. This emphasizes on abstracting the inter-agent interaction over the length of the trajectory, which is critical to help upscale the method to larger number of agents. The proposed method only uses a single shared model for all the agents and the axial attention processor is the critical component that allows the model to generalize the behavior to larger number of agents. To enable a goal-conditioned planning method and to bolster the ability to handle dynamically varying number of agents, a conditional diffusion approach has been incorporated by including context encoding. Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of the proposed Multi Agent Diffusion Based Planner (MA-DBP). We first leverage existing MARL methods to collect a dataset of trajectories trained with smaller number of agents. We then sample trajec-tories from this dataset to train a goal conditioned diffusion planner. Additionally, we also collect scenario specific data for generating context tokens for the denoising network. The trajectory data is pre-processed by passing it through the Axial Attention Pre-processor, and after a noise scheduler is used to generate the noisy signal, a U-Net based denoising procedure is employed to learn the added noise. Additional losses are introduced to enforce temporal consistency, main-tain feasible boundary conditions and reduce collisions. The encoded context information is provided at each step of U-Net with attention modules. Finally, during execution, the denoised trajectory is passed to a low-level controller, ensuring that the trajectory is executed with safety and minimizing local collisions. Decoupling the low-level controller from the planner allows for training the method for heterogeneous systems. We provide further details of our method in the following subsections. 3

Fig. 1: The proposed Multi-Agent Diffusion Based Planner. 

C. Dynamic Multi Robot Path Planner based on Enhanced Diffusion Method 

The fundamental principles of the proposed method aims to learn the low-dimensional policies and utilize that to upscale to higher dimensions. This implies an aggregated learning approach. The proposed MA-DBP leverages three main components to do so; firstly, by training with distinct number of agents in a moving window fashion, secondly, by carefully embedding the trajectory data to a higher dimension capturing the multi-agent behavior leveraging attention, and lastly, by constraining the trajectories to maintain feasibility with a multi-component loss function. 

1) Moving Window Diffusion with Enhanced Attention Pro-cessor: To ensure that we can capture the dynamic behavior, we pose the problem as a moving window trajectory planning problem with a fixed window horizon. It is also important to notice that the length of the horizon is a key design parameter. If the planning horizon is too short, the model may fail to converge due to limited temporal context and feature sparsity. On the other hand, if the horizon is too long, the moving window may capture overly static patterns and overlook important dynamic transitions, making it difficult to generate high-quality, goal-directed trajectories. Moreover, the increased dimensionality of long-horizon planning complicates training and can lead to less stable or less focused behavior. To address this, we sweep across different horizon lengths to identify an optimal window size that balances dynamic awareness, training stability, and computational tractability. 

2) Attention Processing and Network Architecture: Axial Attention Processor : Unlike existing methods [27, 7] which include the attention within the diffusion model, we explicitly embed the trajectory with different semantic dimensional attention processing block before the denoising step. Video diffusion [6] based methods that have temporal attention embedding in the U-Net architecture, struggle to diffuse with such low-dimensional trajectory data and cannot handle task constraints. Transformer based methods, which again have attention blocks within the denoising network, are severely data hungry and significantly hard to train [14]. The proposed model learns the inter-agent behavior through this module and can thus generalize for a varying number of agents, without additional supervision. To be able to generalize the behavior from a smaller number of agents to a larger number of agents, it is critical to capture two things, i) the inter-agent interaction which can include things such as collision avoidance, and ii) the temporal evolution of the trajectories over time. Assuming that we have the trajectory data for a batch size of B trajectories, 

Xk ∈ RB×H×na×d, where d is the dimension of state. The input is first projected to a higher embedding space 

Xkproj = Linear (Xk) ∈ RB×H×na×D . Combining with the learned positional embedding for the number of agent dimensions ( P E Agent ) and temporal dimensions ( P E temp ), resulting in the positional embedding variable, 

Xkpos = Xkproj + P E Agent (Xk) + P E temp (Xk) (1) where Xkpos are the learned positional embedding function that maps the input variable to the same high-dimension as the projection space, P E : RB×H×na×d → RB×H×na×D .The positional embedded variable is first transformed to 

Xkagent = Reshape (Xkpos ) ∈ R(B×na)×H×D. Using this, we compute the attention embedding along the number of agent axis, resulting in Aagent = Attention (Xkagent ) ∈

RB×H×na×D . After a layer-norm is applied this results in 

Xka = LayerNorm (Xkpos + Aagent ). Next we compute the attention along the time axis, by first transforming the em-bedded variable to Xktime = Reshape (Xka ) ∈ R(B×H)×na×D .After computing the attention along the time axis this results in Atime = Attention (Xktime ) ∈ RB×H×na×D . Finally after combining it with the positional embedded variable and pars-ing through a layer-norm, we get Xkat = LayerN orm (Xkpos +

Atime ) ∈ RB×H×na×D . Finally, we pass the attended features through a MLP for feature refinement resulting in ˜Xk =

Xkat + M LP (Xkat ) ∈ RB×H×na×D resulting in the attention embedded variable in higher dimension. Unlike existing methods which leverage inter agent inter-4

action in the context and a single diffusion model for each agent, the proposed axial-attention processor block embeds this before passing it to the U-Net. This reduces the need to repeat the diffusion block for each agent and minimize the parameters of the model. 

Network Architecture and Context Encoding : The net-work architecture is designed to accommodate larger than 

ntrain max agents through masking mechanisms that ensure seam-less training and execution with variable agent numbers, supporting both complete trajectory generation and moving horizon training via careful data chunking. During training, the noise-free signal X0(t : tH ) undergoes k diffusion steps to produce noisy signal Xk(t : tH ), which is then processed through the Axial Attention Processor to yield the embedded diffused variable ¯Xk(t : tH ) ∈ RB×H×na×D . The denoising network follows a U-Net encoder-decoder architecture with skip connections, comprising three essential blocks: the down-sampling block (two-layer 1D convolution with batch normal-ization, ReLU activation, and max-pooling), the middle block (similar convolution architecture without pooling to maintain dimensional consistency), and the upsampling block (two-layer 1D convolution with ReLU activation and batch nor-malization after skip-connection concatenation), culminating in a decoder block that transforms the predicted noise back to the original trajectory dimensions ϵθ (t : tH ) ∈ RB×H×na×d.Since the aim of the diffusion model is to generate a goal-conditioned multi-agent planner, we provide the scenario image frame Ot, initial agent positions xt, goal positions 

x∗, and agent count na as context information to the de-noising network. The unprocessed context token is defined as 

c = {Ot, xt, x∗, n a} built using the information captured as discussed earlier. We generate embedded context representa-tions through a multi-modal encoder comprising: (1) a CNN-based image encoder for scenario understanding, (2) an MLP-based pose encoder for start/goal positions, and (3) learned embeddings for agent count. These modalities are fused using multi-head attention to produce the final embedded context 

˜c = Attention (CNN (Ot), MLP ([ xt, x∗]) , Embed (na)) . The context is further augmented with sinusoidal time embeddings and integrated into each U-Net level through Feature-wise Lin-ear Modulation (FiLM) [15], enabling adaptive conditioning based on both spatial context and diffusion timestep. 

3) Losses: To ensure that the sampled trajectories are dynamically feasible and have temporal consistency, we use a multi-term loss to include the loss based on boundary con-straints and to minimize jerk, as well as maintain a temporally feasible trajectory. 

Lnoise = Ek,ϵ ∼N (0 ,I )

∥ϵ − ϵθ (Xk, k, c)∥22

 (2) Eq. 2 represents the standard diffusion loss, training the network to learn the added noise. As highlighted in [5], minimizing the loss based on noise prediction or the initial signal is equivalent. This allows us to combine the noise loss with the other losses that control the behavior of the predicted trajectory. 

Lboundary = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

h

L(b) 

> start

+ L(b)

> goal

i

(3) Eq 3 is introduced to ensure that the initial and final poses of the denoised trajectory match the requirements. Here L(b) 

> start

=

|| ˆx0(t) − x(t)|| 2 and L(b) 

> goal

= || ˆx0(tH ) − x∗|| 2. It should be noted that these losses are computed after denoising for each horizon and x∗ is the final desired goal and a moving horizon goal. This bolsters the diffusion planners goal-seeking behavior. 

Ltemporal = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

h

L(b) 

> direction

+ λjerk L(b)

> jerk

i

(4) Additionally, we include a loss which forces the diffusion network to generate temporally consistent trajectories, and minimize jerk as shown in eq. (4). Where 

L(b) 

> acc

= 1

nanaX

> i=1

∥vb,i,t +1 − vb,i,t ∥2 (5) and 

L(b) 

> jerk

= 1

nanaX

> i=1

∥ab,i,t +1 − ab,i,t ∥2 (6) Here a and v are the acceleration and velocity of the trajectory respectively, computed by finite differences with zero-order hold. Lastly, we also include the loss based on collision, which is defined by 

Lcollision = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1
> T

X

> t=1

X

> i,j ∈A b,i ̸=j

ReLU (dmin − ∥ sb,i,t − sb,j,t ∥2)+ 

X

> i∈A b

X

> o∈O b

ReLU (dobs − ∥ sb,i,t − o∥2)

(7) Here, o is the position of the obstacle center position. This results in the final loss 

Lθ = W T [Lnoise ; Lboundary ; Ltemporal ; Lcollision ] (8) where W is a weighting vector allowing to tune the dif-ferent loss components. Our experiments highlight that giving maximum weight to the Lnoise component was important for fast and stable training. The weight vector used for this case is W = [0 .85 , 0.025 , 0.025 , 0.1] ⊤.

D. Training and Execution 

Data Collection To train the diffusion model, we leverage MARL techniques to collect data. We train multiple poli-cies, πθn , where n ∈ { 1, · · · , n train max }, where ntrain max is the maximum number of agents in the scenario during training. The starting poses and final goals are sampled randomly for each agent. For collecting the trajectory dataset, we store the position and velocity of each agent along with the start st and final goal positions s∗. Additionally, we also store the actions (control inputs). For the purpose of context tokens, we store frame for the initial point in the trajectory Ot depicting the scenario as an RGB image frame. Given a horizon H, for a n

agents we sample a trajectory xn(t : tH ) ← T (πθn (st, s ∗)) ,where T (π(si, s f )) is a function which stores the trajectory data given a policy πθn , the initial state si and the final state 5

sf . For simplicity, throughout the rest of this section we store agent positions in the trajectory. Given the noise free embedded input ˜x0 at step k = 0 , the 

forward process or the diffusion process focuses on generating the approximate posterior q(˜ x1: K |x0) with a fixed Markov chain given as 

q  ˜x1: K |˜x0 := 

> K

Y

> k=1

q  ˜xk|˜x0 ,q  ˜xk|˜xk−1 := N



˜xk; p1 − βk ˜xk, β kI)

 (9) Here βk is the noise variance at diffusion step k, I is the identity matrix and N (·) represents the normal distribution. Following this, the second Markov Chain is utilized to learn a parametrized joint distribution, pθ

 ˜xK:0 . The diffusion model can be further extended to include the condition based diffusion process, where given the condition c, the denoising sampling is computed as 

pθ

 ˜xK:0  := pθ (˜ xK )

> K

Y

> k=1

pθ

 ˜xk−1|˜xk; c ,pθ (˜ xk−1|˜xk, c ) = N (˜ xk−1; μθ (˜ xk, k, c ), Σθ (˜ xk, k, c )) 

(10) 

Training Procedure To ensure that the proposed approach can handle varying number of agents we employ two steps: i) a curriculum learning based approach and ii) a agent masking approach in training. The number of agents in training varies from ntrain = {1, · · · , n max train ]}. The curriculum approach is utilized to ensure a stable learning procedure in which the number of agents increases linearly every 1000 ∗nmax train epoch. To ensure that the model can handle a larger number of agents in execution, the network is defined for nmax agents, and masking is applied to identify only the active agents. It should be noted that nmax train < n max .

Algorithm 1 Enhanced Multi-Agent Diffusion Model Training with Curriculum Learning 

Require: Dataset D, max agents ntrain 

> max

, epochs E, horizon size H

Require: Model ϵθ , optimizer, learning rate η, batch size B

Ensure: Trained diffusion model ϵ∗ 

> θ
> 1:

Initialize model parameters θ 

> 2:

Initialize optimizer with learning rate η = 3 × 10 −4 

> 3:

for epoch e = 1 to E do  

> 4:

ncurr ← CurriculumSchedule (e, E, n train 

> max

) 

> 5:

progress ← e/E  

> 6:

for batch {F, S, G, N, T} ∈ D do  

> 7:

Filter batch to agents ≤ ncurr  

> 8:

Update θ using ∇θ Lbatch  

> 9:

Clip gradients: ∥∇ θ ∥ ≤ 1.0 

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return ϵ∗

> θ

Execution With the proposed architecture, we utilize the context token to define the planning problem. During sam-pling, we define the current poses of each agent, the desired 

Fig. 2: Three navigation scenarios used for validation. (Left to right) Empty map, obstacle map and barrier map. goal positions, and the initial scenario. Algorithm 2 shows the sampling step utilized to compute the path plan for all the active agents. 

Algorithm 2 Diffusion Model Sampling with Boundary Con-straints 

Require: Trained UNet model ϵθ , noise schedule {¯αt}Tt=1 ,conditioning c, constraint mask M , constraint values 

xconstraint 

Ensure: Generated sample X0 

> 1:

Initialize ˜Xk ∼ N (0 , I ) 

> 2:

for t = T − 1, T − 2, . . . , 1 do  

> 3:

ϵθ ← UNet (t, c ) 

> 4:

ˆx0 ← xt−√1− ¯αt·ϵθ√ ¯αt 

> 5:

˜xt−1 ← √¯αt−1 · ˆx0 + √1 − ¯αt−1 · ϵθ 

> 6:

˜xt−1[M ] ← ˜xconstraint ▷ Apply boundary constraints  

> 7:

end for return ˜x0

IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

We utilize the Vectorized Multi-Agent Scenarios (VMAS) [2] framework to train and validate our method. To demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of the proposed MA-DBP, we compare it with the MARL algorithm, namely MAPPO, a heuristic Lyapunov Function Quadratic Product (CLF-QP) based controller, and a conventional diffusion-based method MADiff [27]. We leverage pre-trained MAPPO policy to bootstrap training of both diffusion-based models, MA-DBP and MADiff [27]. The training and validation were conducted on a Lambda workstation with AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970x 32-core processor, 256 GB of RAM with a RTX 3090 GPU and 24 GB of VRAM. All the methods are validated on three 2-D navigation scenarios as shown in Fig. 2, namely navigation in Empty map, Obstacle map and Barrier map. For all the scenarios, the agents are initialized randomly in the map and must navigate to their respective goals which are represented as circles with same colors as agents. Each experiment is repeated 20 times and a successful goal reaching is defined as when each agent is within 0.1 6

Fig. 3: (a) Comparison in training time and success rate for MAPPO( na) and MA-DBP( na/2) agents. The success rate is the success rate when executed on na agents. (b) Plot comparing real-time execution comparison between MAPPO, MA-DBP (Proposed) and CLF-QP. units from it’s respective goal position. At the end of the test episodes, we define the average success rate as the ratio of test episodes in which all agents achieve their respective goals successfully within the allowed maximum number of steps. Each simulation episode ran for maximum 100 steps. Our experiments highlight that the proposed method can upscale in execution with fairly good performance, while also requiring lesser training time. The ablation studies highlight the benefits of utilizing the moving window approach along with the benefits of the Axial Attention Processing. 

A. Training and Execution Comparison 

We compare MAPPO and MA-DBP in terms of training efficiency on the empty map (see Fig. 3(a)). MAPPO is trained with na agents, while MA-DBP is trained using only 

na/2 agents, yet both are evaluated on na agents. Results show that MA-DBP achieves a comparable success rate while requiring up to 4x less total training time for ntrain a = 8 ,demonstrating the benefits of the train-small, deploy-large approach. Notably, MA-DBP’s reported time includes both MAPPO pre-training (for data generation) and its own training phase. This highlights MA-DBP’s scalability: efficient learning with fewer agents translates into significant computational savings without sacrificing performance. Table I compares MA-DBP against MAPPO, CLF-QP, and MADiff [27] across three scenarios, with all methods trained and evaluated on identical agent counts. MA-DBP demon-strates competitive performance overall. CLF-QP struggles in cluttered environments due to lack of collision foresight, often getting stuck. MADiff, using classifier-free guidance without explicit goal conditioning, exhibits weaker goal-reaching be-havior and struggles with obstacles in our tasks, even though it replans a full horizon-H trajectory at each time step and executes only the first action. MAPPO, which provides training data for both diffusion methods, serves as the baseline and generally outperforms MA-DBP and MADiff, particularly in obstacle-rich scenarios owing to the fundamental nature of bootstrapping and due to one-step sampling nature of MAPPO. However, MA-DBP’s moving horizon approach enables per-formance comparable to MAPPO in many cases and superior to CLF-QP and MADiff. TABLE I: Performance Comparison (Avg. Success Rate)                                                                                                                

> MAPPO CLF-QP MADiff MA-DBP *
> Navigation Empty Map
> n=2 0.96 ±0.024 0.97 ±0.020 0.55 ±0.081 0.94 ±0.027 n=4 0.94 ±0.033 0.96 ±0.021 0.47 ±0.011 0.96 ±0.034
> n=6 0.94 ±0.021 0.94 ±0.036 0.42 ±0.031 0.95 ±0.021 Navigation with Obstacles
> n=2 0.94 ±0.021 0.80 ±0.01 0.12 ±0.021 0.72 ±0.100 n=3 0.95 ±0.037 0.68 ±0.02 0.15 ±0.018 0.70 ±0.080 n=4 0.94 ±0.014 0.65 ±0.02 0.18 ±0.010 0.78 ±0.065
> Navigation with Barrier
> n=2 0.92 ±0.035 0.78 ±0.021 0.37 ±0.026 0.81 ±0.048 n=3 0.88 ±0.021 0.65 ±0.016 0.32 ±0.034 0.73 ±0.096 n=4 0.84 ±0.034 0.67 ±0.014 0.30 ±0.041 0.65 ±0.047

B. Execution Speed Comparison 

We also compare the efficacy of our method in real-time execution speed. Fig. 3(b)) shows the plot comparing the average execution time for the empty navigation scenario for the three methods against the number of agents. It was evident that the MAPPO method was the fastest during inference, while the MA-DBP is slower than MAPPO, it still shows good comparative performance. The CLF-QP method sees an increase in execution time with number of agents owing to the increased computational cost. This further highlights the real-world applicability of the proposed MA-DBP. With an average sampling time of 0.04 seconds for the cases, the proposed methods seems to be able to handle real-time performance. 

C. Quantitative Analysis of Scalability 

Most importantly, we also investigate the ability of the proposed MA-DBP to scale to larger number of agents. We again validate this on three scenarios, an empty map, barrier map and obstacle map. All agents and their respective goals are randomly spawned. Figure 4 shows the results from upscaling with proposed MA-DBP approach. As observed from the experiments, the proposed MA-DBP scales with good accuracy even as the number of agents increase. We train the model with smaller number of agents and increase the number of agents grad-ually during execution. While na = 2 , leads to reasonable performance when upscaling, with na = 3 , 4 the upscaling works significantly better. For na = 2 the success rate does not scale very well when the number of agents increases, and it appears that this is mostly due to the lack of information to capture enough interactions between agents. Another ob-servation made from the experiments was that the decrease in performance for the larger number of agents was not substantial when na increased, especially for ntrain a > 2.This was attributed to a higher density of goal positions which makes it easier for MA-DBP to plan a path, however, it was also observed that a higher density naturally increased the number of collisions. 

D. Ablation Studies 

For further highlighting the benefits of the semantic-axial attention processing and the moving window approach, we 7

Fig. 4: Success rate in upscaling with MA-DBP for three different scenarios with different number of agents in training and execution. 

Fig. 5: Plot comparing the training loss for the models for ab-lation study identifying the effect of moving window approach and semantic-axial attention pre-processing. carry out ablation studies. In the case where the axial attention processor is removed, it is replaced by a linear encoder (LE) which embeds the trajectory to the same dimension as the axial attention processor to ensure a feasible comparison. We compare the training and execution performance of four models, i) complete trajectory without axial attention processor (CT+LE), ii) complete trajectory with axial attention processor (CT+AAP), iii) the model with moving horizon but without axial attention processor (MW+LE) and iv) the proposed axial attention processor with the moving window (MA-DBP). The horizon length for moving window is 10 steps. We train and validate the models for the Empty navigation map. Figure 5 shows the training loss of the four models for ntrain a = 4 .As seen, during training, the complete trajectory model is the slowest in learning. Table II shows the average success rate in upscaling for the four methods. The first column shows the number of agents in training and the second row shows the number of agents in execution. As is evident, the complete trajectory method often struggles to get near the goal region. Additionally, it also evident that the proposed Axial Attention processor is much more critical in improving the upscaling performance. TABLE II: Ablation Comparison (Avg. Success Rate)                                   

> CT + LE CT + AAP MW + LE MA-DBP* n=6 n=7 n=6 n=7 n=6 n=7 n=6 n=7 n=2 0.18 0.10 0.32 0.34 0.46 0.42 0.60 0.58
> n=3 0.28 0.22 0.68 0.59 0.65 0.61 0.83 0.82
> n=4 0.34 0.31 0.71 0.69 0.72 0.67 0.95 0.87

E. Discussion 

The proposed MA-DBP method shows promising perfor-mance in leveraging diffusion for training a multi-agent plan-ner which can generalize to system settings. Although the experiments highlight different characteristics of the proposed method, we observed different contributing factors. First, the horizon size needs to be chosen carefully. If the horizon is too long the model struggles to capture the nuances of the trajectory. And if the horizon length is too small, the attention module fails to capture inter-agent interaction effectively. The MAPPO outperforms the MA-DBP in cluttered environments, since it can sample one step at a time, whereas the diffusion model struggles to learn when the planning horizon is too short. Secondly, two of the main contributing factors for improving upscalability are the Axial Attention Processor and utilizing a curriculum approach in training. Although the training loss plot in Sec. IV-D does not make it apparent enough due to the scale of the losses, the reason the losses do not reduce any further for case 1 (red) in Fig. 5 are because as the number of agents is increasing in a curriculum fashion the model weights fail to adjust and struggle to overcome this issue. Also, while the upscaling success rate is high as the number of agents increase it lead to a higher number of collisions. The test was limited to 8 agents due to the size of the environment. Our experiments highlight that leveraging the explicit attention computation and combining it with curriculum based training and a moving horizon approach is necessary for ensuring upscaling behavior. Removing either of these three components leads to failure. V. C ONCLUSION 

This work investigated a diffusion based planner for multi-agent systems and specifically dived deeper into studying the ability of the diffusion to upscale to larger number of agents. We introduced an axial-attention based approach to capture both inter-agent interaction and temporal composition of the trajectory. By introducing losses on collision avoidance and temporal consistency we were able to devise a conditional dif-fusion based planner, which generates motion plans for multi-agent robotic systems. Our experiments highlight that even though the method is trained for a smaller number of agents, it can handle, previously unseen, a larger number of agents with acceptable success. This approach highlights the ability of diffusion to generalize the behavior from low-dimensional policies to high-dimensional policies. Additionally, we also highlight that MA-DBP can also outperform existing MARL 8

and control based methods in execution in certain aspects; such as handling dynamically changing agents, sampling speed in execution, and handling larger number of agents. However, as a implicit behavior with diffusion models, one can either train them for coarse long horizon trajectories, where the goal is far or for fine trajectories where the final goal is within the vicinity. Combining the two behaviors can lead to unstable training. REFERENCES 

[1] Jean-Marc Alkazzi and Keisuke Okumura. A comprehensive review on leveraging machine learning for multi-agent path finding. IEEE Access , 12:57390–57409, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ ACCESS.2024.3392305. [2] Matteo Bettini, Ryan Kortvelesy, Jan Blumenkamp, and Amanda Prorok. Vmas: A vectorized multi-agent simulator for collective robot learning. In Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems , DARS ’22. Springer, 2022. [3] Avinash Gautam and Sudeept Mohan. A review of research in multi-robot systems. In 2012 IEEE 7th International Conference on Industrial and Information Systems (ICIIS) , pages 1–5, 2012. doi: 10.1109/ICIInfS.2012.6304778. [4] Pablo Hernandez-Leal, Michael Kaisers, Tim Baarslag, and Enrique Munoz de Cote. A survey of learning in multi-agent environments: Dealing with non-stationarity. ArXiv ,abs/1707.09183, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:23436632. [5] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arxiv:2006.11239 , 2020. [6] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agar-wal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 35, pages 8633–8646. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/file/ 39235c56aef13fb05a6adc95eb9d8d66-Paper-Conference.pdf. [7] Chiyu Jiang, Hang Zhao, Yilun Wang, Yilun Chen, Ziyu Wang, Yuning Chai, Pei Sun, Charles R Qi, and Dragomir Anguelov. Motiondiffuser: Controllable multi-agent motion prediction us-ing diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 19808–19818, 2023. [8] Zhuo Li, Weiran W, Yunlong Guo, Jian Sun, , and Qing-Long Han. Embodied multi-agent systems: A review. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , 12(JAS-2025-0498):1095, 2025. ISSN 2329-9266. doi: 10.1109/JAS.2025.125552. URL https: //www.ieee-jas.net/en/article/doi/10.1109/JAS.2025.125552. [9] Jinhao Liang, Jacob K. Christopher, Sven Koenig, and Fer-dinando Fioretto. Multi-agent path finding in continuous spaces with projected diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.17993 , 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17993. [10] Jinhao Liang, Jacob K Christopher, Sven Koenig, and Ferdi-nando Fioretto. Simultaneous multi-robot motion planning with projected diffusion models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2502.03607. [11] Jinhao Liang, Sven Koenig, and Ferdinando Fioretto. Discrete-guided diffusion for scalable and safe multi-robot motion plan-ning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.20095. [12] K. Mizuta and K. Leung. CoBL-Diffusion: Diffusion-Based Conditional Robot Planning in Dynamic Environments Using Control Barrier and Lyapunov Functions. In IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots & Systems , 2024. [13] Nunzia Palmieri, Floriano de Rango, Xin She Yang, and Sal-vatore Marano. Multi-robot cooperative tasks using combined nature-inspired techniques. In 2015 7th International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence (IJCCI) , volume 1, pages 74–82, 2015. [14] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 4195– 4205, October 2023. [15] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. CoRR , abs/1709.07871, 2017. URL http: //arxiv.org/abs/1709.07871. [16] Benedetto Piccoli. Control of multi-agent systems: results, open problems, and applications, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2302.12308. [17] Federico Rossi, Saptarshi Bandyopadhyay, Michael Wolf, and Marco Pavone. Review of multi-agent algorithms for collective behavior: a structural taxonomy. IFAC-PapersOnLine , 51(12): 112–117, 2018. ISSN 2405-8963. doi: https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.ifacol.2018.07.097. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S2405896318308401. IFAC Workshop on Networked & Autonomous Air & Space Systems NAASS 2018. [18] Sepehr Samavi, Anthony Lem, Fumiaki Sato, Sirui Chen, Qiao Gu, Keijiro Yano, Angela P. Schoellig, and Florian Shkurti. Sicnav-diffusion: Safe and interactive crowd navigation with diffusion trajectory predictions. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , pages 1–8, 2025. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2025.3585713. [19] Yorai Shaoul, Itamar Mishani, Shivam Vats, Jiaoyang Li, and Maxim Likhachev. Multi-robot motion planning with diffusion models. The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), also at AAAI 2025 Workshop on Multi-Agent Path Finding , 2025. [20] Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations . Cam-bridge University Press, 2008. [21] Bitla Bhanu Teja, Simon Idoko, T. Shilpitha Chowdary, K. Mad-hava Krishna, and Arun Kumar Singh. Disco: Diffusion-based inter-agent swarm collision-free optimization for uavs. In 2025 IEEE 19th International Conference on Control & Automation (ICCA) , pages 911–916, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICCA65672.2025. 11129710. [22] Haitong Wang, Aaron Hao Tan, and Goldie Nejat. Navformer: A transformer architecture for robot target-driven navigation in unknown and dynamic environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 9(8):6808–6815, 2024. doi: 10.1109/LRA. 2024.3412638. [23] Di Wu, Xian Wei, Guang Chen, Hao Shen, Xiangfeng Wang, Wenhao Li, and Bo Jin. Generative multi-agent collaboration in embodied ai: A systematic review, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2502.11518. [24] Feng Xia, Ke Sun, Shuo Yu, Abdul Aziz, Liangtian Wan, Shirui Pan, and Huan Liu. Graph learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 2(2):109–127, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TAI.2021.3076021. [25] Zhiwei Xu, Hangyu Mao, Nianmin Zhang, Xin Xin, Pengjie Ren, Dapeng Li, Bin Zhang, Guoliang Fan, Zhumin Chen, Changwei Wang, and Jiangjin Yin. Beyond local views: Global state inference with diffusion models for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09501 ,2024. [26] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Bas ¸ar. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective Overview of The-ories and Algorithms , pages 321–384. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2021. ISBN 978-3-030-60990-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60990-0 12. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-60990-0 12. [27] Zhengbang Zhu, Minghuan Liu, Liyuan Mao, Bingyi Kang, Minkai Xu, Yong Yu, Stefano Ermon, and Weinan Zhang. Madiff: Offline multi-agent learning with diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 37. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024.