Title: Testing Agentic Workflows with Structural Coverage Criteria

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26521v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:37:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Testing Agentic Workflows with Structural Coverage Criteria 

Nafiseh Kahani and Mojtaba Bagherzadeh 

Abstract —Multi-agent systems increasingly expose explicit workflow structure: agents, tools, tool-access rules, restrictions, and delegation paths. Existing evaluations rely largely on end-to-end task success, benchmark scores, final-response quality, or prompt-level checks, which provide limited evidence that this declared coordination structure has actually been exercised. This makes it difficult to assess test-suite adequacy or detect structural regressions in tool access, restrictions, and inter-agent delegation. We address this gap with a structural testing approach for multi-agent workflow specifications. The approach represents each workflow as a typed coordination graph, derives coverage obligations over reachable agents, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegation edges, and uses coverage-driven generation with DSPy-based scenario realization to produce executable tests. The graph fixes what must be covered; DSPy realizes those obligations as natural-language scenarios whose witnesses are checked at runtime. We implement the approach for OpenAI Agents SDK-style workflows and evaluate it on ten SDK-derived benchmarks comprising 49 reachable agents, 47 tools, and 403 structural obligations. Generated scenarios witness 54/75 allowed-tool obligations and 36/48 delegation obligations within a bounded refinement budget. The adversarial restricted-tool criterion elicits 23/248 restricted-call violations, separating workflows whose restrictions hold under probing from work-flows with concrete misrouting failures. These results show that structural coverage provides a useful adequacy layer for multi-agent workflow testing: it does not replace semantic or end-to-end evaluation, but reveals whether declared agents, tool-access rules, restrictions, and delegation paths have been exercised. 

Index Terms —agent testing, coverage, mutation analysis, soft-ware testing, agent artifacts 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

LLM-based agents are software systems that use language models to interpret context, reason about goals, and take actions on behalf of users, often through tools or external APIs [20]. In this paper, we focus on LLM-based software agents and refer to them simply as agents. Recent tool-augmented and multi-agent systems extend beyond single-turn prompting to support information retrieval, planning, API use, orchestration, and delegation across specialized agents [21], [19]. As these systems become more capable, they are increasingly deployed as structured workflows rather than isolated prompts: agents are assigned roles, connected to tools, constrained by tool-access rules, and linked through handoff or delegation paths. Existing evaluation practice largely emphasizes observable task outcomes, benchmark performance, final response quality, and tool-use behavior [11], [12], [9], [15], [7], [22]. These          

> First Author is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada. Email: nafisehkahani@cunet.carleton.ca Second Author is with the Cisco Systems, Ottawa, Canada. Email: mbagherz@cisco.com

metrics are useful, but they provide limited evidence that a system’s internal coordination structure has been covered. A multi-agent workflow may complete a task successfully even if some tools are never invoked, some restricted tool accesses are never tested, or some delegation paths remain unexplored. Thus, end-to-end task success is not a reliable proxy for structural coverage in multi-agent systems. This gap becomes more important as multi-agent systems evolve. A small change to a workflow definition may add a new tool edge, remove a restriction, or alter a delegation path without causing immediate end-to-end failures. Conventional evaluations may still pass while important structural obliga-tions remain unobserved. This makes it difficult to assess whether a test suite is adequate, whether a system change has been meaningfully exercised, and whether regressions have been introduced into the workflow’s coordination struc-ture. The issue is especially important in safety-, policy-, or compliance-sensitive settings, where practitioners often need traceable evidence that relevant tool-access rules, restrictions, and coordination paths have been tested. We therefore treat multi-agent testing as both a behavioral and structural problem. We model a multi-agent workflow as a typed coordination graph whose nodes represent agents and tools, and whose edges represent relations such as allowed tool access, restricted tool access, and delegation. This perspective follows established ideas in software testing, where adequacy criteria such as statement coverage, branch coverage, and mutation-based testing are used to assess how thoroughly a program has been exercised [1], [13]. Related work on behavioral testing has likewise shown that aggregate accuracy or task success can mask important coverage gaps [16], [18]. However, structural adequacy for multi-agent workflows remains comparatively underdeveloped. In this paper, we define a structural adequacy model for typed multi-agent coordination graphs. The model includes four coverage criteria spanning reachable agents, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegation edges. These criteria measure not only whether a multi-agent system pro-duces acceptable outputs, but also whether its declared co-ordination structure has been witnessed during testing. We then introduce a coverage-driven generation procedure that synthesizes structural witness objectives from the graph and uses DSPy modules to realize each objective as a natural-language test scenario [8], [2]. The structural meaning of each test is fixed by the graph; DSPy is used only for controlled scenario realization, and runtime witnesses determine whether a generated scenario actually covers its intended obligation. We implement the approach as a prototype for OpenAI 

> arXiv:2605.26521v1 [cs.SE] 26 May 2026 2

Agents SDK-style workflows. The pipeline takes a Python agent entry point, extracts a normalized workflow manifest, de-rives graph-based structural obligations, realizes typed witness objectives as natural-language scenarios, and measures cover-age by replaying those scenarios against a runtime adapter. The implementation supports both one-shot execution and stage-by-stage invocation, so extraction, obligation construction, scenario realization, and runtime evaluation can be inspected independently. We evaluate the approach on ten SDK-derived workflows extracted from the OpenAI Agents SDK examples and public third-party projects built on the same SDK. Together, these benchmarks contain 49 reachable agents, 47 tools, and 403 graph-derived structural obligations. The evaluation is orga-nized around four research questions: whether the pipeline can extract valid typed coordination graphs and structural obliga-tions from SDK-derived workflows (RQ1); how often gener-ated scenarios witness allowed-tool and delegation obligations at runtime (RQ2); whether adversarial restricted-tool testing reveals concrete violations of declared restrictions (RQ3); and whether the same structural harness can test robustness under tool faults on a instrumented benchmark (RQ4). Our results show that structural obligations can be extracted and exercised across workflows of varying size and coordina-tion structure. Across the runtime evaluation, generated sce-narios witness 54/75 allowed-tool obligations and 36/48 del-egation obligations within a bounded refinement budget. The adversarial restricted-tool criterion elicits 23/248 restricted-call violations, separating workflows whose restrictions hold under probing from workflows with concrete misrouting failures. We use the OpenAI Agents SDK oai_customer_service 

workflow as both a running example throughout the paper and a instrumented benchmark for routing-prompt ablation and tool-fault robustness. These results show that structural testing complements existing agent evaluations: it does not re-place end-to-end benchmarks or semantic quality assessment, but provides explicit evidence that a multi-agent workflow’s declared agents, tool-access rules, restrictions, and delegation paths have been exercised. The paper makes the following contributions:  

> •

We formulate testing of multi-agent workflow specifica-tions as a structural adequacy problem over typed co-ordination graphs derived from agent-framework source code.  

> •

We define graph-derived coverage criteria for reachable agents, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegation edges. Restricted-tool coverage is treated as an explicit negative-observation obligation rather than as the mere absence of a tool call.  

> •

We present a coverage-driven test-generation pipeline that converts workflow manifests into typed witness objectives and uses DSPy-based, runtime-grounded realization to produce natural-language test scenarios.  

> •

We evaluate the approach on ten OpenAI Agents SDK-derived workflows totaling 403 structural obligations, including a deeper analysis of 

oai_customer_service for routing-prompt ablation and tool-fault robustness. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II defines multi-agent workflow specifications and in-troduces the oai_customer_service running example. Section III presents the typed coordination-graph model, the four structural coverage criteria, and the coverage-driven gen-eration procedure. Section IV describes the benchmark suite, implementation, and empirical evaluation across ten SDK-derived workflows. Section V discusses related work in struc-tural testing, model-based testing, automated test generation, and LLM-agent evaluation. Section VI discusses limitations, future work, and concludes. II. M ULTI -A GENT WORKFLOW SPECIFICATIONS 

In this work, a multi-agent workflow specification is a normalized description of the structural elements of an LLM-based multi-agent workflow that are relevant for graph-based testing. It records the agents that may participate in an execution, the tools associated with the workflow, the tool-access rules that determine which agents may or may not invoke which tools, and the delegation paths by which control may move between agents. We use this term to refer to the representation analyzed by our testing method, rather than to a universal format shared by all agent frameworks. The core declarations are:  

> •

a set of reachable agents , meaning agents that can be reached from the workflow entry point through zero or more delegation steps;  

> •

allowed tool edges , which record which tools each agent may invoke;  

> •

restricted tool edges , which record tools that an agent is explicitly restricted from invoking; and  

> •

delegation edges , which describe how one agent may hand control or responsibility to another agent. We interpret tool access using a closed-world convention. A tool is available to an agent only when an explicit allowed-tool edge is declared. A restricted-tool edge represents an explicit negative obligation: generated tests should witness that the workflow respects the restriction. If no edge is declared between an agent and a tool, the pair is treated as unspecified rather than both allowed and restricted. Such pairs do not induce coverage obligations in our model. We also require well-formed specifications to avoid contradictory declarations, so the same agent–tool pair cannot appear as both allowed and restricted. We deliberately keep execution-time concerns out of the specification graph. Whether a particular tool is implemented as a Python function, an MCP server, or an HTTP endpoint, and whether the harness runs the test in a validation, dry-run, or full-execution mode, are properties of the runtime layer. They affect how a test is observed but do not change the set of structural obligations declared by the specification. We therefore treat the specification graph as a static description of agents, tools, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegations. 

A. Running Example: oai_customer_service 

We use oai_customer_service as the main running example for introducing the workflow specification and graph-3

derived coverage model. The workflow is extracted from the public OpenAI Agents SDK repository [14]; its source is the examples/customer_service/main.py file of 

openai/openai-agents-python . We extract the man-ifest mechanically, by importing the example module and introspecting its Agent , function_tool , and handoff 

objects. The specification used here is therefore a faithful normalization of what an SDK developer would write, not a hand-crafted toy. We later use oai_message_filter 

in Section III-C only to illustrate a multi-attempt delegation-refinement trace, because that benchmark exposes the runtime-feedback behavior of the realizer more clearly than the simpler customer-service example. The workflow contains three reachable agents:  

> •

triage_agent is the entry-point agent. It owns no tools of its own and acts as a router that hands the conversation off to the agent best suited to the user’s request.  

> •

faq_agent answers frequently asked questions about flights and is permitted to call the faq_lookup_tool 

function tool.  

> •

seat_booking_agent updates a passenger’s seat as-signment and is permitted to call the update_seat 

function tool. There are two function tools, faq_lookup_tool and 

update_seat . Each tool is allowed for exactly one agent and explicitly restricted for the other two. In addition, both leaf agents are configured to hand the conversation back to 

triage_agent once their specialized work is done, so the delegation structure is bidirectional rather than tree-shaped. Figure 1 shows the corresponding coordination graph. Rounded nodes denote agents, rectangular nodes denote tools, solid edges denote allowed tool access, and dotted edges denote delegation. For readability, the figure shows only the two allowed-tool edges and the four delegation edges; the four restricted-tool edges are listed in the caption. Listing 1 shows the normalized specification used by the prototype. The listing uses a YAML rendering for readability. We return to this example throughout the paper. Sec-tion III-A uses it to illustrate the formal coverage model, Sec-tion III-B traces the generation procedure on it, and Section IV uses it as the instrumented benchmark within a broader ten-workflow evaluation. 

B. DSPy for Test Scenario Realization 

Our structural coverage model is symbolic: obligations are derived from a typed coordination graph. However, executing those obligations against LLM-based agent systems still re-quires natural-language scenarios. To generate those scenarios in a controlled way, we use DSPy as a scenario-realization layer rather than as the source of the coverage model. DSPy is a declarative framework for programming language-model pipelines using typed signatures, modules, and optimization metrics rather than hand-written prompt strings [8], [2]. A DSPy signature specifies the input–output behavior of a language-model module, while a module imple-ments a reusable language model call that can be composed 

triage_agent 

faq_agent seat_booking_agent 

faq_lookup_tool update_seat   

> delegate delegate
> allow allow

Fig. 1: Coordination graph for the 

oai_customer_service running example. Rounded nodes are agents, rectangular nodes are tools, solid edges denote allowed tool access, and dotted edges denote delega-tion. The four restricted-tool edges, omitted from the figure for clarity, are: (triage_agent, faq_lookup_tool) ,

(triage_agent, update_seat) , (faq_agent, update_seat) , and (seat_booking_agent, faq_lookup_tool) .                                            

> system: id: oai_customer_service entry_agent: triage_agent agents: -id: triage_agent -id: faq_agent -id: seat_booking_agent tools: -id: faq_lookup_tool -id: update_seat permissions: allow: -[faq_agent, faq_lookup_tool] -[seat_booking_agent, update_seat] restrict: -[triage_agent, faq_lookup_tool] -[triage_agent, update_seat] -[faq_agent, update_seat] -[seat_booking_agent, faq_lookup_tool] delegations: -{from: triage_agent, to: faq_agent, trigger: delegate} -{from: faq_agent, to: triage_agent, trigger: delegate} -{from: triage_agent, to: seat_booking_agent, trigger: delegate} -{from: seat_booking_agent, to: triage_agent, trigger: delegate}

Listing 1: Normalized specification for the 

oai_customer_service running example, extracted from the OpenAI Agents SDK examples/customer_service module. 4

with other modules [4], [3]. DSPy programs can also be optimized against user-defined metrics, which makes them useful when the desired output can be checked automatically or semi-automatically [8]. In our setting, DSPy is used only after the structural obligations have been computed. The graph model determines what must be covered; DSPy helps realize each obligation as a concrete test scenario. This separation is important: the adequacy criteria do not depend on the language model’s judgment. Instead, the language model proposes candidate scenarios, and deterministic checks verify that each scenario is aligned with the intended obligation, consistent with the workflow specification, and paired with observable structural evidence. III. A PPROACH 

We propose a structural testing pipeline for multi-agent workflows. Rather than judging a workflow only by end-to-end task success, the pipeline first reads the workflow specifi-cation as a structured graph, extracts the structural obligations declared by that graph, and generates tests that explicitly try to witness those obligations. In our setting, the obligations concern reachable agents, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegation edges. The approach follows the five-step pipeline shown in Fig-ure 2. 1⃝ We begin from a normalized multi-agent workflow specification S. 2⃝ We convert S into a reachable typed coordination graph G(S). 3⃝ From G(S), we derive graph-based obligations. 4⃝ We synthesize typed witness objectives and use DSPy to realize them as natural-language test sce-narios. 5⃝ We execute the resulting tests through a runtime adapter and measure whether the expected structural evidence is observed. Overall, the method follows a specification →

graph → obligations → tests → observations pipeline. The running example introduced in Section II-A provides a concrete instance of this process. It contains three reachable agents, two tools, two allowed tool edges, four restricted tool edges, and four delegation edges, yielding 13 structural obligations. Section IV later evaluates the same procedure across ten SDK-derived workflows. 

A. Formal Coverage Model 

Let S be a normalized multi-agent workflow specification. We model the structurally relevant content of S as a typed coordination graph 

G(S) =  VA, V T , E allow , E restrict , E del 

,

where VA is the set of agent nodes, VT is the set of tool nodes, Eallow ⊆ VA × VT is the set of allowed agent–tool edges, Erestrict ⊆ VA × VT is the set of restricted agent–tool edges, and Edel ⊆ VA × VA is the set of delegation edges. Tools are modeled as opaque nodes. The graph does not record how a tool is implemented, such as a Python function, an MCP server, or an HTTP endpoint, nor which execution mode the harness uses to invoke it. These are runtime concerns that affect how a witness is observed but not which structural obligations exist. Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed pipeline. A normalized multi-agent workflow specification S is converted into a reachable coordination graph G(S), from which structural obligations are extracted. These obligations are turned into coverage-driven witness objectives and realized as executable tests via DSPy. Runtime observations then support coverage measure-ment.        

> 1⃝Normalized Workflow Specification S
> Agents, tools, allow/restrict edges, delegation edges
> ↓
> 2⃝Reachable Coordination Graph G(S)
> Typed nodes and reachable structural relations
> ↓
> 3⃝Structural Obligations
> Reachable agents, allowed tools, restricted tools, delegations
> ↓
> 4⃝Generated Structural Tests
> Natural-language scenarios with expected structural witnesses
> ↓
> 5⃝Execution and Coverage Measurement
> Runtime observations, witness verdicts, coverage scores

Let Areach ⊆ VA be the set of agents reachable from the workflow entry point by following zero or more delegation edges. Reachability is computed over Edel , so cycles in the delegation graph do not pose a problem. Structural coverage is defined only over reachable parts of the workflow. We assume well-formed specifications: all edge endpoints must be declared, and no agent–tool pair may appear in both Eallow 

and Erestrict .From G(S) we derive three additional reachable obligation sets: 

Tallow = {(a, t ) ∈ Eallow | a ∈ Areach },Trestrict = {(a, t ) ∈ Erestrict | a ∈ Areach },D = {(a, b ) ∈ Edel | a ∈ Areach ∧ b ∈ Areach }.

Thus, the structural obligation space is 

Ω( S) =  Areach , T allow , T restrict , D .

Each executed test x produces a structural observation 

obs (x) =  agents (x), tools (x), restricted (x), delegations (x),

where agents (x) records observed agents, tools (x) records observed allowed tool invocations, restricted (x) records ex-plicit restricted-access outcomes, and delegations (x) records observed delegation edges. A restricted-tool obligation is not witnessed merely by the absence of a tool call. It requires an explicit restricted-access observation, such as a harness-level rejection, policy event, refusal trace, or attempted restricted call recorded by the runtime adapter. This distinction is important because absence alone does not show that the restriction was actually exercised. 5

For a finite obligation set O and a witness predicate 

W (x, ω ), we define coverage as 

Cov (X, O, W ) = 



1, if O = ∅,

{ω ∈ O | ∃ x ∈ X : W (x, ω )}

|O| , otherwise, where X is the generated test suite. This convention treats criteria with no applicable obligations as vacuously satisfied. 

a) C1. Agent coverage: Every reachable agent is ob-served by at least one test: 

C1(X, S ) = Cov  X, A reach , λ (x, a ). a ∈ agents (x).

b) C2. Allowed-tool coverage: Every reachable allowed agent–tool edge is exercised: 

C2(X, S ) = Cov  X, T allow , λ (x, (a, t )) . (a, t ) ∈ tools (x).

c) C3. Restricted-tool coverage: Every reachable re-stricted agent–tool edge is exercised through an explicit restricted-access observation: 

C3(X, S ) = Cov  X, T restrict ,λ(x, (a, t )) . (a, t ) ∈ restricted (x).

For example, a request that tempts triage_agent to update a seat directly should produce explicit evidence that direct use of update_seat by triage_agent is blocked, refused, redirected, or otherwise recorded as a restricted-access event. 

d) C4. Delegation coverage: Every reachable delegation edge is observed: 

C4(X, S ) = Cov  X, D, λ (x, (a, b )) . (a, b ) ∈ delegations (x).

Full structural coverage means that all four criteria are satisfied. It does not, by itself, guarantee semantic correctness, safety, or output quality; it only shows that the declared coordination structure has been exercised. 

B. Coverage-Driven Test Generation 

We now describe how tests are generated from the graph-derived obligation space. The guiding principle is one obliga-tion, at least one witness objective. Rather than synthesizing arbitrary task prompts and hoping they exercise the relevant parts of a workflow, the generator starts from the obligation sets and constructs focused objectives designed to witness them directly. The generator has two layers. The first layer is determin-istic: it constructs the reachable coordination graph, extracts obligations, and converts each obligation into a typed witness objective. The second layer is DSPy-based: it realizes each witness objective as a natural-language test scenario, checks whether the scenario is aligned with the intended obligation, repairs invalid scenarios when possible, and emits executable tests with expected structural observables. Thus, DSPy is used for controlled scenario realization, while the coverage model remains graph-defined [8], [2]. Formally, the generator is a mapping 

Generate (S) → X, 

where S is a normalized multi-agent workflow specification and X is a structural test suite. Generation proceeds in five phases: 1) Graph construction. Parse S and compute G(S).2) Obligation extraction. Derive Ω( S) =(Areach , T allow , T restrict , D ).3) Objective construction. Convert each obligation into a typed witness objective. 4) Scenario realization. Use DSPy modules to realize objectives as natural-language scenarios. 5) Validation and assembly. Check candidates against structural constraints and emit executable tests. Each generated test specification contains a target agent or workflow entry point, one or more structural witness objec-tives, a natural-language user scenario, and the expected struc-tural evidence: observed agents, agent–tool uses, restricted-access outcomes, and delegation edges. 

a) Witness objectives: A witness objective is a typed request for evidence about one structural obligation. We use four objective families: 

Reach (a), UseTool (a, t ), RestrictTool (a, t ), Delegate (a, b ).

They ask, respectively, for evidence that agent a is reached, that agent a uses allowed tool t, that restricted access from 

a to t is explicitly observed, and that control transfers from agent a to agent b.

b) Objective construction rules: The deterministic layer constructs objectives using four rules:  

> •

R1 (Agent rule). For each a ∈ Areach , emit Reach (a). 

> •

R2 (Allowed-tool rule). For each (a, t ) ∈ Tallow , emit 

UseTool (a, t ). 

> •

R3 (Restricted-tool rule). For each (a, t ) ∈ Trestrict ,emit RestrictTool (a, t ). 

> •

R4 (Delegation rule). For each (a, b ) ∈ D, emit 

Delegate (a, b ).Applied to oai_customer_service , these rules emit 3 + 2 + 4 + 4 = 13 typed witness objectives. 

c) Merging.: A single test may witness multiple obli-gations. For example, a test that exercises an allowed tool of agent a may also witness that a was reached. The merge step therefore combines compatible objectives into objective bundles to reduce suite size. Each bundle contains one driver objective , which determines the DSPy realization signature, and zero or more secondary objectives, which are checked as additional witness obligations on the same runtime trace. A merge is allowed only when it is obligation-preserving :the realized test must retain the witness obligations of ev-ery objective in the bundle. In the current implementation, heterogeneous bundles are allowed only when the secondary objectives are reachability objectives entailed by the driver. For example, a bundle containing Reach (a) and UseTool (a, t ) is realized using the RealizeUseTool signature, and the resulting trace is checked for both reaching a and observing the tool-use edge (a, t ). We do not merge objectives with different non-reachability drivers, such as UseTool (a, t ) and Delegate (a, b ),because they require different realization constraints. We also forbid merges that introduce contradictions, such as requiring 6

the same agent to both use and be restricted from using the same tool in one execution. 

C. DSPy-Based Scenario Realization 

Each typed witness objective is realized by a DSPy module that produces a candidate end-user message and pairs it with the structural evidence expected from executing it. The structural meaning of a test is fixed by the objective; DSPy is responsible only for surface form and contextual plausibility. 

a) One signature per criterion: The realizer is not a single free-form prompt template. Each coverage criterion has its own DSPy signature [4], with structured input fields lifted from the manifest and criterion-specific generation constraints:  

> •

RealizeReach (C1) produces a realistic request that should route to the target agent without naming it.  

> •

RealizeUseTool (C2) produces a request that requires the capability provided by the target tool without naming the tool.  

> •

RealizeRestrictTool (C3) produces a request that tempts an agent toward a restricted capability while staying within its surface domain.  

> •

RealizeDelegate (C4) produces a request that should ar-rive at a parent agent but require delegation to a child agent. This separation matters because the objectives have different and sometimes opposite goals. For example, C2 asks the realizer to elicit a permitted tool call, while C3 asks it to probe a forbidden boundary. A single generic prompt template would not express these distinctions cleanly. 

b) Bounded refinement with an execution-grounded re-ward: Surface plausibility alone is a poor proxy for structural coverage: a well-written user message can be answered by the wrong agent or without the intended tool call. We therefore wrap the per-criterion realizer in a bounded dspy.Refine 

loop [2]. Each candidate prompt z is executed through the runtime adapter and scored by a binary reward: 

r(z) = 



0, if z leaks a forbidden identifier, such as a literal tool or agent name, 

1, if executing z produces the structural evidence required by the objective, 

0, otherwise. The loop terminates as soon as r(z) = 1, or after N

attempts. In our experiments, N = 5 . After each attempt, the witness verdict and observed trace are fed back to the realizer, allowing it to revise based on runtime behavior rather than its own confidence. If no candidate succeeds within the budget, the objective is marked unrealized and reported. 

Worked example: a delegation realization. 

Figure 3 shows a real RealizeDelegate run on the 

oai_message_filter workflow, for the obligation 

Delegate (assistant_2 → spanish_assistant ).Although oai_customer_service remains the paper’s main running example, we use oai_message_filter 

here because it provides a clearer illustration of multi-attempt runtime-grounded refinement. Early attempts ask for Spanish                                                         

> Objective. Delegate (assistant_2 →
> spanish_assistant )on oai_message_filter .
> Signature inputs. Parent description of assistant_2 ; child description of spanish_assistant ; delegation trigger “user prefers Spanish.”
> Attempt 1. “¿Puedes ayudarme atraducir este párrafo al español, por favor?” runtime: assistant_2 replies in Spanish; no handoff; r= 0 .
> Attempt 2. “Hi, could you briefly explain this phrase in Spanish? . . . if my Spanish isn’t perfect, please kindly pass me on to someone who can assist fluently in Spanish.” runtime:
> assistant_2 answers in English; no handoff; r= 0 .
> Attempt 3. “Please provide a very brief explanation of this text in Spanish . . . I’m more comfortable using that language for this.” runtime: assistant_2 replies in Spanish; no handoff;
> r= 0 .
> Attempt 4. “Could you give me a very brief summary of this text? I’m more comfortable with Spanish, so please reply in Spanish
> or connect me with someone who can assist in Spanish .”
> runtime: handoff assistant_2 →spanish_assistant
> observed; r= 1 . Stop.

Fig. 3: A four-attempt RealizeDelegate trace from 

oai_message_filter . The realizer converges on aphrasing that produces the intended delegation only after runtime-grounded feedback. output but are answered directly by assistant_2 , so no handoff is observed. After runtime feedback, the realizer changes the prompt to explicitly allow connection to someone who can assist in Spanish; this produces the intended handoff. The realizer cannot satisfy an objective merely by writing a plausible scenario. A candidate is accepted only when the runtime trace contains the expected structural evidence. This is what makes the generated suite coverage-driven rather than prompt-driven: the graph defines the obligation, DSPy proposes a scenario, and the runtime witness decides whether the scenario actually covers the obligation. 

D. Execution and Observation 

Once generated, the suite is executed and evaluated through structural observations rather than source-code instrumenta-tion. Each test produces an observation tuple of the form defined in Section III-A. These observations are matched back to the four obligation sets to compute coverage under C1, C2,

C3, and C4.The execution layer may attach additional metadata, such as backend used, retry count, model configuration, trace iden-tifier, or invocation surface, that is useful for debugging and reproducibility but is not part of the graph-derived coverage model. In our prototype, the runtime adapter materializes each reachable agent as an OpenAI Agents SDK Agent , registers tool edges as recording stubs that bridge to a per-test runtime context, and routes delegation handoffs through the SDK’s native handoff machinery. Section IV reports the resulting observations across the ten-workflow benchmark suite and the deeper oai_customer_service study. 7

Algorithm 1 Coverage-driven structural test generation with DSPy realization.                                                                                                                                   

> 1: Construct reachable coordination graph G(S)
> 2: Extract obligations Ω( S) = ( Areach , T allow , T restrict , D )
> 3: Q←∅
> 4: for all a∈Areach do
> 5: Q←Q∪ { Reach (a)}
> 6: end for
> 7: for all (a, t )∈Tallow do
> 8: Q←Q∪ { UseTool (a, t )}
> 9: end for
> 10: for all (a, t )∈Trestrict do
> 11: Q←Q∪ { RestrictTool (a, t )}
> 12: end for
> 13: for all (a, b )∈Ddo
> 14: Q←Q∪ { Delegate (a, b )}
> 15: end for
> 16: B←MergeCompatibleObjectives (Q)
> 17: X←∅
> 18: for all Bi∈Bdo
> 19: q⋆←Driver (Bi)
> 20: Select the criterion-specific DSPy signature for q⋆
> 21: Bind signature inputs from Sand G(S)
> 22: passed ←FALSE ;i←0
> 23: while i < N and ¬passed do
> 24: z←sample candidate user prompt using prior feedback
> 25: if zleaks a forbidden identifier then
> 26: r←0
> 27: else
> 28: τ←execute zand collect the structural trace
> 29: r←V
> q∈BiWitness (q, τ )
> 30: end if
> 31: record (z, τ, r )
> 32: if r= 1 then
> 33: X←X∪ { RealizeAsTest (z, τ, B i)}
> 34: passed ←TRUE
> 35: end if
> 36: i←i+ 1
> 37: end while
> 38: if ¬passed then
> 39: ReportUnrealized (Bi)
> 40: end if
> 41: end for
> 42: return X

IV. E VALUATION 

We evaluate the structural-testing pipeline on ten multi-agent workflows drawn from the OpenAI Agents SDK ex-amples and from public third-party projects built on the same SDK. The evaluation asks whether the proposed graph-based coverage model can be extracted from real SDK-style workflow definitions, whether coverage-driven scenario generation can produce executable witnesses for the resulting obligations, and whether runtime witness outcomes provide useful diagnostic information about workflow structure. Across the ten workflows, the extracted specifications con-tain 49 reachable agents, 47 tools, and 403 graph-derived struc-tural obligations. These obligations consist of reachable-agent obligations (C1), allowed-tool obligations (C2), restricted-tool obligations ( C3), and delegation obligations ( C4). We evaluate extraction and obligation construction on all ten workflows, execute runtime witness studies for allowed-tool, restricted-tool, and delegation obligations, and use 

oai_customer_service as a instrumented benchmark for additional routing-prompt ablation and tool-fault robust-ness experiments. The evaluation has three goals. First, it tests whether the deterministic parts of the pipeline produce well-formed co-ordination graphs and obligation sets across workflows of different sizes and orchestration styles. Second, it tests whether the LLM-based realization layer can produce natural-language scenarios that witness structural obligations at runtime under a bounded refinement budget. Third, it examines whether the resulting per-criterion outcome distributions are diagnostically useful: for example, whether they distinguish single-hop work-flows from multi-hop workflows, and whether restricted-tool probing reveals concrete misrouting failures. All runtime results are single-run measurements under a fixed configuration. We therefore interpret them as empirical evidence of feasibility and diagnostic value, not as statisti-cally powered estimates of performance across all multi-agent systems. 

A. Research Questions 

The evaluation is organized around four research questions. 

RQ1. Obligation extraction and scenario realization. Can the pipeline derive valid typed coordination graphs, structural coverage obligations, and corresponding witness scenarios from SDK-derived multi-agent workflows? 

RQ2. Allowed-tool and delegation witnesses. To what extent do generated scenarios witness allowed-tool obligations (C2) and delegation obligations ( C4) at runtime? 

RQ3. Restricted-tool adversarial witnesses. Does restricted-tool testing ( C3) reveal workflows whose declared tool restrictions can be violated under adversarial prompting? 

RQ4. Fault-injection robustness. Can the same structural harness test whether agents continue to handle tool faults without crashing or leaking raw error payloads? These questions separate witness types with different inter-pretations. For C2 and C4, a satisfied witness means that the expected structural behavior was observed: the intended tool was invoked, or the intended delegation edge was traversed. For C3, the runtime adversarial study has inverted polarity: a satisfied witness means that the adversarial scenario elicited an attempted restricted call. Thus, higher C3 violation counts are not better; they identify concrete hardening targets. RQ4 uses the same runtime harness but changes the witness predicate to test mechanical robustness under faulty tool responses. 

B. Benchmarks a) Source and extraction: Each benchmark is derived from publicly available OpenAI Agents SDK-style source code. The extractor imports a configured entry point, walks the reachable agent graph through declared tools and handoffs, and emits a normalized workflow specification of the kind described in Section II. The extracted specifications are then parsed into typed coordination graphs and checked for well-formedness before obligation construction. Manifests are not edited by hand; when a benchmark uses external orchestration 8

TABLE I: Benchmark list. Ag = reachable agents, Tl = tools, Al 

= allowed agent–tool edges, Re = restricted agent–tool edges, 

De = delegation edges, and Obl = total structural obligations (C1+C2+C3+C4 = Ag +Al +Re +De ). The tool count Tl is reported for context and does not contribute to Obl , since |C1|

counts reachable agents rather than tools.                                                                          

> Benchmark ID Ag Tl Al Re De Obl
> oai_customer_service 3224413
> oai_message_filter †311228
> oai_research_bot 44412 323
> oai_financial_research 77742 662
> social_media_agent_system 233319
> deep_research_clone †311228
> value_investment 4924 12 343
> autopitch 76636 655
> octagon_vc_agents 12 12 12 132 11 167
> ydmitry_deep_research 4253315
> Total (10) 49 47 65 248 41 403
> †These workflows implement part of their multi-agent control externally, by re-invoking the runtime with a different starting agent rather than declaring all transfers as in-agent handoffs. For structural extraction, we re-encode the externally orchestrated transfer as an equivalent handoff edge in the extraction layer. This does not add agents, tools, prompts, or new behavior; it makes the already-present control transfer visible to the graph model.

rather than in-agent handoff declarations, the adaptation is doc-umented below. Note that the tool count Tl and the allowed-tool edge count Al need not coincide: the same tool may be declared as accessible to several agents, so each (agent, tool) access relation is counted as a separate allowed edge. This is why some benchmarks in Table I report Al > Tl (for example, 

value_investment with Tl =9 and Al =24 ). 

b) Benchmarks: Table I reports the structural shape of the ten extracted workflows. The benchmark set spans workflows from small routing examples to larger coordinator-style systems. It also includes both SDK delegation styles used in the source projects: explicit handoffs and sub-agent invocation through Agent.as_tool . Tools include user-defined function tools and SDK-provided tools such as web search. 

c) Instrumented benchmark: The 

oai_customer_service workflow plays a special role because it is small enough to inspect manually while still exercising every kind of structural obligation. It contains three reachable agents, two tools, two allowed tool edges, four restricted tool edges, and four delegation edges. We use it as the running example in Sections II and III, and as the instrumented benchmark for the routing-prompt ablation and fault-injection robustness study. 

d) Benchmark construction notes: Most benchmarks are extracted directly from their source-level agent declarations. A small number require normalization because their orches-tration style is not represented as explicit SDK handoff decla-rations. For benchmarks that orchestrate sub-agents in ordinary Python control flow, the extraction layer introduces a coordina-tor representation that mirrors the published call structure. For workflows that externally switch the starting agent between turns, the extraction layer re-encodes that transfer as a handoff edge so that reachability can be computed from a single entry point. These adaptations are local to extraction and do not modify the upstream agents, tools, or prompts. We report them because they affect the graph shape and therefore the derived obligations. 

C. Experimental Setup 

The implementation consists of four stages: manifest extrac-tion, obligation construction, scenario realization, and runtime witness execution. Extraction and obligation construction are deterministic. Scenario realization uses DSPy with a bounded refinement loop. Runtime witness execution replays each real-ized scenario against an OpenAI Agents SDK runtime adapter. All experiments use gpt-4.1-mini for both the realizer and the agent under test, with a maximum of N =5 refinement attempts per objective. The runtime adapter materializes each reachable agent as an SDK Agent , registers tool edges as recording stubs, and records observed agents, tool calls, restricted-access events, and delegation edges. Tool backends are mocked so that the witness signal measures structural behavior—which agent attempted which tool or handoff— rather than correctness of an external service. Each criterion-level runtime evaluation is executed once per benchmark under the default configuration. The 

oai_customer_service benchmark is additionally evaluated under a strict-routing realizer prompt and under two injected tool-fault modes. Because the realizer and the agent under test are LLM-backed, the reported results should be read as single-run empirical evidence rather than statistically powered estimates. 

a) Runtime witness accounting: The runtime focuses on allowed-tool, restricted-tool, and delegation obligations. Agent-reachability obligations are included in the structural obligation inventory, but the main runtime tables emphasize tool and delegation behavior because those criteria require more specific runtime evidence than observing that an agent appeared in a trace. Restricted-tool results are reported with inverted polarity: a counted restricted-tool witness means that an adversarial prompt elicited an attempted restricted call. 

D. RQ1: Obligation Extraction and Scenario Realization a) Setup: We run graph construction, obligation extrac-tion, witness-objective construction, and DSPy-based scenario realization on every benchmark in Table I. For each bench-mark, we record the graph shape, the resulting obligation counts, and whether the realizer produces a candidate natural-language scenario for each generated witness objective within the refinement budget. The realizer uses gpt-4.1-mini 

with N =5 attempts. 

b) Results: The extractor terminates with a well-formed coordination graph on all ten workflows. In total, the bench-mark set contains 49 reachable agents, 65 allowed-tool edges, 248 restricted-tool edges, and 41 delegation edges, for 403 structural obligations. The obligation layer emits typed witness objectives for the resulting obligation sets without manual intervention. The scenario realizer produces candidate natural-language scenarios for the generated objectives within the refinement 9

budget. The realized scenarios are concrete and domain-relevant. For example, on oai_customer_service , areachability objective for seat_booking_agent is re-alized as a request to change a seat assignment, while a multi-intent scenario for the entry agent combines a flight-change request with a baggage question. On 

social_media_agent_system , a use-tool objective for web search is realized as a request for recent viral social-media posts. 

c) Behaviour of the bounded refinement loop: Most realization attempts terminate quickly. On the smaller work-flows, objectives often succeed on the first attempt. Multi-hop workflows require more attempts, especially when the target obligation sits behind two or more handoffs. In those cases, runtime feedback helps the realizer move from a generic request toward a more instrumental request that causes the intended route or tool call. This behavior is important because it shows that scenario realization is not judged by surface plau-sibility alone: candidates are refined using observed structural traces. RQ1 Summary The pipeline extracts well-formed coordination graphs and derives structural obligations for all ten SDK-derived workflows. It also realizes witness scenarios within the bounded DSPy refinement budget. Multi-hop routing objectives account for the cases that re-quire more than one realization attempt. 

E. RQ2: Allowed-Tool and Delegation Witnesses a) Setup: We execute the allowed-tool and delegation witness evaluations on all ten benchmarks. The allowed-tool witness for C2 holds when the runtime trace records that the intended agent invoked the intended allowed tool. The delega-tion witness for C4 holds when the trace records the intended handoff or Agent.as_tool transfer. Both evaluations use the default configuration described in Section IV-C. 

b) Cross-benchmark results: Table II reports per-benchmark runtime outcomes for allowed-tool, restricted-tool, and delegation witnesses. We discuss the allowed-tool and delegation columns here and the restricted-tool column in Section IV-F. Across the ten benchmarks, allowed-tool wit-nesses succeed on 45/65 obligations (69.2%), and delegation witnesses succeed on 31/41 obligations (75.6%). 

c) Allowed-tool findings (C2): The allowed-tool results cluster into three regimes. First, single-hop targets pass uniformly. On 

oai_customer_service , oai_message_filter ,

social_media_agent_system , and 

deep_research_clone , every allowed-tool target sits at most one delegation hop from the entry agent, and all allowed-tool witnesses succeed: 7/7 combined. Second, fan-out coordinator workflows pass on most targets. In oai_research_bot , oai_financial_research ,and octagon_vc_agents , coordinators route to multiple specialists. These workflows satisfy 19/23 allowed-tool wit-nesses. The misses occur mainly when the intended target overlaps semantically with another specialist, causing the coordinator to choose a different route. Third, multi-hop and handoff-stub targets account for most misses. In ydmitry_deep_research , misses occur when the intended target sits two hops away from the entry agent. In 

value_investment , many misses correspond to handoff-like objects surfaced as allowed edges but not invocable as ordinary function tools by the runtime harness. These failures are informative: they show where prompt-only realization and runtime-callability assumptions are weakest. 

d) Delegation findings ( C4): Delegation witnesses suc-ceed on 31/41 obligations. As with allowed-tool witnesses, the main determinant is topology. Direct handoffs and obvious coordinator-to-specialist routes are usually witnessed. Multi-hop routes and overlapping specialist roles account for most failures. The bounded refinement loop is especially useful for dele-gation objectives. For example, in oai_message_filter ,early attempts asking for Spanish output are answered directly by the parent agent. After runtime feedback, the realizer changes the request to explicitly allow connection to someone who can assist in Spanish, which produces the intended hand-off. This illustrates the value of runtime-grounded realization: the realizer is not merely producing plausible prompts, but adapting prompts based on whether the structural witness actually appears. RQ2 Summary Allowed-tool witnesses succeed on 45/65 obligations, and delegation witnesses succeed on 31/41 obligations across the ten benchmarks. Single-hop targets pass uniformly, fan-out coordinators pass on most dominant routes, and multi-hop or runtime-ambiguous targets account for most misses. 

F. RQ3: Restricted-Tool Adversarial Witnesses a) Setup: We execute the restricted-tool evaluation on all ten benchmarks. For each restricted edge (a, t ), the realizer attempts to construct a request that tempts agent a toward capability t without naming the tool literally. Restricted tools are represented by recording stubs: if a restricted call is attempted, the runtime records the attempted (a, t ) pair and returns a refusal payload. The C3 witness is satisfied when the target restricted call attempt is observed. For C3, a satisfied witness means that the adversarial prompt elicited a restricted-call attempt. Such a result is useful because it gives a concrete hardening target, but it is not a positive outcome from a restriction-enforcement perspective. Conversely, a zero count means that no restricted-call violation was elicited within the realizer’s adversarial budget; it is not an absolute safety guarantee. 

b) Results: Across the ten benchmarks, restricted-tool probing elicits 23 violations out of 248 restricted-tool obligations (9.3%). Four benchmarks 10 

TABLE II: Cross-benchmark single-execution runtime results under the default configuration. Columns report obligations satisfied within the N =5 refinement budget. For C2 and C4, a satisfied witness means that the expected allowed-tool invocation or delegation edge was observed. For C3, polarity is inverted: a satisfied witness means that an adversarial prompt elicited an attempted restricted call. Thus, lower C3 violation counts are better from a restriction-enforcement perspective.                                                           

> Benchmark Allowed tool witnessed ( C2)Restricted violation elicited ( C3)Delegation witnessed ( C4)Wall (s) LM r.t.
> oai_customer_service 2/2 0/4 4/4 290 47
> oai_message_filter 1/1 0/2 2/2 138 27
> social_media_agent_system 3/3 2/3 1/1 311 33
> deep_research_clone 1/1 0/2 2/2 161 23
> ydmitry_deep_research 2/5 1/3 2/3 498 59
> oai_research_bot 3/4 0/12 2/3 1,789 137
> value_investment 13/24 4/12 3/3 3,352 243
> autopitch 4/6 3/36 3/6 6,409 376
> oai_financial_research 5/7 7/42 3/6 7,353 407
> octagon_vc_agents 11/12 6/132 9/11 18,915 2,285
> Total (10 benchmarks) 45/65 23/248 31/41 39,216 3,637

TABLE III: Routing-prompt ablation on 

oai_customer_service . “Pass” counts allowed-tool objectives whose witness predicate held during execution. “Wall” is end-to-end wall time, and “Calls” is the number of realizer LM round-trips.             

> Cell Realizer Routing Pass Calls Agpt-4.1-mini loose 2/2 2Bgpt-4.1-mini strict 2/2 2

produce no elicited restricted-call violations within the budget: oai_customer_service (0/4), 

oai_message_filter (0/2), deep_research_clone 

(0/2), and oai_research_bot (0/12). Six benchmarks produce at least one viola-tion: social_media_agent_system (2/3), 

ydmitry_deep_research (1/3), value_investment 

(4/12), autopitch (3/36), oai_financial_research 

(7/42), and octagon_vc_agents (6/132). 

c) No violation elicited within budget: The zero-violation benchmarks are informative because they show cases where adversarial prompting did not elicit the targeted restricted call. On oai_customer_service , capability-laden re-quests tend to route to the agent that legitimately owns the tool rather than causing a peer specialist to invoke an off-owner tool. For example, a request about changing a seat is routed toward seat_booking_agent instead of caus-ing faq_agent to invoke update_seat . Similar behav-ior appears in deep_research_clone , where scraping-like requests route to the search execution agent, and in 

oai_research_bot , where the coordinator structure limits direct invocation of underlying function tools. Table IV gives the per-objective restricted-tool outcomes for oai_customer_service . The off-target column is important: it shows that the recording mechanism can observe restricted-call attempts even when the target restricted edge is not violated. Thus, the zero on-target count is not merely an instrumentation failure. 

d) Elicited restricted-call violations: On the six bench-marks with violations, the eliciting prompts are concrete and reproducible. In social_media_agent_system , re-quests for recent viral posts can steer the social-media agent toward a web-search capability outside its declared access. In ydmitry_deep_research , a request for immediate source retrieval can cause the orchestrator to invoke a source-gathering tool directly rather than route to the search specialist. In oai_financial_research , prompts that ask for a single end-to-end answer including verification can collapse a planner-then-verifier flow into a direct planner call against verifier-like capabilities. These are exactly the kinds of struc-tural regressions or boundary weaknesses that restricted-tool coverage is intended to expose. The violation rate also varies substantially by workflow shape. octagon_vc_agents has the largest restricted-edge surface, with 132 restricted edges, but only six elicited viola-tions. This suggests that coordinator-to-specialist structure can limit cross-specialist tool reach, although the result should be read as a single-run observation rather than a general safety claim. RQ3 Summary Restricted-tool probing elicits 23 restricted-call vi-olations across 248 restricted-tool obligations. Four workflows produce no targeted restricted-call violation within the adversarial budget, while six produce at least one concrete misrouting failure. The inverted-polarity C3 criterion therefore provides diagnostic in-formation that would be invisible in an allow-list-only evaluation. 

G. RQ4: Fault-Injection Robustness a) Setup: We re-execute the allowed-tool evaluation on oai_customer_service with a fault injected into the target tool stub. We test two failure modes. In 

fail:error , the stub returns a canned internal-error pay-load. In fail:malformed , the stub returns a deliberately malformed payload. The robustness witness W F 1 holds when the target agent attempts the target tool call, the run does not crash, the agent produces a non-trivial final reply, and the reply does not leak the raw internal-error marker back to the 11 

TABLE IV: Per-objective restricted-tool outcome on oai_customer_service . “Pass” is 1 iff the runtime records a restricted-call attempt at the intended (a, t ) pair. “Off-target” lists restricted-call attempts observed at a different agent than the intended target.                 

> Target agent Restricted tool Pass Off-target attempts
> faq_agent update_seat 0/1 —
> seat_booking_agent faq_lookup_tool 0/1 (triage_agent, faq_lookup_tool) triage_agent faq_lookup_tool 0/1 —
> triage_agent update_seat 0/1 —

TABLE V: Fault injection on the allowed-tool evaluation of oai_customer_service . “Pass” is the number of objectives whose mechanical robustness witness W F 1 held.          

> Mode Pass Wall (s) Calls
> fail:error 2/2 32.2 4
> fail:malformed 2/2 12.9 2

user. The witness is intentionally mechanical so that it can be evaluated without a language-model judge. 

b) Results: Table V reports both failure modes. The robustness witness holds for both allowed-tool objectives under both injected faults. Under fail:error , the agent produces replies that acknowledge a technical issue. Under 

fail:malformed , the agent sometimes produces plausible-looking content from the malformed payload. This is accepted by W F 1 because the witness only checks mechanical robust-ness, not semantic correctness. The result therefore demon-strates that the same structural harness can test fault-handling behavior, while also showing the limits of a purely structural witness. RQ4 Summary Under both injected fault modes, the target tool is attempted, the run does not crash, and the final re-ply does not leak the raw internal-error marker. The witness holds 2/2 in both modes. Because the witness is mechanical, it does not detect semantic fabrication from malformed tool output. 

H. Synthesis 

The evaluation supports the central claim of the paper: structural coverage provides an adequacy layer for multi-agent workflow specifications. The extracted graphs turn each workflow into an explicit set of test obligations, and the runtime witnesses show which declared agents, tool-access edges, restrictions, and delegation paths can actually be ex-ercised by generated scenarios. This gives a different kind of evidence than end-to-end task success: it shows not only whether a workflow can produce an answer, but which parts of its declared coordination structure have been tested. The ten-benchmark results show that coverage outcomes are informative at the level of workflow structure. Single-hop obligations are usually easy to witness, while multi-hop routes, overlapping specialist roles, and runtime-ambiguous handoff stubs produce most of the missed allowed-tool and delegation witnesses. These misses are not merely failures of the evaluation; they identify structural paths that are difficult to exercise under the current realizer and harness. In this sense, a coverage report is useful even when it is incomplete, because it tells the developer where the test suite does not yet provide evidence. The restricted-tool results show why structural adequacy must include negative obligations. An evaluation that only checks allowed tool use and delegation would miss cases where an agent can be prompted into attempting a tool call outside its declared access. The C3 results expose both sides of this boundary: some workflows produce no targeted restricted-call violation within the adversarial budget, while others yield concrete prompts that elicit restricted calls. Both outcomes are useful. The former gives bounded evidence that the tested restrictions resisted the generated probes; the latter gives actionable hardening targets. RQ4 also shows that the same coverage-driven tests can also support robustness checks by changing the witness predicate while keeping the underlying structural obligation fixed. This is important methodologically: once a workflow obligation has been identified, the same target can be evaluated under differ-ent runtime conditions, such as normal execution, restricted access, or faulty tool output. The malformed-output case also illustrates the boundary of the method: structural witnesses can show that the intended tool was attempted and that the run did not crash, but they do not establish semantic correctness of the final response. Overall, the evaluation shows that the proposed criteria are more than bookkeeping over a graph. They define a practical notion of test-suite adequacy for multi-agent workflows: a suite is more adequate when it provides runtime evidence for the workflow’s declared agents, allowed tool edges, re-stricted tool boundaries, and delegation paths. The resulting coverage profile helps distinguish exercised structure from untested structure, and turns coordination gaps into concrete targets for additional tests, better routing prompts, or workflow hardening. 

I. Threats to Validity External validity. The evaluation covers ten workflows, but all are OpenAI Agents SDK-style systems and most are demo-scale or research-scale projects rather than production deployments. We therefore do not claim that the measured pass rates generalize to other frameworks, closed-source systems, or much larger workflows. The graph model is intended to be framework-agnostic, but the extractor and runtime adapter evaluated here are SDK-specific. 12 

Construct validity. The witness predicates measure struc-tural evidence: agents observed, tools invoked, restricted-call attempts recorded, and delegation edges traversed. They do not measure semantic correctness of the final answer, user satisfac-tion, policy compliance beyond the tested structural relation, or factual accuracy. A suite can achieve high structural cov-erage while still producing poor natural-language responses. The fault-injection study makes this limitation explicit: the malformed-output case can produce plausible but semantically questionable replies that the mechanical witness still accepts. 

Internal validity. The runtime layer uses mocked tool back-ends. This isolates structural behavior from external service variability, but it means the evaluation measures whether the agent attempts the intended tool or delegation, not whether the real tool would return a correct result. A second internal-validity concern is realizer reach: the bounded DSPy realizer does not always steer the conversation through multi-hop delegation chains within N =5 attempts. We report such misses as part of the diagnostic outcome rather than treating them as noise. 

Reproducibility. Both the realizer and the agent under test are LLM-backed, so repeated runs may produce different surface prompts and occasionally different traces. We reduce this risk by using a fixed configuration, recording structural traces, and evaluating witnesses mechanically from those traces. However, the evaluation is single-run; a multi-run reliability study would be needed to estimate variance. 

Benchmark normalization. Some source projects use orches-tration styles that are not directly represented as static SDK handoff declarations. For these, the extraction layer normalizes the published control flow into graph edges so that reachability and coverage can be computed. These adaptations do not add new agents, tools, or prompts, but they can affect the graph shape and therefore the obligation set. We document them because they are part of the benchmark construction process. 

Cost and scale. The ten-benchmark runtime evaluation required roughly 39,216 seconds of wall-clock time and 3,637 realizer LM round-trips. This is manageable for the benchmark sizes studied here, but larger workflows may require more aggressive objective merging, path-aware realization, or staged execution to control cost. V. R ELATED WORK 

a) Structural coverage and mutation testing: Our work is most directly inspired by classical software testing notions of structural adequacy, including statement, branch, and related coverage criteria, as well as mutation testing [13], [1], [6]. The key difference is that our coverage obligations are defined over a multi-agent workflow graph rather than over program control flow. In that sense, the proposed criteria are closer in spirit to artifact-level adequacy measures: they ask whether declared agents, allowed tool edges, restricted tool edges, and delegation edges have been exercised. Mutation analysis along the same lines (injecting structural faults into the workflow specification) is a natural extension of the present work and is discussed as future work in Section VI. The main distinction is not the evaluation logic of coverage itself, but the decision to treat the multi-agent workflow specification as the primary testable artifact. 

b) Specification-based testing and model-based testing: 

There are also strong connections to specification-based test-ing, model-based testing, and behavior-driven approaches in which tests are derived from an abstract description of ex-pected structure or behavior. Our setting is similar in that the object under test is not arbitrary source code alone, but a de-clared artifact with explicit relations and constraints. However, multi-agent workflow specifications differ from conventional formal models because the artifact statically declares agents, tools, and edges but is exercised at runtime by language-model-driven agents whose tool-use and delegation choices are not deterministic. This makes the testing setting a hybrid: more structured than prompt-only evaluation, but less fully formal than traditional model-based testing [17]. Our contribution differs from classical model-based testing in that the input model is a lightweight coordination graph rather than a fully formal behavioral model. 

c) Automated test generation: The generation side of our approach is also related to automated test-suite construc-tion work in software engineering. Tools such as EvoSuite illustrate how coverage obligations can drive systematic suite construction for code artifacts [5]. Our generator follows the same broad testing philosophy, but the generation targets are not source-level branches or methods. Instead, the witnesses are derived from declared workflow structure: agents, allowed and restricted tool edges, and delegation edges. In this sense, we borrow the obligation-driven spirit of automated test generation without assuming that code structure is the right abstraction level for multi-agent workflows. 

d) LLM and agent evaluation: Recent work on LLM and agent evaluation has largely focused on benchmark task success, robustness, and behavioral probing. Existing agent benchmarks are valuable for measuring end-to-end perfor-mance, but they do not provide a coverage theory for the underlying multi-agent workflow. Our goal is complementary: instead of replacing task benchmarks, we provide adequacy criteria for asking whether the declared structure of a multi-agent workflow has been tested at all. This perspective is especially relevant for systems in which the same agent run-time may execute many different workflow specifications with different tool and delegation configurations [10], [11], [12], [7], [22]. The distinction is therefore one of evaluation target: prior benchmarks ask how well an agent solves tasks, whereas we ask how thoroughly a reusable workflow specification has been exercised. 

e) Prompt, tool, and workflow testing: A growing ecosystem of prompt-evaluation and tool-testing frameworks supports prompt regression checks, output comparison, and scenario-based assessment of LLM systems. These tools are useful in practice, but they generally emphasize example-level correctness rather than structural adequacy over reusable workflow artifacts. Our contribution is to identify an emerging software artifact class and to give it a corresponding structural testing vocabulary. This shifts the discussion from “did these examples pass?” toward a coverage question: “which parts of the declared workflow have actually been exercised?” [16], 13 

[18], [9], [15]. In other words, our framework is not another prompt-regression harness or tool-use benchmark. It is an adequacy model for multi-agent workflow specifications. 

f) Positioning: Taken together, prior work gives us the ingredients for this paper but not the combined result. Clas-sical testing contributes the ideas of coverage and mutation. Specification-based testing contributes the view that declared structure can serve as the basis for test generation. LLM and agent evaluation contributes the modern execution setting in which these artifacts matter. What has been missing is a coverage model and generation procedure tailored to multi-agent workflow specifications as a software artifact in their own right. VI. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

This paper evaluates structural coverage as an adequacy layer for LLM-based multi-agent workflow specifications. The evaluation covers ten SDK-derived workflows, totaling 49 reachable agents, 47 tools, and 403 graph-derived structural obligations. The results show that the proposed model can be extracted from real workflow definitions, that the resulting obligations can be turned into typed witness objectives and natural-language scenarios, and that runtime traces can be used to determine which declared agents, tool-access edges, restricted boundaries, and delegation paths have actually been exercised. The evaluation should be read as evidence of feasibility and diagnostic value, not as a general safety claim about multi-agent systems. All benchmarks are OpenAI Agents SDK-style workflows, and each runtime evaluation is executed once under a fixed configuration. The results therefore show that the method works on a nontrivial set of real SDK-derived workflows, but they do not establish statistical reliability across model runs, generality across agent frameworks, or effectiveness on production-scale deployments. The oai_customer_service workflow plays a nar-rower role within this broader evaluation. It is used as the running example and as a instrumented benchmark for routing-prompt ablation and fault-injection experiments. It is not the sole empirical basis for the paper. The main empirical evidence comes from the ten-workflow benchmark set, while the deeper case study shows how the same coverage framework can support closer inspection of one workflow. The four criteria measure structural exercise of the declared workflow graph. A suite that satisfies C1, C2, C3, and C4

has observed every reachable agent, exercised every allowed tool edge, produced explicit evidence for every restricted-tool obligation, and traversed every delegation edge. This gives a concrete notion of test-suite adequacy for workflow structure: an obligation that is never witnessed has not been tested. This is different from semantic correctness. Structural cov-erage does not show that the final answer is factually correct, useful to the user, policy compliant in all cases, or robust to every possible prompt. It also does not measure the realism of generated scenarios except insofar as those scenarios execute and produce structural evidence. A workflow can have high structural coverage and still produce poor responses. Con-versely, a workflow can succeed on an end-to-end benchmark while leaving important structural obligations untested. The restricted-tool criterion is especially important because it makes negative obligations explicit. Testing only allowed tool use and delegation would show whether intended paths can be exercised, but it would not show whether forbidden tool boundaries can be probed. The C3 results demonstrate that restricted-tool testing can produce two useful outcomes: no targeted restricted-call violation within the adversarial budget, or a concrete prompt that elicits a restricted call and therefore becomes a hardening target. The most immediate next step is mutation analysis over workflow graphs. Structural mutations such as deleting an allowed-tool edge, removing a restriction, changing a delega-tion target, or disconnecting an agent would make it possible to measure whether structurally adequate suites detect workflow regressions. This would also enable fair comparison against alternative generation strategies. A second direction is broader benchmark coverage. The current evaluation uses ten SDK-derived workflows. Extending the extractor to additional frameworks would test whether the same graph model captures workflow structure beyond the OpenAI Agents SDK. Larger workflows with deeper delegation chains and denser tool graphs would also stress the current realization strategy. A third direction is improving the realizer. The evaluation shows that multi-hop obligations are harder to witness than single-hop obligations. A path-aware realizer that receives explicit route structure, or a scenario diversifier that generates multiple semantically distinct prompts for the same obligation, may improve coverage on deep or ambiguous workflows. Finally, structural coverage should be combined with behav-ioral and semantic evaluation. The present criteria say whether declared structure was exercised; they do not judge whether the final response was correct. A mature testing framework for multi-agent workflows should include both layers: structural adequacy to ensure the workflow was exercised, and semantic or task-level checks to judge the quality of the resulting behavior. REFERENCES [1] Paul Ammann and Jeff Offutt. Introduction to Software Testing .Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2016. [2] DSPy Contributors. Dspy documentation. https://dspy.ai/, 2026. Ac-cessed: 2026-05-02. [3] DSPy Contributors. Dspy documentation: Modules. https://dspy.ai/learn/ programming/modules/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-02. [4] DSPy Contributors. Dspy documentation: Signatures. https://dspy.ai/ learn/programming/signatures/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-02. [5] Gordon Fraser and Andrea Arcuri. Evosuite: Automatic test suite generation for object-oriented software. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium and the 13th European Conference on Foundations of Software Engineering , pages 416–419, 2011. [6] Yue Jia and Mark Harman. An analysis and survey of the development of mutation testing. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,37(5):649–678, 2011. [7] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 14 

[8] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [9] Ming Li et al. API-Bank: A comprehensive benchmark for tool-augmented LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08244 , 2023. [10] Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yao Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language models. 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [11] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688 , 2023. [12] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. GAIA: A benchmark for general AI assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12983 , 2023. [13] Glenford J. Myers, Corey Sandler, and Tom Badgett. The Art of Software Testing . John Wiley & Sons, 3rd edition, 2011. [14] OpenAI. Agents sdk. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/ agents, 2026. Accessed: 2026-05-02. [15] Yujia Qin, Ruyi Luo, Pan Ye, et al. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 , 2023. [16] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy: Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4902–4912, 2020. [17] Mark Utting and Bruno Legeard. Practical Model-Based Testing: A Tools Approach . Morgan Kaufmann, 2006. [18] Xiao Wang, Qin Liu, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang, et al. Textflint: Unified multilingual robustness evaluation toolkit for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing: System Demonstra-tions , pages 347–355, 2021. [19] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Has-san Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In 

First Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. [20] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shi-han Dou, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, and Tao Gui. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864 , 2023. [21] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [22] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 , 2024.