Title: Access Timing as Scaffolding: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to GenAI in Education

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15850v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 01:18:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Access Timing as Scaffolding: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to GenAI in Education 

## 1st Janne Rotter 

Universitat Pompeu Fabra Barcelona, Spain jannedavid.rotter01@estudiant.upf.edu ORCID: 0009-0001-3520-958X 

## 2nd Pau Benazet i Montobbio 

Universitat Pompeu Fabra Barcelona, Spain pau.benazeti01@estudiant.upf.edu ORCID: 0009-0007-7759-6016 

## 3rd Davinia Hern´ andez-Leo 

Universitat Pompeu Fabra Barcelona, Spain davinia.hernandez-leo@upf.edu ORCID: 0000-0003-0548-7455 

Abstract – In recent years, generative AI (GenAI) in educational settings has become ubiquitous in students’ daily lives, despite its potential to induce over-reliance, metacognitive disengagement, and diminished learning when used unrestrictedly. While most prior research has thus focused on how to pedagogically scaffold its usage, the question of when to allow off-the-shelf GenAI remains understudied and lacks pedagogically grounded empirical investigation. We treat access timing itself as a form of implicit scaffolding and operationalize it through a rein-forcement learning (RL) agent that decides when students should access GenAI, with a reward function grounded in metacognitive theory, cognitive load theory, and productive failure. In a mixed-methods controlled lab study with N=105 participants, we compared the agent’s effect on learning gains and metacognitive engagement to unrestricted and fully restricted use. Results show that strategically timed GenAI access under the reinforcement learning condition improved objective post-test performance and metacognitive accuracy compared with unrestricted access, while reducing task errors and time on task relative to complete withholding, all without the need for explicit metacognitive prompts or structured scaffolding. However, no between-condition dif-ferences emerged on self-reported metacognitive awareness. Overall, timing of GenAI access therefore is a tractable, theoretically grounded, and scalable pedagogical paradigm that improves over completely unrestricted and withheld access, compatible with off-the-shelf tools and potentially low adoption barrier. This opens up a new research area that explores how access timing can be facilitated by edu-cators and implemented in human-AI learning system design. 

This paper has been submitted to IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies for peer review (May 2026). 

Keywords - Generative AI in Education, Reinforce-ment Learning, Metacognition, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Productive Failure, AI Access Timing 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) has revolu-tionized the way we learn and understand within educa-tional contexts [1]. While historical innovations of edu-cational technologies such as film and interactive white-boards have already reshaped the way education was done in the past, GenAI represents a qualitatively dif-ferent tool that can autonomously generate ideas, texts, and solutions [2]. Modern GenAI applications offer sup-port from source finding to linguistic polishing and are omnipresent in most students’ daily lives, regardless of institutional policies [3]. According to a survey by the digital education council amongst 3,800 university stu-dents across 16 countries, already 86% of university stu-dents used AI for their studies in 2024 [4]. While these systems offer a number of upsides such as individualized experience and unprecedented access to information, they also have a tendency to increase students’ overreliance and reduce their critical thinking capacities [5]. Students themselves notice this trend, with over 50% of university students believing that over-reliance on AI negatively impacts their academic perfor-mance [4]. Similarly, an OECD study [6] reports that while AI use can improve performance on practice tasks, students may perform worse on exams where AI is un-available, suggesting that apparent learning gains may mask growing over-reliance. Completely banning GenAI use may not effectively address this issue and could even have unintended consequences, such as increasing unre-1

> arXiv:2605.15850v1 [cs.CY] 15 May 2026

flective use [7]. Therefore, there is a growing degree of agreement that the aim should not be to completely pro-hibit GenAI use, but rather to explore how it can be ap-plied in ways that position AI and learners as collabora-tors, with their interactions informed by pedagogical and ethical frameworks [7, 1]. Such effective use requires bal-ancing cognitive support with the development of criti-cal thinking and self-regulation. The primary question therefore becomes not how to best prohibit GenAI use for learning, but when to allow it to foster pedagogical goals. 

1.1 The Present Study 

Addressing this challenge requires a dynamic approach that can adapt to learners’ evolving needs. Rather than focusing on how to explicitly scaffold generative AI use, we investigate when access to such support should be provided and how it affects learning outcomes. Rein-forcement learning offers a promising framework to op-erationalize this question, as it enables an agent to learn when to intervene to maximize educational outcomes and balance different learning objectives [8]. Further-more, its clear concept of agent actions and states is easily applicable as an online episodic task description to the question of when to intervene. Although the impact of generative AI on metacogni-tion is an increasingly studied area, its intersection with RL-based guidance remains largely unexplored, despite its significant potential to enhance human-AI collabo-ration. Furthermore, as described by Phung et al. [9] existing research often emphasizes student preferences [10] or technical accuracy [11] while neglecting the need to base AI-usage on sound educational principles, which may reduce its effectiveness for learning. Additionally, recent work by Zhi et al. [12] has begun to treat the timing of LLM access as an empirical variable in its own right and compared fixed early, continuous, late, and no-LLM access conditions on a critical thinking task. While they found that the effect of access timing depended on available task time, their approach was fixed rather than adaptive, focused on in-session task performance and was not grounded in pedagogical theory, ultimately leav-ing the question open whether theoretically motivated, adaptive timing can support durable learning. Therefore, we develop a prototype that implements pedagogically grounded access timing and enables its empirical evaluation. We use reinforcement learning as a mechanism to derive an adaptive access policy informed by educational theory. Overall, we aim to answer the following research questions: 

• RQ1 : Can a pedagogically grounded policy for when to allow GenAI improve learning gains (post-test performance) compared to naive baselines (al-ways allow/never allow)? 

• RQ2 : How does adaptive timing of AI access influ-ence students’ metacognitive skills? In line with contemporary research focused on peda-gogical steering [13, 8], we thus propose a reinforcement learning agent that utilizes pedagogical reward shaping, student modelling, and Proximal Policy Optimization to learn when to allow the usage of generative AI in the learning process to foster knowledge acquisition and metacognitive engagement. This approach allows com-bining the upsides of individualized education with a rigorous grounding in pedagogical theory, with the goal to reduce over-reliance and foster metacognitive growth. This agent thus serves as a theoretically grounded mech-anism to operationalize pedagogical frameworks into a single, adaptive access policy, which enables an empir-ical test of whether timing of GenAI access improves learning outcomes. To evaluate the developed solution we focus on text comprehension, as it requires learners to actively construct meaning and monitor their under-standing, making it well suited for studying how the tim-ing of AI assistance influences both learning outcomes and metacognitive engagement. 

2 RELATED WORK 2.1 Generative AI in Education 

GenAI can be used for a wide range of use cases in the educational domain, such as grading assistants [14], delivering individualized feedback [15], or generat-ing new content like quizzes [16] and educational videos [17]. Furthermore, GenAI can be used to facilitate per-sonalized on-demand support via hints [18]. However, while a number of studies attest a positive effect of on-demand support on educational outcomes [19, 20], a meta-analysis by Kluger & DeNisi [21] indicates that providing too detailed feedback can result in diminished learning gains, which suggests that only selectively allow-ing hints can be beneficial. This highlights the tension between pedagogical opportunities and risks. Generally, there is a consensus in academic thought both being aware of the potential upsides of GenAI in education and acknowledging its prospective pitfalls. For instance, across the literature, a common thread is the recognition that GenAI can enhance education by enabling personalization, fostering interactivity, deliver-ing timely feedback, and supporting innovative teaching and assessment practices [3, 22, 23, 24]. On the other hand, scholars consistently highlight the ethical, techni-cal, and pedagogical challenges posed by GenAI, empha-sizing concerns over accuracy, bias, privacy, accountabil-ity, and the disruption of established educational prac-2tices [3, 22, 23]. Given this duality of promise and risk, the central ped-agogical question has shifted from whether to integrate GenAI into education toward understanding when and how its use can most effectively support learning. 

2.2 Pedagogical Background 

In order to be able to inform when to allow GenAI use to facilitate learning, reduce over-reliance and fos-ter metacognitive growth a thorough understanding of the pedagogical literature body is required. Central to this understanding is the concept of scaffolding which describes the provision of a support mechanism that en-ables a learner to solve a problem or carry out a task which would otherwise be beyond their unassisted effort [25]. In educational technology, scaffolding has been im-plemented through a wide range of mechanisms such as adaptive hints [9] or structured feedback [26] . Most prior work on scaffolding in AI-supported learning fo-cuses on how support is delivered. By contrast, this work investigates the complementary dimension of when 

access to GenAI support is granted, treating access tim-ing itself as a form of implicit scaffolding. 

Metacognition and Generative AI 

Metacognition is generally defined as ”thinking about your own thinking” [27, 28, 29]. It refers to our under-standing of how we plan and conduct our learning and how cooperation with tools influence this process. For instance, after writing an exam, a student might realize that rereading and learning in a short time (cramming) were not the most effective study strategies to prepare. Reflecting on this experience, they may decide to adjust their study strategies for future exams. For instance, they might decide to alternate between different learn-ing strategies, a process known as interleaving [30, 31]. This is a classic example of metacognition in action [32]. Students’ metacognitive abilities are of significant rele-vance in educational contexts, as they are a meaningful predictor for their learning and performance [33], even outweighing factors like intelligence [34]. Furthermore, building metacognitive skills in learners often leads to an increase in self-confidence [28]. It is thus often sug-gested that metacognitive abilities distinguish good from bad learners [28, 29]. GenAI, however, is a disrupting factor that can influence metacognitive elements, especially regarding younger students who did not have sufficient time to form a metacognitive understanding of their learning process [5]. For instance, Fan et al. found that GenAI encourages learners to rely heavily on technology and may lead to metacognitive “laziness” [35], which could undermine their metacognitive control and the capac-ity to self-regulate and engage in critical thinking. Fur-thermore, the instant response common to GenAI mod-els and insufficient attention to developing metacogni-tive capabilities and reflective practices [36] may also lead to the development of a dependency in students, who consequently no longer actively learn but passively accept GenAI outputs, reducing their critical thinking ability and metacognitive engagement [37, 38, 39]. Sim-ilarly, it was shown that using AI can significantly hin-der the metacognitive ability to accurately assess ones own performance, with high AI literacy being a pri-mary predictor of low accuracy [40]. As a result, stu-dents’ self-regulated learning abilities in GenAI environ-ments can be enhanced by external metacognitive sup-port [41] or integrating metacognitive support strategies [42], whereas an absence of such strategies has negative effects on learning outcomes [41]. In line with these findings, creating Intelligent Tutor-ing Systems (ITS) that facilitate metacognitive reflec-tion is an ongoing research area. ITS are particularly well fit for metacognitive focused education as they can tailor content to individual students. This is important as different learning styles play a crucial role in how stu-dents engage with content [43]. Consequently, adapting metacognitive strategies to students via ITS can facili-tate effective learning [43, 44]. While some studies did not find a significant impact of increasing metacognitive engagement in ITS on educational outcomes [45], most research suggests that metacognitive prompts can signif-icantly enhance learning [46] and the ability to seek help when needed [47]. A commonly used framework for metacognition in Schraw & Dennison’s [48] differentiation between metacognitive knowledge, the awareness of one’s think-ing, and metacognitive regulation, the ability to manage one’s own thinking processes. To investigate metacogni-tion rigorously, this framework will be used in the con-text of this work. 

Cognitive Offloading 

Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) provides another im-portant perspective for examining the role of GenAI in educational contexts [49]. It proposes that the human cognitive system has a finite capacity, and lowering cog-nitive load can improve both learning and performance while also reducing mental strain [5]. One way to achieve this is through cognitive offloading, which involves using external tools to lessen working memory demands which can consequently lead to greater learning gains [50]. For instance, Zhao et al. [51] showed that the introduction of GenAI can help students reduce the external cognitive load to some extent, freeing up more space for the pro-3cessing, construction, and automation of schemas. Fur-thermore, the ability to remember planned future ac-tions, known as prospective memory, can improve when individuals transfer or externalize their intentions [52]. This process of cognitive offloading is also strongly asso-ciated with metacognitive decision-making [52]. However, there are also potential downsides to cogni-tive offloading. While it can free up cognitive resources, there is concern that it may lead to a reduction in in-ternal cognitive abilities, such as memory retention and critical analysis skills [5]. For instance, drivers who use GPS initially navigate routes more efficiently than those without it, but they tend to drive more slowly on later attempts without GPS guidance [53]. This effect occurs because GPS use can disrupt the acquisition of spatial knowledge by diverting attention [54] and showcases the dual nature of cognitive offloading. In the case of AI tools and search engines, studies have shown that the mechanism of cognitive offloading can potentially dimin-ish memory retention and deep information processing [55, 56]. An issue that emerges as a significant concern re-garding cognitive offloading is that its associated costs may not be immediately apparent to those affected [57]. In GenAI environments, students may place unjustified trust in these technologies and the consequently acquired skills [39, 58]. This phenomenon of overtrust was also shown to lead to greater cognitive offloading, ultimately resulting in diminished critical thinking [58]. Taken to-gether, cognitive offloading presents both benefits and drawbacks for learning, underscoring the importance of a balanced approach to using GenAI in education, lever-aging the tool’s advantages while remaining mindful of the risks of over-reliance. 

Productive Failure 

Another crucial theoretical lens through which to view GenAI use in education is the productive failure frame-work. It emphasizes that permitting learners to engage in unstructured problem-solving and to experience strug-gle or failure before receiving elaborate explanation and scaffolding can positively influence learning outcomes [59]. It further emphasizes that we tend to learn more effectively from our own failed attempts than from oth-ers’ [60]. This framework differentiates between different types of learning: Productive failure refers to situations in which learners initially fail to solve a problem but gain valuable insights that enhance learning in the long run. In contrast, unproductive success describes cases where learners reach the right answer but without meaning-ful comprehension or transferable knowledge [61]. Illus-trating the practical importance of productive failure, a meta-study by Darabi et al. [62] could attest to moder-ately positive result for the effect of learning from failure. A number of cognitive explanations exist in the lit-erature for this phenomenon. For instance, DeCaro & Rittle-Johnson [63] and Schwartz et al. [64] argue that engagement in productive struggle may help to activate and differentiate relevant prior knowledge. In relation to CLT, Kapur [60] suggests that learning through produc-tive failure involves a balance between the negative im-pact of increased cognitive load and the positive effects of activating and differentiating prior knowledge, with the benefits outweighing the drawbacks as long as the cognitive load does not become overwhelming enough to cause learners to disengage. GenAI might take away this initial productive strug-gle as it positions information and correct solutions di-rectly at our fingertips. For instance, a student might directly query a generative AI model before even try-ing himself, resulting in unproductive success [65]. This is supported by contemporary research. For instance, a mixed-method study amongst 381 students could show that a subset of students superficially copied AI-outputs, being an example of unproductive success that limits students’ ability to engage in critical thinking and inde-pendent problem-solving [66]. This is particularly worri-some as many students do not possess the metacognitive awareness required to differentiate between effective and ineffective uses of AI support [35]. Regarding the chal-lenge of the over-reliance of students on AI for problem-solving, decision-making, and cognitive tasks [67, 68] research also suggests that fostering a problem-based learning environment where students are encouraged to first use analytical reasoning before turning to AI solu-tions can be beneficial [69], which directly aligns with the notion of productive failure. Importantly, no studies to date have directly investigated the relationship between productive failure and GenAI, highlighting a significant gap in the literature. While not directly investigating this gap, this study utilizes productive failure to inform pedagogically grounded GenAI use. Taken together, these pedagogical perspectives sug-gest that while GenAI can reduce cognitive load and support learning, premature access may encourage cog-nitive offloading and reduce metacognitive engagement. Conversely, allowing learners to initially struggle with a task can promote deeper understanding through pro-ductive failure. These findings suggest that the access timing to GenAI assistance may be a crucial factor de-termining whether generative AI supports or undermines learning. 42.3 Reinforcement Learning for Hint Giving in Education 

Reinforcement learning in educational contexts is an active and growing research area [70].Generally, RL is a machine learning paradigm in which an agent learns to make decisions through interaction with an environ-ment [71]. At each step, the agent observes the current state of the environment and selects an action accord-ing to a policy, which defines the agent’s strategy for choosing actions. After performing an action, the agent receives a reward signal that reflects the desirability of the outcome. Over time, the agent updates its policy to maximize the cumulative reward, allowing it to learn effective decision strategies through trial and error. It is used for a wide array of tasks in learning setting, among them informing hint giving [8]. For instance, previous research has explored multi-armed bandit (MAB) ap-proaches to deliver personalized explanations [72] and to optimize the sequencing of tasks [73]. Reinforcement learning was also demonstrated to be able to support Self-regulated learning (SRL), a concept closely related to metacognitive awareness [74]. While not including human participants, the study could show that RL techniques like Q-learning combined with ped-agogically grounded reward shaping could accurately learn strategies such as SRL. Furthermore, contem-porary research could demonstrate that reinforcement learning can be used to provide adaptive pedagogical support to students by adapting difficulty and feedback, ultimately enhancing the learning effect and real-time response ability [26, 75, 11]. Another approach is to leverage deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to provide metacognitive support that specifies when and how to use different learning strategies, which also significantly improves learning [46]. To utilize the advantages of GenAI in educational con-texts, we thus investigate how the timing of access to GenAI can be adaptively determined via RL-based steer-ing. This represents a novel perspective that, to our knowledge, has not yet been systematically explored in the context of adaptive educational support. This ap-proach enables a rigorous empirical evaluation of the im-pact of adaptive access timing on learning performance. 

3 DERIVATION OF HYPOTHESES 

Building on the theoretical frameworks above, we de-rive three hypotheses that operationalize our research questions into testable predictions. Common theories such as metacognitive theory [27], CLT [49] or the productive failure framework [59] sug-gest that the structuring of external assistance in learn-ing can significantly impact learning gains. We there-fore hypothesize that modelling these theories in the RL-agents reward function and consequently have them inform GenAI use could enhance objective learning out-comes. 

H1 : Learners interacting with an RL-based policy will achieve significantly higher learning outcomes, measured by performance on a standardized post-test of the target instructional content, than those with na¨ ıve baseline policies (always allow / never allow). Prior results by Fernandes et al. [40] suggest that GenAI use can negatively impact accuracy of self assess-ment. Based on these findings, we hypothesize that an RL approach can enhance this accuracy by only strate-gically allowing GenAI use. 

H2 : Learners interacting with an RL-based policy will show significantly higher metacognitive accuracy of their own post-test performance than those inter-acting with na¨ ıve baseline policies (always allow / never allow). Across past implementations of ITS, metacognitive guidance is generally explicit, requiring learners to ar-ticulate their thinking or engage in structured reflection [76, 47, 43]. However, emerging research suggests that implicit scaffolds, such as delaying assistance or structur-ing opportunities for productive struggle, can also influ-ence metacognitive regulation without directly prompt-ing reflection [60]. Motivated by this distinction, we investigate whether a minimal intervention, timing the availability of AI-based assistance, can support metacog-nitive engagement without relying on explicit reflective prompts. 

H3: Learners interacting with an RL-based policy will show significantly more positive change in self-reported metacognitive awareness of working with AI than those interacting with na¨ ıve baseline policies (al-ways allow / never allow). 

4 METHODS 4.1 Experimental Design 

To statistically evaluate the defined hypotheses we em-ployed a 3x1 factorial design using the policy type as an independent variable. The three conditions as illustrated in Figure 1 were (1) the RL agent decides at which point the learner should be allowed to use GenAI in the task, (2) the learner is never allowed to use GenAI, and (3) the learner is always allowed to use GenAI. The indi-vidual score in the task unassisted by GenAI after the unrelated activity, the alignment between this score and 5Figure 1: Visualization of Experiment Design the students self evaluation and the pre-post test differ-ence of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory for Ar-tificial Intelligence (MAI-AI) scales, a questionnaire to assess metacognitive awareness when working with AI, were treated as dependent variables. Additionally, time on each task, LLM logs and free text reflection on par-ticipant’s work with the system were collected for ex-ploratory and qualitative analysis. To avoid carry over effects, the experiment used a between-subject design. 

4.2 Materials The intelligent tutoring system 

Throughout the experiment, participants interacted with a custom-built Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) that integrates all procedural steps except the distractor task. The ITS design is inspired and significantly builds upon the system developed by Koch et al. [77]. It is implemented using an AngularJS architecture and de-ployed as a locally hosted web interface, which includes comprehensive logging functionalities for capturing all relevant interaction data. An example screenshot of the ITS is provided in Figure 7 in the Appendix. The exper-iment was run on standardized laboratory computers to mitigate confounding effects of using personally owned computers. All devices used identical desktop comput-ers running Windows with 23.8” screen sizes. The ITS was accessed via Google Chrome (v143.0.7499.40), and screen resolution was fixed at 1920 × 1080 pixels. 

Metacognitive awareness questionnaire (MAI-AI) 

The MAI-AI is a questionnaire to assess metacogni-tive awareness in relation to working with generative AI [78]. It comprises 19 items on a 5 point Likert scale dis-tributed across the two subscales knowledge of cognition 

and regulation of cognition . The instrument is derived from the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI) [48] and is currently under validation at Universitat Pompeu Fabra. The used version can be found in the additional material. 

Learning task 

A central problem many young adults in Europe face is the potentially negative influence of social media on their mental health and self-image. Studies by the Euro-pean Union could show that excessive social media usage (i.e. more than three hours per day) is associated with negative mental health outcomes, specifically depression and anxiety [79]. While the topic is highly relevant to students’ daily lives, Chung [80] found that young people had received very little formal instruction on how social media algo-rithms work during their secondary education, indicat-ing a lack of prior knowledge. Additionally, the topic strikes a balance between conceptual complexity and ac-cessibility, making it well suited for a text-based learning experience. Accordingly, the learning task revolves around the is-6sue of social media effects on self-image. To ensure its effectiveness, included content was adapted from ex-tensively tested workshops developed by the National Health Association (NHS) in the UK [81] and Canada’s Centre for Digital Media literacy [82]. Overall during their work with the learning environ-ment, participants have to complete three tasks, each consisting of a short text (approx. 650 words) on social media and self-image and three multiple choice questions concerning the text. Each multiple choice question has either two or three correct answers and after answered correctly unlocks the next multiple choice question. This is important for the RL-agent that assumes strictly lin-ear task completion for training purposes. To facilitate learning some information is repeated between tasks. The unassisted task after the work with the learning environment and completion of the distractor task also consists of nine similar multiple choice questions, with three each regarding the content of the previous tasks in the learning environment. However, here the order of completion does not matter. 

AI systems 

The RL agent utilizes Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [83] to learn a policy that determines when stu-dents should be allowed to use GenAI during the learn-ing task. PPO is a reinforcement learning algorithm de-signed to find an optimal policy in a sequential decision-making framework, typically formalized as a Markov De-cision Process (MDP) which is commonly defined as: 

M = ( S, A, P, R ) (1) where: 

• S is the set of states all possible states s. In our case all s ∈ S are four-tuple that hold: 

– sf a : The failed attempts on current question 

– st: The time on the current task 

– sgai : A tuple that for each previous task holds a boolean describing whether GenAI was used or not 

– scu : Current understanding defined as the number of failed attempts on the current task (aggregated version of sf a )

• A is the sets of actions the agent can perform. In our case the action space is a set of two possible actions A =

{”allow AI usage” , ”continue denying GenAI usage” }

• P : S × A → ∆( S), P (st+1 | st, a t) can conceptually be understood as the probability that action a in state s at time t will lead to state s′ at time t + 1. 

• R : S × A → R is a function that, given a state, action pair outputs the reward the agent gets. In our case it is defined as: 

R(s, a ) = Rsuccess +Rtime +RMT +RPF +RCLT (2) The components are conceptually explained in Ta-ble 1 For a complete formal definition please refer to the Appendix. Only the reward for the chosen action is observed, which guides learning toward desirable behaviour [71]. For each of the three learning tasks, the agent decides at which point, if any, participants are granted access to GenAI. Once access is granted for a given task, it remains available until the subsequent task begins. To train the agent, we simulate student behaviour us-ing Bayesian Knowledge Tracing (BKT) [84] with the KT-IDEM [85] and multiple retake extension [86]. The model parameters are drawn from a truncated normal distribution centred on estimates derived from a pilot study (n=9). This allows the agent to interact with re-alistic student models and learn policies that generalize across diverse learner profiles. Post-hoc analysis revealed that assumptions of model parameters generalized rea-sonably well to initial parameter assumptions. Through iterative PPO updates on these simulated interactions, the agent learns a policy that maximizes long-term expected learning gains. Findings reveal that in the given context PPO outperforms similar algorithms like Deep Q-Networks (DQN) [87] and Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) [88]. Illustrations of BKT parameter comparison, concrete reward parameters used, and the comparison of PPO with DQN and A2C can be found in the additional ma-terial. The GenAI available to participants for use within the learning environment is the Mistral 3 14B 2512 LLM [89], accessed via the OpenRouter API [90]. This model developed by Mistral was chosen for several rea-sons. First, it demonstrates strong performance on instruction-following and text comprehension tasks rela-tive to its size. Additionally, Mistral due to its location in Europe is subject to EU data protection regulations, facilitating GDPR compliance in the handling of partic-ipant data. 

Distractor task 

A distractor task was introduced during the retention interval to prevent students from relying on short-term memory for the following unassisted task. Specifically, participants engaged in a collaborative drawing activ-ity inspired by and functionally similar to [91] in which each student added to a drawing and then passed the pa-per to the next person. The task directs students’ focus 7Table 1: Reward components and their pedagogical grounding 

Component Grounding Effect 

Rsucc Learning goals Rewards task completion 

Rtime Efficiency Penalizes long trajectories 

RMT Metacognition [31, 30] Rewards alternating AI use 

RPF Productive failure [59, 62] Rewards post-struggle access 

RCLT Cognitive load [50] Penalizes premature access away from the study content, ensuring that later recall reflects long-term retention rather than lingering short-term memory traces. Pilot testing confirmed that the drawing-exchange activity was engaging and attention-demanding, making it suitable as a distractor task for this purpose. The distractor task is provided in the ad-ditional material. 

4.3 Participants 

Overall, 109 voluntary participants were recruited via email chains to undergraduate groups, poster advertise-ment and personal connections. However, some data was removed due to insufficient quality resulting in N=105 participants, as described in section 4.6. The singular inclusion criterion was that participants were aged be-tween 18 and 65 years to comply with ethical standards. However, the majority of participants was composed of students due to the recruitment channels. Participants were aged between 18 and 39 ( M =20.5, SD =2.91). For an overview of the demographic information of partici-pants gender and education in accordance to the newest International Standard Classification of Education 2011 (ISCED; [92]) please refer to Table 2 and 3 respectively. Table 2: Gender distribution of participants 

Gender No. of participants 

Female 60 Male 45 Diverse 0Table 3: Highest education distribution of participants 

Highest education No. of participants 

Upper secondary education 14 Bachelor or equivalent 83 Master or equivalent 8Different 0

4.4 Procedure 

The experiment took place in 9 workshop sessions with 8 to 21 participants per sessions ( M =12.33, SD =5.07), which can be considered a controlled lab environment. After arriving and providing informed consent, partic-ipants first completed the MAI-AI pretest. They were then assigned to one of the three experimental conditions (all participants in each session were assigned the same condition to keep completion time approximately equal between them). Next, they worked through three tasks, each consisting of a text followed by three multiple-choice questions. To ensure that participants actively engaged with GenAI when it was available in the RL and Always condition, they were explicitly and strongly verbally encouraged at the beginning of the study by the experimenter to use AI in any manner they consid-ered helpful when available (e.g., for translation, copy-pasting questions, or seeking clarification). After com-pleting these tasks, participants reached a password gate that remained locked until everyone in the session had finished the distractor task. Once the gate was unlocked, they proceeded to the unassisted task, which consisted of nine multiple-choice questions. For each of these questions, participants rated whether they believe they answered correctly and then completed the MAI-AI post test. Finally, they were in-vited to answer an optional open-ended question about their subjective experience of working with the system which concluded the experiment. In total, participants spent between 34.81 and 74.08 minutes in the study ( M = 54.39, SD = 6.24). 

4.5 Measures and Operational Definitions 

The objective learning performance of participants was assessed as the number of correctly answered multiple-choice questions in the unassisted task. After completion of data collection, an error was identified in one question which was subsequently excluded from the analysis. This exclusion did not affect the statistical va-lidity of the study. Overall, the objective score could thus range from zero to eight. No points were deducted for false answers. For each multiple-choice question, par-ticipants assessed whether they think they answered cor-8rectly or not. Their metacognitive accuracy was calcu-lated as the number of questions for which participants’ judgments matched their actual performance (i.e. iden-tifying correct answers as correct and incorrect answers as incorrect), and could thus also range from zero to eight. To further differentiate between overconfidence and underconfidence, a signed metacognitive accuracy score was computed as the difference between the num-ber of answers judged as correct and the number of an-swers actually answered correctly. Generally, positive values indicate overconfidence, whereas negative values indicate underconfidence. This measure was included for exploratory analyses. To assess metacognitive awareness in the context of working with AI, the MAI-AI questionnaire was em-ployed [78]. As the instrument consisted of items rated on a 5-point Likert scale, the mean score for each of the two subscales, as well as for the total questionnaire, was used to assess metacognitive awareness. Accordingly, fi-nal scores ranged from one to five. The questionnaire was administered using a pre–post design, enabling the sys-tematic assessment of changes in metacognitive aware-ness associated with the different experimental condi-tions. Additionally, behavioural indicators such as the num-ber of AI requests, their content, and the time on indi-vidual tasks was recorded for exploratory and qualitative analysis. 

4.6 Data Analysis Plan 

To evaluate the proposed hypotheses, multiple statis-tical tests were conducted. For H1 and H2, pairwise independent-samples t-tests were used, with experimental condition as the indepen-dent variable and individual task score (unassisted by AI) and unsigned metacognitive accuracy as the respec-tive dependent variables. The primary contrasts of in-terest were RL vs. Never and RL vs. Always. To test H3, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was con-ducted to assess whether experimental condition influ-enced change in metacognitive reflection, while control-ling for pre-test MAI-AI score as a covariate. Analyses were performed separately for the two MAI-AI subscales (knowledge of cognition and regulation of cognition ). To ensure only attentive and accurate responses were cap-tured participants were excluded from this analysis if their MAI-AI responses met any of the following crite-ria: (1) straight-lining ( >75% identical answers), (2) ex-treme responding ( >75% of answers scored 1 or 5), or (3) low response variance ( <0.5 SD). Overall, 14 partic-ipants were thus not considered in the analysis of H3. Additionally, data was excluded if a participant dropped out during the course of the experiment or failed to answer any of the questions in the unassisted task correctly, resulting in the exclusion of 4 participants and N=105. Consistent with contemporary research standards, an 

α-threshold of 0.05 was applied. As H3 was tested across multiple MAI-AI factors as well as the overall MAI-AI score, a Bonferroni correction was applied to control for the increased risk of Type I error. In contrast, no correc-tion was applied for H1 and H2, as these only involved theory-driven comparisons between the intervention and control groups. 

4.7 Ethical Considerations 

This study received institutional ethics approval from the Universitat Pompeu Fabra ethics review body (CIREP; approval number 452). All participants pro-vided informed consent digitally before taking part in the study and were informed about the study purpose, procedures, use of AI, and their rights as participants. Participation was voluntary, and individuals could with-draw at any time without penalty. All collected data was handled confidentially, pseudonymized at the point of collection, and stored on secure university servers with access restricted to the research team. Only anonymized data is reported or shared for scientific reuse. 

5 RESULTS 5.1 Descriptive Analysis 

The final sample consisted of N = 105 participants. Participants were assigned to the Always condition (n = 36), RL condition (n = 37), and Never condition (n = 32). Overall, there were no significant differences in the highest educational level, χ2(4) = 5.81, p = .213, or age across conditions, F (2, 102) = 0.27, p = .763. However, a 

χ2 test of independence showed that gender distribution significantly differed across conditions, χ2(2) = 7.82, p

= .020. In subsequent analyses, results controlling for gender are reported only when they differ in significance from the unadjusted analyses. Internal consistency for the MAI-AI survey was as-sessed using Cronbach’s α. For the total scale, α was .90, indicating excellent internal consistency. The knowl-edge of cognition subscale demonstrated fair reliability, with α = .78, while the regulation of cognition subscale demonstrated good reliability with α = .86. These re-sults confirm that the MAI-AI items consistently mea-sure a coherent underlying construct, supporting the in-ternal validity of the instrument. Descriptive statistics for objective post-test perfor-mance, metacognitive accuracy and self-reported MAI-AI gains are presented in Table 4. Means and standard deviations are shown separately for each experimental 9condition (RL, Never, Always), allowing additional com-parison of signed accuracy, MAI-AI subscales gains, av-erage time on task, and total AI requests across groups. Prior to analysis, Levene’s test confirmed homogeneity of variances of objective performance and metacognitive accuracy across conditions, and normality was assumed via the Central Limit Theorem given group sizes exceed-ing 30 [93]. Additionally, homogeneity of variances and regression slopes were confirmed regarding the MAI-AI scores. 

5.2 Quantitative Analysis 

Results indicated that participants in the RL con-dition significantly outperformed those in the Always condition regarding objective post-test scores , t(71) = 2.51, p = .014, d = 0.59, as visualized in Figure 2. However, there was no significant differ-ence in post-test scores between the RL and the Never condition, t(67) = -0.30, p = .762, d = -0.07. We thus partially accept H1. 

Figure 2: Boxplot comparison of the objective post-test scores Additionally as shown in Figure 3, the data reveals that participants in the RL condition exhibit significantly higher metacognitive accuracy than those in the Always condition , t(71) = 2.32, p =.023, d = 0.54. On the other hand, there was no signif-icant difference in metacognitive accuracy between the RL and the Never condition, t(67) = 0.29, p = .769, d =0.07. Therefore, we partially accept H2. Separate one-way ANCOVAs were conducted to exam-ine the effect of intervention condition on MAI-AI factors and overall metacognitive gain, controlling for pre-test MAI-AI scores. After adjusting for pre-test scores, the effect of condition was not significant for knowledge of 

Figure 3: Boxplot comparison of the metacognitive ac-curacy cognition gain, F (2, 87) = 0.39, p = .678, η2 

> p

= 0.01, regulation of cognition gain, F (2, 87) = 0.86, p = .427, 

η2 

> p

= 0.02, and overall metacognitive gains, F (2, 87) = 0.86, p = .425, η2 

> p

= 0.02. We thus reject H3. In addition to the analysis of the hypothesis, an ex-ploratory analysis was conducted to examine differences in both the average completion time per question and the average number of mistakes per question. Results indi-cated that there was no significant difference between the RL and Always conditions in terms of the average number of mistakes per question, t(71) = 0.68, p = .498, 

d = 0.16. However, participants in the RL condition made significantly fewer mistakes than those in the Never condition , t(67) = 2.05, p = .047, d = 0.51, potentially reducing frustration. This effect is not statis-tically significant anymore after controlling for gender, b

= 0.46, p = .513. Furthermore, participants in the RL condition took marginally significantly less time per question than those in the Never condi-tion , t(67) = 1.94, p = .058, d = 0.47. After controlling for gender, this difference was no longer significant, b =2.74, p = .769. No significant difference was observed in average time per question between the RL and Always conditions, t(71) = 0.37, p = .714, d = 0.09. 

5.3 Qualitative Analysis 

Beyond the quantitative analysis, we examined the qualitative material gathered through inductive the-matic analysis [94]. This process involved reviewing the text participants submitted as prompts within the chat-bot, as well as their answers to the concluding open-ended question about their experience with the system. The analysis followed multiple iterative stages and was 10 Table 4: Descriptive statistics of relevant variables 

Always ( M , SD ) RL ( M , SD ) Never ( M , SD )

Objective post-test score (0-8) 4.03, 1.83 5.11, 1.85 5.25 , 2.00 Accuracy (0-8) 5.17, 1.36 5.95 , 1.51 5.84, 1.37 Signed accuracy 1.28, 1.68 0.92 , 1.59 1.34, 1.54 Knowledge of cognition gain 0.03, 0.43 0.09, 0.53 0.12 , 0.33 Regulation of cognition gain -0.04, 0.48 -0.01, 0.52 0.08 , 0.32 Combined metacognitive gain -0.01, 0.40 0.03, 0.48 0.09 , 0.27 Average time on task (in min) 2.19 , 0.57 2.24, 0.57 2.56, 0.77 Total AI requests 11.25, 6.42 2.46, 3.20 0.00, 0.00 carried out by the first author by hand. Initially, both the prompts and the open-ended responses were sys-tematically coded, identifying recurring terms, phrases, and underlying ideas. This process relied on induc-tive codes (emerging directly from the data, e.g., ”Lazi-ness/Dependence on AI”). Related codes were subse-quently grouped into broader, overarching organizing themes which in turn were grouped into global themes. To support this process, a thematic map was created to visualize and clarify the connections among themes and to guide their refinement. The resulting thematic structure and the full codebook are provided in the ad-ditional material. Finally, these themes were integrated into a cohesive narrative that brings together the key in-sights from the analysis. During the whole process, spe-cial attention was paid to how the distribution of themes differed between conditions. 

GenAI Usage Between Conditions 

Overall, the usage distribution of GenAI differed strongly between the RL and Always condition. First of all, 43.2% in the RL condition did never use AI either because the agent did not think it necessary to allow us-age or because they deliberately choose not to. This is strongly opposed to the Always condition, where all par-ticipants used GenAI at least once. The remaining dis-tribution of usage patterns excluding participants who never used GenAI is visualized in Figure 4. While both conditions exhibit a similar likelihood to use clarifying prompts or translation approaches, partic-ipants in the RL condition seem more likely to simply copy-paste questions. However, they did so more se-lectively than participants in the Always condition and rarely copy-pasted more than one multiple-choice ques-tion by task. Another key point is that participants in the Always condition used summarization prompts while users in the RL condition never relied on it. This is most likely due to participants in the RL condition being forced to read the text before eventually gaining access to GenAI thus already knowing and engaging with its content rendering summarizing prompts useless. 

Figure 4: Comparison of GenAI usage patterns across conditions. Note that bars may not sum to 100% as participants could use multiple strategies. 

Sentiment Towards the Own Condition 

Regarding the self-reflection prompts which asked about the perceived usefulness of the GenAI used in the corresponding condition, participants both reported benefits and detrimental effects of using GenAI in accor-dance to their condition. The distribution of the senti-ment of the responses is visualized in Figure 5. Anno-tation was done by two independent reviewers reaching substantial agreement (Cohen’s κ = .75). Conflicts were resolved through discussions. 

Perceived Benefits of Using GenAI 

Many participants in the RL condition noted that ”it was helpful to have [access to] the AI assistant after ’fail-ing’ [...] a few times, to not get frustrated and lose track” (RL condition) . This importance of initial failure 

was consistently highlighted throughout this condition as one other participant put it as ”It was [...] super use-ful to just have the AI assistance after failing because that is the whole point of learning, we need to fail to be able to learn and this enhances thinking” (RL condition) .Another crucial point that was perceived as beneficial in the RL condition was the motivation to try tasks by 

11 Figure 5: Comparison of sentiment towards the own con-dition between groups. 

oneself first . One participant noted that ”the positive aspect of having AI assistance only sometimes, is that you have to [...] read the text [...] first, understand it and then, if you have the assistance of AI, you can use it to support what you already learnt” (RL condition) . An-other participant noted that ”not having AI at all times forced me to try to work out the answers [...] before searching any type of aid” (RL condition) but then also having access to GenAI ”when I was stuck on a ques-tion, so I [...] would not get frustrated” (RL condition) .The potential benefit of this technique was even noted in other conditions as one participant in the Always con-dition stated that ”AI need[s] to learn how to help the user [and] notify them that he/she needs the artificial in-telligence too much” (Always condition) . Overall, some users also indicated a sustainable long-term effect of us-ing GenAI in this way and that ”at the end of the ex-periment [their] opinion on AI has changes and in the future [they] will try to use it in a more responsible way” (RL condition) .Beyond the perceived benefits in the RL condition par-ticipants noted a general desire to use AI indepen-dent of condition: ”I believe [AI] improved my learning routine a lot” (Always condition) . However, this desire was described as contextually dependent and one user put it as: ”Maybe I would have used generative AI if this was another setting, like if I was alone in my room, and this questionnaire had a pressing delivery date” (Never condition) .A primary driver for this desire across conditions was the ability to save time : ”I think the work [with the] system is interesting, since being able to use [such] tools [...] saves you a lot of time.” (RL condition) . Along the same line participants also reported that ”[AI] has been really useful to not get blocked” (Always condition) .However, this was not always seen as a positive aspect and some users did not think that in the given task ”gen-erative AI would be useful in order to learn [about] the content. It would just make the process of answering questions faster” (Never condition) .

Perceived Pitfalls of Using GenAI 

Concerning the detrimental effects of using GenAI during the experiment many users cited laziness and dependence on the system as a primary concern. Particularly in the Always condition participants noted that working with GenAI has made them ”more depen-dent” (Always condition) and ”lazier than before” (Al-ways condition) . Another user noted that ”I use the AI to finish fast and I know it, so if I want to learn I have to force myself to not use it” (Always condition) .Another key point noted in the RL and Always con-dition was that perceived usefulness degraded over time in some instances. For example, one participant stressed that ”in the beginning it helped me but over time, when I was getting tired and I felt pressured to finish fast [...], it hindered my learning since I started believing AI without checking if [its answer] was stated in the text” (Always condition) .Overall, participants in the RL and Always condi-tions highlighted the subjective feeling of diminished learning when using GenAI. Users consistently noted, that ”I think that AI hindered my learning because later I wasn’t sure about any question” (Always condition) and that ”[GenAI] just gives a simple answer, not deep un-derstanding. So I have to use it carefully” (RL condi-tion) . Especially ”the possibility [to] just ask for the right answer” (RL condition) was seen as a primary reason for this. Finally, it is also noteworthy that particularly in the RL condition the danger of easiness to game the sys-tem was noted by some participants, as for instance one of them indicated that ”once I knew [GenAI] will [be available] after some wrong answers. I was tempted to answer wrong purposely to get [access to the GenAI] es-pecially when I didn ´t want to do the thinking on my own” (RL condition) .

6 DISCUSSION 

The present study investigated whether pedagogically grounded timing of access to GenAI, implemented via an RL-based agent trained on reward signals informed by metacognitive theory, cognitive offloading, and pro-ductive failure, can meaningfully outperform naive base-lines in supporting learning outcomes and metacogni-tive development. A consistent pattern emerged across primary and exploratory analyses: strategically timed GenAI access improved objective post-test performance and metacognitive accuracy compared to unrestricted 12 access, while reducing task errors and time on task rel-ative to complete withholding, all without requiring ex-plicit metacognitive prompting or structured scaffolding. Qualitative findings reinforce this picture, with partici-pants in the RL condition responding most positively to their learning experience and spontaneously articu-lating the value of initial struggle. The one exception to this pattern was self-reported metacognitive aware-ness, where no significant between-condition differences emerged. Taken together, these results position the tim-ing of GenAI access as a meaningful and theoretically grounded pedagogical method that preserves the cogni-tive benefits of productive struggle while mitigating the risks of unrestricted AI reliance to ultimately outperform both baseline conditions and enhance learning gains. The results show clear signs that grounding the de-cision of when to use AI in pedagogical principles can significantly enhance objective learning gains, over hav-ing unrestricted access. This illustrates that, beyond external self-evaluation prompts, planning support [43] and metacognitive prompts [95, 41] simply timing the access to GenAI can already enhance learning. Impor-tantly this also works on unscaffolded naive tools like for instance off-the-shelf LLMs like Mistral or Claude. Ac-cording to qualitative findings this improvement may be due to the ability to ask clarifying questions, understand answers deeply and translate content providing targeted individualized support. These results further align with recent findings that independent work before LLM use can be beneficial for critical thinking given sufficient time on the task [12]. Furthermore, the same intervention that improved learning also recalibrated metacognitive accuracy, sug-gesting these aren’t independent effects. Past research by Fernandes et al. [40] highlighted that users are un-able to accurately assess their performance when using GenAI when compared to not relying on it. While re-producing this finding, our results strongly indicate that only strategically allowing the use of GenAI recalibrates cognition and performance leading to similar outcomes when compared to never using GenAI. According to the productive failure framework [59], this alignment may be due to understanding a task thoroughly on ones own and failing before receiving structured support, leading to an increased understanding of ones own skills. While strategically allowing GenAI access could thus clearly improve over unrestricted access, it also had sig-nificant benefits over complete withholding. For in-stance, participants in the RL condition made signifi-cantly fewer mistakes than the ones with fully restricted access. Qualitative findings further indicate that this re-duced frustration in learners. Through the lens of cogni-tive load and productive failure this finding aligns with Kapur’s observation that productive struggle enhances learning only insofar as cognitive load and frustration remains manageable and does not cause learners to dis-engage entirely [60]. Additionally, participants in the RL intervention re-quired marginally less time per task than learners with-out access to GenAI. While this result should be inter-preted with caution, it is in line with findings by Noy & Zhang [2]. At first glance, such acceleration may appear beneficial. However, some research suggests that it may bypass important cognitive processes that typically oc-cur during slower, more deliberate learning by offloading them to GenAI [96]. However, given that the objective post-test scores were approximately equal between the RL and Never conditions, this interpretation seems un-likely in the present case and rather a reflection of higher learning efficiency. Qualitative analysis further revealed that selective ac-cess to GenAI was viewed by participants as most posi-tive. Participants in the RL condition valued the impor-tance of initial failure and the motivation to try tasks by oneself first. This aligns well with the used pedagog-ical principles of productive failure and cognitive load theory. Furthermore, learners with unrestricted access commonly talked about feelings of laziness and depen-dence on the GenAI system, supporting the notion of metacognitive laziness [35] and external reliance [36, 39] commonly discussed in literature. Overall, the results thus indicate that strategic tim-ing of GenAI access via the RL condition outperforms both unrestricted and fully restricted access. This points to the importance of integrating pedagogical insights with human-AI interaction in education [23]. Especially, when combined with other scaffolding mechanisms such as metacognitive prompting or adaptive feedback strate-gic access timing could therefore lead to deeper and more durable learning gains. However, it should be noted that as common for scaffolding techniques surrounding reflec-tive GenAI usage final learning outcomes also partly de-pend on the quality of the underlying LLM. If the model provides low-quality or misleading responses when access is granted, the pedagogical benefit of strategic timing may be weakened. Results showed no between-group differences regard-ing metacognitive knowledge and regulation as assessed by the pre-post test of the MAI-AI. There could be a number of reasons for this finding. First, using self-assessment tests for metacognitive measurements is widely criticized in literature as metacognitive knowl-edge and regulation is often not adequately related to metacognitive behaviour [97]. Additionally, research suggests that we may hold inaccurate beliefs about our metacognitive monitoring capacity [98], further reduc-ing the effectiveness of self-assessment measures. These results might thus represent more of a design insight, in-13 forming future work, than a limitation. Another reason could be that students simply did not engage more in metacognitive reflection in the RL condition than in the Never and Always condition beyond a recalibration of cognition and performance. This raises the question of to what degree the findings can be interpreted through the lens of metacognition. A final option concerns the fact that even though the MAI-AI shows good internal reliability and was used in previous studies [78] it still awaits validation. While the high internal consistency indicates that the items measure a coherent construct, it does not guarantee that the instrument accurately cap-tures the intended dimensions of metacognitive knowl-edge and regulation. It is therefore possible that the null results of H3 partly reflect limitations of the instru-ment rather than a true absence of between-condition differences. 

6.1 Implications 

The finding that strategically timed access to GenAI outperforms both unrestricted and fully restricted ac-cess offers strong empirical support for access timing as a novel and effective mechanism to scaffold learning with minimal invasiveness. Taken together with the recalibra-tion of metacognitive accuracy in the RL condition, this suggests that some dimensions of metacognitive benefit may emerge without explicit and structured prompting, as commonly assumed in ITS research. Additionally, the results offer support for the intersection of cognitive of-floading and productive failure. They also suggest that the core ideas of the productive failure framework which was originally developed for a non-AI context retains its expressiveness when applied to GenAI timing decisions, extending its theoretical scope. Finally, the null-results on changes in metacognitive engagement together with the increase in metacognitive accuracy raise a theoreti-cally important question about the relationship between metacognitive accuracy and metacognitive awareness as potentially distinct constructs. For educators and instructional designers the results suggest that simply adapting the timing of access to GenAI, without requiring additional infrastructure or ex-plicit pedagogical prompting, can meaningfully improve learning outcomes and self-assessment accuracy. This is a low-cost easily traceable intervention that is compat-ible with off-the-shelf tools like Claude or Gemini, that can be readily deployed in classrooms without requir-ing custom-built AI systems. For policymakers navigat-ing the educational landscape the results advice against full restrictions or unrestricted access as viable defaults but rather advocate for a balanced approach that al-lows educators to strategically use GenAI when peda-gogically desirable. For developers these results empiri-cally demonstrate that a RL agent trained on a pedagog-ically grounded reward function with simulated student data can learn meaningful access policies, thus offering a traceable framework to integrate similar mechanisms into existing platforms. 

6.2 Limitations 

Nevertheless, this study suffers from a number of lim-itations. First, the student modelling to simulate data was based on limited interactions (n=9) and post-hoc reestimation revealed moderate deviations for some pa-rameters and skills. However, these selective differences had minimal effect on the learned policy as the dominant role of pedagogical reward shaping and the use of trun-cated normal sampling during training buffered the pol-icy against moderate parameter misspecification, as evi-denced by the significant between-group effects observed. Second, the majority of participants spoke a Romance language other than English as their first language, while the experiment itself was conducted in English, poten-tially leading to a language bias. Third, this study only investigates the temporary use of the system and does not longitudinally track learning over a prolonged period of time. This is particularly noteworthy as a closer famil-iarity with the system might lead to learners being able to game the system and adapt their behaviour to gain faster access to GenAI. Fourth, qualitative data analysis is inherently subject to interpreter bias. Even though measures were taken through the development of a the-matic map, extensive code book, and measurements of inter-rater reliability the possibility for self-serving and confirmation bias, particularly regarding the sentiment of participants towards their own condition, remains. Finally, the learning tasks in this study concerned one specific topic (social media and mental health) and text comprehension, potentially limiting how far findings can be extended to other content areas or skill types. 

6.3 Future Work 

Building on the findings and limitations of this study, future work should employ ablation studies to investi-gate which components of the pedagogically grounded reward function and thus pedagogical theories were pri-marily responsible for the observed effects. Additionally, given the established importance of intrinsic motivation in GenAI-mediated learning, subsequent research could move beyond metacognitive awareness as the primary outcome measure and explicitly monitor motivational dynamics across different access timing conditions. Fur-thermore, replicating and extending these findings be-yond controlled laboratory environments for instance, in classroom settings over longer time horizons would sub-stantially strengthen the ecological validity and practi-14 cal transferability of the results. Finally investigating how teachers can facilitate these findings and co-develop appropriate tools could further increase the impact of findings while keeping humans in the loop. 

7 CONCLUSION 

The present study shows that pedagogically grounded timing of access to GenAI, implemented via an RL-based agent utilizing reward shaping derived from metacogni-tive theory, cognitive load theory, and productive failure, can meaningfully outperform naive baselines by simply timing GenAI access during learning. We show how the system improves objective performance and metacogni-tive accuracy compared to unrestricted access, while also reducing errors and time on task compared to complete withholding access. These findings imply that educators do not necessarily need to rely on complex scaffolding techniques but that a pedagogically grounded decision of when to allow access already represents a low-cost, scalable solution that facilitates learning. This opens up a new research area for how this method can be facil-itated by educators to improve long-term learning and practically implemented in intelligent tutoring systems. Ultimately, these results suggest that the challenge of in-tegrating GenAI into education may not lie in restricting it, but in learning when to allow it. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Special thanks are attributed to Batuhan Sayis for his assistance in receiving the ethics approval. 

Funding 

This work was supported by the Spanish Re-search Agency (AEI) under PID2023-146692OB-C33 and 2023-26 CEX2021-001195-M by MI-CIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. DHL (Serra H´ unter) acknowledges support by ICREA Academia. 

Additional Material 

Additional material can be found on OSF under 

https://osf.io/ezs3b/overview?view_only=c3f862 c43eb641aa83053c47e69c60ea .Additionally, the code for the tutoring system, can be found on GitHub under 

https://github.com/Janne-ro/learning-when-to-h elp.git .

Generative AI Use 

This paper was developed with support from genera-tive AI (ChatGPT-5.1 and Claude Sonnet 4.6) for gram-mar and stylistic polishing during document refinement. While the authors initially wrote all of it, directed the whole process and made all critical revisions, the AI’s stylistic input is woven throughout. All changes made by the AI were minor and reviewed by the human au-thor. The authors take full responsibility for the content of this manuscript. 

References 

[1] Davinia Hern´ andez-Leo et al. “Collaborating with generative AI for learning?” In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning-CSCL . Interna-tional Society of the Learning Sciences. 2025, pp. 525–533. doi : 10.22318/cscl2025.882858 .[2] Shakked Noy and Whitney Zhang. “Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative artificial intelligence”. In: Science 381.6654 (2023), pp. 187–192. doi : https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.adh2586 .[3] Lixiang Yan et al. “Promises and challenges of generative artificial intelligence for human learn-ing”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 8.10 (2024), pp. 1839–1850. doi : 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 024 -02004-5 .[4] Digital Education Council. Global AI Student Sur-vey 2024 . Tech. rep. Accessed: 2025-10-27. Digi-tal Education Council, 2024. url : https://www. digitaleducationcouncil.com/post/digital-education - council - global - ai - student -survey-2024 .[5] Michael Gerlich. “AI tools in society: Impacts on cognitive offloading and the future of critical think-ing”. In: Societies 15.1 (2025), p. 6. doi : 10.3390/ soc15010006 .[6] OECD. OECD Digital Education Outlook 2026: Exploring Effective Uses of Generative AI in Ed-ucation . Paris: OECD Publishing, 2026. doi : 10. 1787/062a7394-en .[7] Weng Marc Lim et al. “Generative AI and the future of education: Ragnar¨ ok or reformation? A paradoxical perspective from management educa-tors”. In: The international journal of management education 21.2 (2023), p. 100790. doi : 10.1016/ j.ijme.2023.100790 .[8] Bisni Fahad Mon et al. “Reinforcement learning in education: A literature review”. In: Informat-ics . Vol. 10. 3. MDPI. 2023, p. 74. doi : 10.3390/ informatics10030074 .15 [9] Tung Phung et al. “Plan More, Debug Less: Apply-ing Metacognitive Theory to AI-Assisted Program-ming Education”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer. 2025, pp. 3–17. [10] Boxuan Ma, Li Chen, and Shin’ichi Konomi. “En-hancing programming education with ChatGPT: A case study on student perceptions and inter-actions in a Python course”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education .Springer. 2024, pp. 113–126. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-64315-6_9 .[11] Yan Li and Wai Yie Leong. “Improvement of AI-driven deep knowledge tracing algorithms”. In: 

2024 International Conference on Intelligent Ed-ucation and Intelligent Research (IEIR) . IEEE. 2024, pp. 1–6. doi : 10 . 1109 / IEIR62538 . 2024 . 10959805 .[12] Jiayin Zhi, Harsh Kumar, and Mina Lee. “Inves-tigating the effects of LLM use on critical think-ing under time constraints: Access timing and time availability”. In: Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .2026, pp. 1–21. doi : 10.1145/3772318.3791796 .[13] Romain Puech et al. “Towards the pedagogical steering of large language models for tutoring: A case study with modeling productive failure”. In: 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03781 (2024). [14] Jussi S Jauhiainen and Agustin Garagorry Guerra. “Generative AI in education: ChatGPT-4 in evalu-ating students’ written responses”. In: Innovations in Education and Teaching International 62.4 (2025), pp. 1377–1394. doi : 10.1080/14703297. 2024.2422337 .[15] ´Alvaro Becerra et al. “A generative AI-based per-sonalized guidance tool for enhancing the feedback to MOOC learners”. In: 2024 IEEE Global Engi-neering Education Conference (EDUCON) . IEEE. 2024, pp. 1–8. doi : 10.1109/EDUCON60312.2024. 10578809 .[16] Ruijia Li et al. “Generating contextualized math-ematics multiple-choice questions utilizing large language models”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education . Springer. 2024, pp. 494–501. doi : 10.1007/978- 3- 031- 64315-6_48 .[17] Rushil Thareja et al. “EDEN: Enhanced Database Expansion in eLearning: A Method for Automated Generation of Academic Videos”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education .Springer. 2024, pp. 400–408. doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-64315-6_37 .[18] Thanaporn Patikorn and Neil T Heffernan. “Effec-tiveness of crowd-sourcing on-demand assistance from teachers in online learning platforms”. In: 

Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale . 2020, pp. 115–124. doi : 10 . 1145/3386527.3405912 .[19] John Stamper et al. “Experimental evaluation of automatic hint generation for a logic tutor”. In: 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 22.1-2 (2013), pp. 3–17. doi : 10.3233/ JAI-130029 .[20] Korinn Ostrow and Neil Heffernan. “Testing the multimedia principle in the real world: a compar-ison of video vs. text feedback in authentic mid-dle school math assignments”. In: Educational data mining 2014 . 2014. [21] Avraham N Kluger and Angelo DeNisi. “The ef-fects of feedback interventions on performance: a historical review, a meta-analysis, and a prelimi-nary feedback intervention theory”. In: Psycholog-ical bulletin 119.2 (1996), p. 254. [22] David Baidoo-Anu and Leticia Owusu Ansah. “Ed-ucation in the era of generative artificial intelli-gence (AI): Understanding the potential benefits of ChatGPT in promoting teaching and learning”. In: Journal of AI 7.1 (2023), pp. 52–62. doi : 10. 61969/jai.1337500 .[23] Uday Mittal et al. “A comprehensive review on generative AI for education”. In: Ieee Access 12 (2024), pp. 142733–142759. doi : 10.1109/ACCESS. 2024.3468368 .[24] Michail Giannakos et al. “The promise and chal-lenges of generative AI in education”. In: Be-haviour & Information Technology 44.11 (2025), pp. 2518–2544. doi : 10 . 1080 / 0144929X . 2024 . 2394886 .[25] David Wood, Jerome S Bruner, and Gail Ross. “The role of tutoring in problem solving”. In: Jour-nal of child psychology and psychiatry 17.2 (1976), pp. 89–100. [26] Cheng Feng. “Application Research on Intelligent Teaching Feedback System Based on Reinforce-ment Learning Algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the 2024 3rd International Conference on Artificial In-telligence and Education . 2024, pp. 563–566. doi :

10.1145/3722237.3722336 .[27] John H Flavell. “Metacognition and cognitive mon-itoring: A new area of cognitive–developmental inquiry”. In: American psychologist 34.10 (1979), p. 906. doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.34.10.906 .16 [28] Sajna Jaleel and P Premachandran. “A Study on the Metacognitive Awareness of Secondary School Students”. In: Universal Journal of Educational Research 4.1 (2016), pp. 165–172. doi : 10.13189/ ujer.2016.040121 .[29] Mohsen Mahdavi. “An overview: Metacognition in education”. In: International Journal of Multidis-ciplinary and current research 2.6 (2014), pp. 529– 535. [30] Korinn Ostrow et al. “Blocking vs. interleav-ing: Examining single-session effects within mid-dle school math homework”. In: International conference on artificial intelligence in education .Springer. 2015, pp. 338–347. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-19773-9_34 .[31] Doug Rohrer et al. “A randomized controlled trial of interleaved mathematics practice.” In: Journal of Educational Psychology 112.1 (2020), p. 40. doi :

10.1037/edu0000367 .[32] Michelle L Rivers, John Dunlosky, and Adam M Persky. “Measuring metacognitive knowledge, monitoring, and control in the pharmacy classroom and experiential settings”. In: American journal of pharmaceutical education 84.5 (2020), p. 7730. doi :

10.5688/ajpe7730 .[33] Julie Dangremond Stanton, Amanda J Sebesta, and John Dunlosky. “Fostering metacognition to support student learning and performance”. In: 

CBE—Life Sciences Education 20.2 (2021). doi :

10.1187/cbe.20-12-0289 .[34] Marcel VJ Veenman and Marleen A Spaans. “Rela-tion between intellectual and metacognitive skills: Age and task differences”. In: Learning and indi-vidual differences 15.2 (2005), pp. 159–176. doi :

10.1016/j.lindif.2004.12.001 .[35] Yizhou Fan et al. “Beware of metacognitive lazi-ness: Effects of generative artificial intelligence on learning motivation, processes, and performance”. In: British Journal of Educational Technology 56.2 (2025), pp. 489–530. doi : 10.1111/bjet.13544 .[36] Chenyu Hou, Gaoxia Zhu, and Vidya Sudarshan. “The role of critical thinking on undergraduates’ reliance behaviours on generative AI in problem-solving”. In: British Journal of Educational Tech-nology 56.5 (2025), pp. 1919–1941. doi : 10.1111/ bjet.13613 .[37] Cecilia Ka Yuk Chan. “A comprehensive AI policy education framework for university teaching and learning”. In: International journal of educational technology in higher education 20.1 (2023), p. 38. 

doi : 10.1186/s41239-023-00408-3 .[38] Mohan Yang et al. “Analysing nontraditional stu-dents’ ChatGPT interaction, engagement, self-efficacy and performance: A mixed-methods ap-proach”. In: British Journal of Educational Tech-nology 65.5 (2025). doi : https://doi.org/10. 1111/bjet.13588 .[39] Chunpeng Zhai, Santoso Wibowo, and Lily D Li. “The effects of over-reliance on AI dialogue sys-tems on students’ cognitive abilities: a systematic review”. In: Smart Learning Environments 11.1 (2024), p. 28. doi : 10.1186/s40561-024-00316-7.[40] Daniela Fernandes et al. “AI makes you smarter but none the wiser: The disconnect between per-formance and metacognition”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 175 (2025), p. 108779. doi : 10. 1016/j.chb.2025.108779 .[41] Xiaoqing Xu et al. “Enhancing self-regulated learning and learning experience in generative AI environments: The critical role of metacognitive support”. In: British Journal of Educational Tech-nology 56.5 (2025). doi : 10.1111/bjet.13599 .[42] Lev Tankelevitch et al. “The metacognitive de-mands and opportunities of generative AI”. In: 

Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Hu-man Factors in Computing Systems . 2024, pp. 1– 24. doi : 10.1145/3613904.3642902 .[43] Roger Azevedo et al. “Lessons learned and future directions of MetaTutor: Leveraging multichannel data to scaffold self-regulated learning with an in-telligent tutoring system”. In: Frontiers in Psy-chology 13 (2022), p. 813632. doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg.2022.813632 .[44] Claudia Cantero, Manuel Caro Pi˜ neres, and Juan C Giraldo Cardozo. “Instructional Model Based on Intelligent Tutor Systems for the Development of 21st Century Competencies”. In: Journal of Posthumanism 5.7 (2025), pp. 2286–2302. [45] Kathryn S McCarthy et al. “Metacognitive over-load!: Positive and negative effects of metacogni-tive prompts in an intelligent tutoring system”. In: International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 28.3 (2018), pp. 420–438. doi : 10. 1007/s40593-018-0164-5 .[46] Mark Abdelshiheed et al. “Leveraging deep rein-forcement learning for metacognitive interventions across intelligent tutoring systems”. In: Interna-tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Edu-cation . Springer. 2023, pp. 291–303. doi : 10.1007/ 978-3-031-36272-9_24 .17 [47] Ido Roll et al. “Improving students’ help-seeking skills using metacognitive feedback in an intelli-gent tutoring system”. In: Learning and instruc-tion 21.2 (2011), pp. 267–280. doi : 10.1016/j. learninstruc.2010.07.004 .[48] Gregory Schraw and Rayne Sperling Dennison. “Assessing metacognitive awareness”. In: Con-temporary educational psychology 19.4 (1994), pp. 460–475. doi : 10.1006/ceps.1994.1033 .[49] John Sweller. “Cognitive load during problem solv-ing: Effects on learning”. In: Cognitive science 

12.2 (1988), pp. 257–285. doi : 10 . 1016 / 0364 -0213(88)90023-7 .[50] Evan F Risko and Sam J Gilbert. “Cognitive of-floading”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 20.9 (2016), pp. 676–688. doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2016. 07.002 .[51] Guoqing Zhao et al. “Generative artificial in-telligence amplifies the role of critical thinking skills and reduces reliance on prior knowledge while promoting in-depth learning”. In: Educa-tion Sciences 15.5 (2025), p. 554. doi : 10.3390/ educsci15050554 .[52] Sam J Gilbert. “Strategic offloading of delayed intentions into the external environment”. In: 

Quarterly journal of experimental psychology 68.5 (2015), pp. 971–992. doi : 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2014.972963 .[53] Elliot P Fenech, Frank A Drews, and Jonathan Z Bakdash. “The effects of acoustic turn-by-turn navigation on wayfinding”. In: Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting . Vol. 54. 23. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 2010, pp. 1926–1930. doi : 10. 1177/154193121005402305 .[54] Aaron L Gardony, Tad T Bruny´ e, and Holly A Tay-lor. “Navigational aids and spatial memory impair-ment: The role of divided attention”. In: Spatial Cognition & Computation 15.4 (2015), pp. 246– 284. doi : 10.1080/13875868.2015.1059432 .[55] Betsy Sparrow, Jenny Liu, and Daniel M Weg-ner. “Google effects on memory: Cognitive conse-quences of having information at our fingertips”. In: Science 333.6043 (2011), pp. 776–778. doi : 10. 1126/science.1207745 .[56] Joseph Firth et al. “The “online brain”: how the Internet may be changing our cognition”. In: World psychiatry 18.2 (2019), pp. 119–129. doi : https: //doi.org/10.1002/wps.20617 .[57] Paul Atchley et al. “Human and AI collaboration in the higher education environment: opportunities and concerns”. In: Cognitive research: principles and implications 9.1 (2024), p. 20. doi : 10.1186/ s41235-024-00547-9 .[58] Artur Klingbeil, Cassandra Gr¨ utzner, and Philipp Schreck. “Trust and reliance on AI—An experi-mental study on the extent and costs of overre-liance on AI”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 

160 (2024), p. 108352. doi : 10.1016/j.chb.2024. 108352 .[59] Manu Kapur. “Productive failure”. In: Cognition and instruction 26.3 (2008), pp. 379–424. doi : 10. 1080/07370000802212669 .[60] Manu Kapur. “Productive failure in learning math”. In: Cognitive science 38.5 (2014), pp. 1008– 1022. doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12107 .[61] Manu Kapur. “Examining productive failure, pro-ductive success, unproductive failure, and unpro-ductive success in learning”. In: Educational Psy-chologist 51.2 (2016), pp. 289–299. doi : 10.1080/ 00461520.2016.1155457 .[62] Aubteen Darabi, Thomas Logan Arrington, and Erkan Sayilir. “Learning from failure: A meta-analysis of the empirical studies”. In: Educa-tional Technology Research and Development 66.5 (2018), pp. 1101–1118. doi : 10 . 1007 / s11423 -018-9579-9 .[63] Marci S DeCaro and Bethany Rittle-Johnson. “Ex-ploring mathematics problems prepares children to learn from instruction”. In: Journal of experimen-tal child psychology 113.4 (2012), pp. 552–568. doi :

10.1016/j.jecp.2012.06.009 .[64] Daniel L Schwartz et al. “Practicing versus invent-ing with contrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer”. In: Journal of edu-cational psychology 103.4 (2011), p. 759. doi : 10. 1037/a0025140 .[65] Michael Pak. “Productive Failure and GenAI”. In: 

Double Helix 12 (2024). doi : 10.37514/DBH- J. 2024.12.1.09 .[66] Yue Zhai and Behzad Nezakatgoo. “Evaluating AI-Powered Applications for Enhancing Under-graduate Students’ Metacognitive Strategies, Self-Determined Motivation, and Social Learning in English Language Education”. In: Scientific Re-ports 15.1 (2025), p. 35199. doi : 10.1038/s41598-025-19118-z .18 [67] Agung Rinaldy Malik et al. “Exploring artificial in-telligence in academic essay: higher education stu-dent’s perspective”. In: International Journal of Educational Research Open 5 (2023), p. 100296. 

doi : 10.1016/j.ijedro.2023.100296 .[68] Cecilia Ka Yuk Chan and Louisa HY Tsi. “Will generative AI replace teachers in higher educa-tion? A study of teacher and student perceptions”. In: Studies in Educational Evaluation 83 (2024), p. 101395. doi : 10 . 1016 / j . stueduc . 2024 . 101395 .[69] Yoshija Walter. “Embracing the future of Artificial Intelligence in the classroom: the relevance of AI literacy, prompt engineering, and critical thinking in modern education”. In: International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education 21.1 (2024), p. 15. doi : 10.1186/s41239-024-00448-3.[70] Anna Riedmann, Philipp Schaper, and Birgit Lu-grin. “Reinforcement learning in education: Asystematic literature review”. In: International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 35 (2025), pp. 2669–2723. doi : 10 . 1007 / s40593 -025-00494-6 .[71] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Rein-forcement Learning: An Introduction . 2nd. Cam-bridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2018. isbn : 978-0-262-03924-6. [72] Joseph Jay Williams et al. “Axis: Generating explanations at scale with learnersourcing and machine learning”. In: Proceedings of the third (2016) ACM conference on learning @ scale . 2016, pp. 379–388. doi : 10.1145/2876034.2876042 .[73] Benjamin Clement et al. “Online optimization of teaching sequences with multi-armed bandits”. In: 

7th international conference on educational data mining . 2014. [74] Ikenna Osakwe et al. “Towards prescriptive ana-lytics of self-regulated learning strategies: A rein-forcement learning approach”. In: British Journal of Educational Technology 55.4 (2024), pp. 1747– 1771. doi : 10.1111/bjet.13429 .[75] Sherry Ruan et al. “Reinforcement learning tutor better supported lower performers in a math task”. In: Machine Learning 113.5 (2024), pp. 3023–3048. 

doi : doi.org/10.1007/s10994-023-06423-9 .[76] Ivon Arroyo et al. “A multimedia adaptive tutor-ing system for mathematics that addresses cogni-tion, metacognition and affect”. In: International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 24.4 (2014), pp. 387–426. doi : 10.1007/s40593-014-0023-y .[77] Nadine N. Koch et al. Cultural diversity in digital learning: Influences of cultural distance on perfor-mance and anxiety . Preprint, OSF Preprints. 2025. 

url : https : / / osf . io / preprints / psyarxiv / 6kjbm_v1 .[78] Pau Benazet I Montobbio and Davinia Hern´ andez-Leo. “Fostering Metacognitive Awareness for Ef-fective Human–AI Collaboration in Learning”. In: 

Proceedings of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS 2026) . Irvine, USA: International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS), 2026. [79] E. Bertoni, C. Centeno, and R. Cachia. Social me-dia usage and adolescents’ mental health in the EU . JRC141047. Science for Policy Brief, Euro-pean Commission: European Commission, 2025. [80] Myojung Chung. “When knowing more means doing less: Algorithmic knowledge and digital (dis) engagement among young adults”. In: Har-vard Kennedy School Misinformation Review 6.5 (2025). doi : 10.37016/mr-2020-186 .[81] Fiona Duffy et al. An Interactive Workshop on Body Image & Social Media for Schools and Youth Groups . [Online] Lesson plan. Bias project. 2022. [82] Canada’s Center for Digital Media Literacy and TELUS. Body Image and Social Media: Escaping the Comparison Trap . [Online] Lesson plan. USE, Understand & Create: A Digital Literacy Frame-work for Canadian Schools. 2024. [83] John Schulman et al. “Proximal policy op-timization algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 (2017). [84] Albert T Corbett and John R Anderson. “Knowl-edge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of proce-dural knowledge”. In: User modeling and user-adapted interaction 4.4 (1994), pp. 253–278. doi :

10.1007/BF01099821 .[85] Zachary A Pardos and Neil T Heffernan. “KT-IDEM: Introducing item difficulty to the knowl-edge tracing model”. In: International conference on user modeling, adaptation, and personalization .Springer. 2011, pp. 243–254. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-22362-4_21 .[86] Shreyansh Bhatt et al. “Evaluating Bayesian knowledge tracing for estimating learner profi-ciency and guiding learner behavior”. In: Proceed-ings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale . 2020, pp. 357–360. doi : 10.1145/3386527. 3406746 .19 [87] Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013). [88] Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In: Interna-tional conference on Machine Learning . PmLR. 2016, pp. 1928–1937. [89] AI Team Mistral. Introducing Mistral 3 . Accessed: 2025-12-02. 2025. url : https : / / mistral . ai / news/mistral-3 .[90] OpenRouter. Mistral: Mistral-7B-Instruct v0.3 — Overview . Accessed: 2025-12-02. 2025. url :

https : / / openrouter . ai / mistralai / ministral-14b-2512 .[91] Jennifer E Drake and Ellen Winner. “Confronting sadness through art-making: Distraction is more beneficial than venting”. In: Psychology of Aesthet-ics, Creativity, and the Arts 6.3 (2012), p. 255. doi :

10.1037/a0026909 .[92] UNESCO Institute for Statistics. International Standard Classification of Education: ISCED 2011 . Document code: UIS/2012/INS/10 REV. Montreal, QC: UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2012. isbn : 978-92-9189-123-8. [93] Andy Field. Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics . 6th ed. London, UK: Sage pub-lications limited, 2024. [94] Victoria Clarke and Virginia Braun. “Thematic analysis”. In: The journal of positive psychol-ogy 12.3 (2017), pp. 297–298. doi : 10 . 1080 / 17439760.2016.1262613 .[95] Anjali Singh, Zhitong Guan, and Soo Young Rieh. “Enhancing critical thinking in generative AI search with metacognitive prompts”. In: Pro-ceedings of the Association for Information Sci-ence and Technology 62.1 (2025), pp. 672–684. doi :

10.1002/pra2.1287 .[96] Anjali Singh et al. “Protecting human cogni-tion in the age of AI”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12447 (2025). [97] Kym Craig et al. “Evaluating metacognitive self-reports: systematic reviews of the value of self-report in metacognitive research”. In: Metacogni-tion and Learning 15.2 (2020), pp. 155–213. doi :

10.1007/s11409-020-09222-y .[98] Kit S Double. “Survey measures of metacognitive monitoring are often false”. In: Behavior Research Methods 57.3 (2025), p. 97. doi : 10.3758/s13428-025-02621-6 .[99] Tiffany Barnes and John Stamper. “Toward the extraction of production rules for solving logic proofs”. In: AIED07, 13th International Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence in Education, Edu-cational Data Mining Workshop . 2007, pp. 11–20. 20 APPENDIX - PEDAGOGICAL REWARD SHAPING 

The reward function is a crucial part of a RL agent that defines which actions are desirable for the RL agent to take to maximize long term discounted reward. In line with previous research which employed pedagogical reward shaping we base the behaviour of the RL agent in educational principles [99, 74]. Specifically, we consider metacognitive theory, CLT, and productive failure. We construct the instantaneous reward at timestep t

which is included in the state s as the sum of a small set of interpretable components: 

R(s, a ) = Rsuccess (s)+ Rtime (s)+ RMT (s, a )+ RPF (s, a )+ RCLT (s, a ) (3) 

Task success and temporal efficiency 

A high positive reward is given when the student successfully completed the current task (to encourage achieving learning goals) in the 5 second time interval after the last action, while a small negative timestep penalty encourages efficiency and discourages trivially long trajectories: 

Rsuccess (s) = csucc · 1task completed at t (4) 

Rtime (s) = −ctime , (5) with csucc ∈ R+ large relative to per-step penalties 

ctime ∈ R+. These terms implement the standard objec-tive of maximizing long-term discounted task attainment while preferring shorter, more focused interactions. 

Metacognitive Theory 

Metacognitive interventions often rely on alternating experience and reflection (for example, exposing learners to contrasting approaches) [31, 30]. To encourage such reflective sequencing, we provide a small incentive for actions that present a contrast relative to the student’s history. 

RM T (s, ”allow AI usage”) = 

{

cM T , if sgai ∩ True = ∅

0, else (6) Conversely: 

RM T (s, ”don’t allow AI usage”) = 

{

cM T , if sgai ∩ False = ∅

0, else (7) with cM T ∈ R+

Productive Failure (PF) 

Productive failure posits that an optimal amount of struggle can benefit later learning [59], but excessive fail-ure becomes detrimental [62]. We therefore shape re-wards to (1) discourage giving additional help too early, (2) promote offering help after engaging in productive struggle, and (3) strongly penalize prolonged or exces-sive failure without assistance. 

RPF (s, ”allow AI usage”) = 



−cP F , if sf a = 0 

α · st, if 1 <= sf a <= 2 

β · st, if sf a > 2(8) with α, β, c P F ∈ R+. We additionally define ∀s :

RP F (s, ”don’t allow AI usage”) = 0. This suffices, as in a binary action space the difference in immediate re-ward between the two action is the relevant factor for action selection [71]. 

Cognitive Load Theory 

CLT warns against premature or excessive cognitive offloading (e.g. relying too early on external aids) espe-cially during the early phases of learning [50]. We there-fore penalize actions that offload cognition (here allowing generative AI assistance) when the learner is still in an early stage of the task. 

RCLT (s, ”allow AI usage”) = 

{

−δ · (Tst − st), if st < T st

0, else (9) where Tst , δ ∈ R+ and Tst denoting the threshold in seconds for being in an early stage of learning. Following the same logic as in the previous subsection, we define 

∀s : RCLT (s, ”don’t allow AI usage”) = 0. 

Practical notes on parameterization and training 

To ensure that the shaped rewards produce the in-tended instructional behaviour, multiple offline simula-tions were run. Additionally, a second pilot study with n = 7 participants was conducted to further fine tune the parameters. The concrete values of reward- and hyper-parameters can be found in the additional material. The finally derived policy is visualized in Figure 6. 21 Figure 6: Visualization of the final policy in the case of the agent being in the second task 

SCREENSHOT OF THE ITS 

Figure 7: Example screenshot of the ITS 22