Title: 2605.15528v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15528v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 00:24:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
1

SCIENCE CHINA Information Sciences 

# Task -Semantic Graph -Driven Distributed Agent Networking for 

# Underwater Target Tracking 

Shengchao ZHU 1, Guangjie HAN 2*, Chuan LIN 3 & Yu He 2

> 1 College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing 210098, China
> 2 College of Information Science and Engineering, Hohai University, Changzhou 210013, China
> 3 Software College, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China

Abstract Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) swarms are emerging as intelligent underwater networks, where each node must sense, 

communicate, process local data, and make decisions under severe acoustic constraints. Persistent underwater target tracking is a

representative task in this setting. The target moves over time, the communication topology changes as the AUVs move, acoustic links are 

intermittent and bandwidth -limited, and each AUV can observe only partial target and neighbor information. Multi -age nt reinforcement 

learning (MARL) is a natural candidate for distributed tracking, yet existing studies still lack a unified open -source platform for 

evaluating different MARL algorithms under six -degree -of -freedom AUV dynamics. In addition, policies traine d directly from raw 

geometric states and low -level force/torque actions often struggle to represent task phases, observation reliability, link quality, and local 

cooperation roles. This paper addresses these issues by developing an open -source MARL -AUV pla tform that integrates DI -engine with a 

six -degree -of -freedom underwater AUV target -tracking simulator. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first open platform that connects 

a public MARL training framework with physically modeled AUV swarm -based tasks, and provides a unified experimental protocol for 

fair training, testing, and comparison of representative RL and MARL algorithms. Based on this platform, we propose STG -MAPPO, a 

Semantic Task Graph -enhanced variant of Multi -Agent Proximal Policy Optimization, to support task -semantic distributed agent 

networking. STG -MAPPO builds semantic policy inputs from tracking diagnostics, task phases, observation confidence, link availability, 

neighbor tracking quality, and local role advantage. A compact se mantic task graph links communication -constrained network states to 

decentralized actor decisions, and a velocity -level action abstraction maps high -level cooperative decisions to executable six -degree -of -

freedom AUV control inputs. Extensive experiments d emonstrate that STG -MAPPO consistently outperforms mainstream MARL 

baselines and conventional AUV control MARL settings in persistent tracking accuracy, target -loss rate, convergence stability, and action 

smoothness under both nominal and stressed conditio ns. The code is available at https://github.com/dasjsaj/MARL -AUV .

Keywords Multi -agent reinforcement learning, underwater AUV swarm network , distributed cooperative decision -making, semantic task 

graph 

## 1 Introduction 

Next -generation communication networks are moving beyond connection -centric infrastructure toward task -oriented 

intelligent systems. In these networks, unmanned platforms, underwater sensors, edge nodes, and autonomous robots are no 

longer sim ple data transmitters. They also sense the environment, process local data, perform computation, and make 

decisions. This shift makes distributed autonomous agent networking a central problem, especially in harsh environments 

where global information excha nge is impractical and cooperation must be built from local observations and limited 

communication resources [1 -4]. 

Underwater AUV swarm target tracking is a typical example. Underwater acoustic communication is limited by narrow 

bandwidth, long propagatio n delay, time -varying link quality, and intermittent connectivity [5]. At the same time, AUV 

motion follows nonlinear six -degree -of -freedom dynamics and is constrained by attitude stability, propulsion limits, and 

energy consumption. Persistent target trac king therefore goes beyond single -vehicle trajectory control. Multiple AUVs must 

keep the target observable, exchange useful neighbor information, and adjust their cooperation as the target moves and the 

communication topology changes [6]. 

MARL is a natura l candidate for learning distributed cooperative policies from local observations [7]. The centralized -

training and decentralized -execution paradigm is particularly relevant, as it allows richer information to be used for value 

estimation during training w hile keeping each agent locally deployable at execution time [8]. However, applying MARL to 

underwater AUV networks remains difficult in practice. Existing MARL implementations are often built for abstract 

benchmarks or simplified robotic systems, and thus do not provide a unified interface for fair comparison under physically 

constrained AUV dynamics [9]. In addition, raw geometric observations and low -level force/torque actions are not 

sufficient for stable underwater tracking. A policy must recognize whe ther an AUV is searching, approaching, stably 

tracking, losing the target, or reacquiring it. It must also assess the reliability of neighbor information from link quality , 

> *Corresponding author (hanguangjie@gmail.com) 2

observation confidence, and tracking error [10]. Without such task -semantic informa tion, cooperation has to be inferred 

implicitly from continuous states, which makes learning harder and may lead to unstable control. 

To address the above issues, we integrate DI -engine [11] with a high -fidelity six -degree -of -freedom AUV target -tracking 

si mulator and develop an open -source MARL -AUV platform. The platform provides a unified interface for training, testing, 

logging, and comparing multiple representative MARL algorithms under the same AUV dynamics, task settings, stress 

conditions, and evaluat ion metrics. To the best of our knowledge, MARL -AUV is the first open -source platform that 

connects a public MARL training framework with physically modeled AUV swarm target -tracking environments, enabling 

reproducible and one -command evaluation of MARL al gorithms for underwater AUV tasks. The platform is available at 

https://github.com/dasjsaj/MARL -AUV .

Built on the MARL -AUV platform, we examine the difficulty of applying MARL to nonlinear AUV control. A policy 

must simultaneously capture tracking context, observation reliability, neighbor value, and six -degree -of -freedom physical 

constraints, which makes it difficult to learn stably from raw states and force/torque actions. This difficulty further leads to

slow convergence and unstable policy optimization. To address this, we propose STG -MAPPO, namely Semantic Task 

Graph -enhanced Multi -Agent Proximal Policy Optimization. It extracts task -level semantics from tracking diagnostics, task 

phases, observation q uality, link availability, neighbor tracking error, and local role advantage, and organizes them into a 

compact semantic task graph for decentralized decision -making. A velocity -level action interface is further used to map 

high -level cooperative decisions to executable AUV control inputs. This design offers a task -semantic way to apply MARL 

to complex nonlinear physical systems. The main contributions are summarized as follows. 

 First, we develop an open -source MARL -AUV benchmarking platform by integrating DI -engine with a six -degree -of -

freedom AUV target -tracking simulator. The platform provides a unified interface for training, testing, logging, and 

comparing representative MARL algorithms in underwater AUV tasks. 

 Second, we formulate AUV swarm target trac king as a communication -constrained distributed agent networking 

problem. This formulation encodes task phase, observation quality, link availability, neighbor tracking error, and local 

role advantage into interpretable semantic states. 

 Third, we propose STG -MAPPO, a Semantic Task Graph -enhanced MAPPO framework under the centralized -training 

and decentralized -execution paradigm. It combines semantic task graph modeling with MAPPO, enabling each AUV 

to make decentralized decisions from loc al semantic observations. 

 Finally, we introduce a velocity -level execution interface compatible with six -degree -of -freedom AUV dynamics, and 

evaluate the proposed method against representative MARL baselines under many conditions. 

## 2 Related work 

## 2.1 Underw ater AUV network -based cooperative target tracking 

Underwater multi -AUV networks have become a key platform for long -term ocean observation, cooperative search, and 

mobile target tracking. Unlike terrestrial or aerial multi -agent systems, they operate unde r narrow -band acoustic 

communication, long propagation delays, intermittent connectivity, limited sensing range, and strongly constrained vehicle 

dynamics. These factors make cooperative tracking different from centralized trajectory control. In such setti ngs, AUVs 

must not only estimate and follow a moving target, but also sustain useful local interactions as communication and 

observation conditions change over time. 

Prior work has studied this problem from several angles. Hierarchical software -defined multi -AUV reinforcement 

learning introduces networking and MARL into underwater target tracking, while interrupted software -defined multi -AUV 

reinforcement learning furt her considers time -saving policy learning under intermittent execution conditions [12, 13]. 

Model -based tracking control has also been explored. For example, trajectory -prediction -based AUV tracking combines 

target prediction with control design to track d ynamic underwater targets [14]. Other studies incorporate multi -source 

sensing and multi -AUV cooperation. Acoustic -optical fusion compensates for delayed and low -frequency acoustic 

measurements with visual observations when tracking highly maneuvering unde rwater targets [15], and bearing -only multi -

AUV tracking addresses cooperative estimation with limited relative information [16]. Learning -from -demonstration and 

cooperative localization studies further suggest that multi -AUV tracking and localization depe nd on both interaction 

modeling and physically feasible motion execution [17, 18]. 

These studies provide important foundations, but most of them emphasize tracking accuracy, localization quality, policy 

convergence, or sensor fusion. The networking relatio n among AUVs is often treated as a given communication condition, a 3

software -defined infrastructure, or an implicit part of the MARL state. In communication -constrained target tracking, 

however, the usefulness of a neighbor depends on link availability, ob servation confidence, tracking error, and its role in the 

current task phase. This calls for a task -semantic view of underwater cooperative tracking, in which AUV cooperation is 

guided not only by proximity or fixed topology, but also by the task value of locally available information .

2.2 Task -oriented agent networking and semantic state representation 

Task -oriented communication and semantic representation offer a relevant lens for studying agent networking. Rather than 

sending all raw observations, a tas k-oriented system seeks to retain the information that matters for downstream decision -

making or inference. Recent work on deep learning -based semantic communication has shown that semantic features can be 

learned and transmitted to support task performanc e under communication constraints [19, 20]. Related studies further show 

that semantic transmission should account for interpretability, information importance, and feature selection, since differen t

pieces of information contribute differently to a given task [21 -23]. Similar ideas also appear in intelligent task -oriented 

semantic communication studies published in the Journal on Communications, where communication effectiveness is 

evaluated by task utility instead of bit -level reconstruction accuracy [24, 25]. 

For distributed autonomous agents, however, task -oriented networking involves more than compressing sensory data. 

Each agent must decide which local and neighboring information is useful for its current action. In cooperative MARL, 

graph -based and inf ormation -aware methods have been used to improve strategy evaluation and decision modeling in large -

scale or partially observable multi -agent systems [26]. These studies indicate that structured relational information can ease 

the difficulty of learning co operation directly from raw joint states. However, most existing work on semantic 

communication and MARL is not designed for underwater AUV networks, where the state representation must jointly 

describe sensing reliability, acoustic link availability, neig hbor tracking quality, and physically feasible control. 

Our method follows this task -oriented view but targets a different system setting. Instead of treating semantic 

representation as a standalone communication codec, it builds a semantic task graph for distributed AUV networking. The 

graph summarizes task phase, observation quality, link condition, neighbor tracking error, and local role advantage into a 

compact policy input. In this formulation, semantic information is not an auxiliary description of th e environment. It serves 

as an intermediate representation that connects communication -constrained network states with decentralized policy 

decisions. 

## 3 System model and problem formulation 

3.1 Underwater intelligent AUV network model 

Consider an underwate r intelligent agent network composed of 푁 AUVs, denoted by 풜 = {1,2, … , 푁}. At discrete time 푡,

the position, velocity, and attitude of the 푖-th AUV are denoted by 푝￿ 

> ￿

∈ ℝ￿, 푣￿ 

> ￿

∈ ℝ￿, and 휂￿

> ￿

, respectively. The position and 

velocity of the moving target are denoted by 푝￿ 

> ￿

∈ ℝ￿ and 푣￿ 

> ￿

∈ ℝ￿. Each AUV acts as a sensing node, a communication 

node, and a local decision -making node. Due to acoustic link constraints, target -motion uncertainty, and local sensing range 

limitations, each agent can only access its own state, target -relative observations, neighbor -relative states, and local task -

semantic features. 

The distance between AUV 푖 and the target, together with the tracking error, is defined a s

푑￿ 

> ￿

=∥ 푝￿ 

> ￿

− 푝￿ 

> ￿

∥￿, 푒￿ 

> ￿

= |푑￿ 

> ￿

− 푑∗|. (1) 

where 푑￿ 

> ￿

is the Euclidean distance between AUV 푖 and the target, 푑∗ is the desired target observation distance, and 푒￿ 

> ￿

is the 

distance -based tracking error. 

3.2 Six -degree -of -freedom AUV dynam ics 

To capture underwater physical constraints, a six -degree -of -freedom AUV dynamic model is adopted. Let the generalized 

pose be 휂 = [푥, 푦, 푧, 휙, 휃, 휓]￿, the body -frame velocity be 휈 = [푢, 푣, 푤, 푝, 푞, 푟]￿, and the generalized force/torque input be 

휏 = [푋, 푌, 푍, 퐾, 푀, 푁]￿. The continuous -time kinematics and dynamics can be written as 

휂̇ = 퐽(휂)휈, (2) 

푀휈̇ + 퐶(휈)휈 + 퐷(휈)휈 + 푔(휂) = 휏 + 푤. (3) 

In Eq . (2), 퐽(휂) is the transformation matrix from the body frame to the inertial frame. In Eq. (3), 푀 is the mass and 

added -mass matrix, 퐶(휈) is the Coriolis and centripetal matrix, 퐷(휈) is the hydrodynamic damping matrix, 푔(휂) is the 

vector of gravity, buoyancy, and restoring moments, and 푤 denotes environmental disturbance s. The RL policy does not 4

alter the dynamics directly. Instead, at each decision step, it outputs an action that is converted into an executable contro l

input 휏 through the environment interface, and the six -degree -of -freedom dynamics then propagate the A UV state. 

3.3 Communication -constrained local observation model 

AUVs mainly rely on acoustic links for information exchange. Due to propagation delay, bandwidth limitation, distance 

attenuation, and environmental noise, it is difficult to maintain global, real -time, and highly reliable communication among 

all agents. T he local communication relation of the AUV swarm at time 푡 is represented by a dynamic graph 

풢￿ 

> ￿

= (풜, ℰ￿

> ￿

), (4) 

where 풜 is the AUV node set and ℰ￿ 

> ￿

is the available communication edge set. For any two nodes 푖 and 푗, the normalized 

link availability is defined as 

푞￿￿  

> ￿

= clip ￿1 − ∥ 푝￿ 

> ￿

− 푝￿ 

> ￿

∥￿

푅￿

, 0,1￿, (5) 

where 푅￿ is the effective communication or proximity radius, and clip (⋅) restricts the link value to [0,1]. If 푞￿￿  

> ￿

> 0, node 푗

is considered an available neighbor of node 푖 . This distance -dependent model captures the dynamic nature of local 

communication relations caused by AUV mobility. 

To further characterize acoustic -link uncertainty, pack et loss, propagation delay, and information freshness are 

incorporated into an extended link -quality model: 

푞￿￿  

> ￿

= exp ￿−훼푑￿￿  

> ￿

￿￿1 − 푝￿￿￿￿ ,￿￿  

> ￿

￿exp ￿− 훥푡￿￿ 

휏￿

￿, (6) 

where 푑￿￿  

> ￿

=∥ 푝￿ 

> ￿

− 푝￿ 

> ￿

∥￿ , 훼 is a distance attenuation coefficient, 푝￿￿￿￿ ,￿￿  

> ￿

is the packet loss probability, 훥푡￿￿ is the age of 

neighbor information, and 휏￿ is the freshness decay constant. 

3.4 Task state modeling for AUV swarm networks 

In underwater AUV swarm target tracking, communica tion, sensing, data, and intelligent decision -making jointly affect task 

completion quality. Communication states determine whether neighbor information is available, sensing states determine 

whether target observations are reliable, data states reflect hi storical tracking errors and neighbor tracking quality, and 

intelligence states indicate policy inference and action selection based on local information. To incorporate these factors 

into distributed policy learning, task -related resources are represented as a local semantic state vector: 

푧￿ 

> ￿

= ￿푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 푧￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

￿. (7) 

where 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

includes target distance, observation confidence, and target -loss indicators; 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

includes the effective -

neighbor ratio, mean link quality, and best link quality; 푧￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

includes neighbor tracking errors, moving averages of 

historical errors, and information freshness; and 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

includes task phase, observation quality, and local role advantage. 

This modeling turns task -related sensing, communication, data, and intelligence factors into a unified state representation 

for semantic task grap h construction. 

3.5 Dec -POMDP formulation 

Under local observation and communication constraints, AUV swarm target tracking is formulated as a decentralized 

partially observable Markov decision process (Dec -POMDP): 

ℳ = ⟨풮, {풪￿}￿￿￿ 

> ￿

, {풜￿}￿￿￿ 

> ￿

, 푃, 푅, 훾, 푁⟩. (8) 

where 풮 is the global state space, 풪￿ is the local observation space of AUV 푖, 풜￿ is its action space, 푃 is the state transition 

function, 푅 is the shared or mixed reward function, and 훾 ∈ (0,1) is the discount factor. 

Additionally , t he centralized -training and decentralized -execution (CTDE) paradigm is adopted . During training, the 

critic may use global or concatenated state information to estimate values, while during execution, each actor generates 

actions only from local observations: 

휋￿(푎￿|표￿) = ￿ 휋￿

> ￿
> ￿￿￿

(푎￿

> ￿

|표￿

> ￿

), (9) 5

퐽(휃) = 피￿￿ ￿￿ 훾￿

> ￿￿￿
> ￿￿￿

푅￿￿. (10) 

The objective is to learn a distributed policy under communication constraints and partial observations, so that the AUV 

swarm can reduce long -term tracking error, target -loss rate, and control oscillation while preserving a deployable local 

decision -making form. 

## 4 Semantic task gr aph driven distributed agent networking method 

This section presents a semantic task graph -driven distributed agent networking method for communication -constrained 

underwater AUV swarm target tracking. The proposed method formulates target tracking as a ta sk -oriented autonomous 

networking process rather than a pure motion control problem. To realize this idea, we integrate semantic task graph 

modeling with multi -agent proximal policy optimization (MAPPO) [27] and present Semantic Task Graph -enhanced 

MAPPO (STG -MAPPO ). It organizes sensing, communication, data, and decision -related information into task -semantic 

policy inputs, thereby enabling each AUV to make decentralized decisions under partial observation and constrained 

underwater communication.   

> Figure 1Overall framework of STG -MAPPO.

4.1 Design rationale and overall framework 

Conventional MARL methods usually pass positions, velocities, target distances, and neighbor -relative states directly to the 

policy network, so the cooperation structure among a gents has to be learned implicitly. This setting can be adequate for 

simple tasks, but it is less suitable for underwater target tracking. The policy must behave differently when an AUV is 

searching for the target, moving toward it, maintaining a stable tr acking state, or recovering from target loss. At the same 

time, acoustic links vary with distance and environmental conditions, and direct exploration in the raw six -degree -of -

freedom force and torque space can lead to action saturation and slow convergenc e. STG -MAPPO therefore introduces task 

semantics and communication -aware neighbor summaries before action selection. 

The semantic task graph is used as an intermediate representation between communication -constrained network states 

and distributed decision -making, rather than as an auxiliary reward term. It combines link availability, target observation 

confidence, tracking -error trends, and local role indicators into the actor input. This design allows each AUV to make 

decisions based on both its own track ing state and the task value of neighboring information, supporting autonomous 

networking and cooperative control for persistent target tracking. 6

4.2 Local semantic state construction 

For distributed execution, relative states are preferred over global coo rdinates. The target -relative position and velocity of 

AUV 푖 are defined as 

푟￿￿ = 푝￿ 

> ￿

− 푝￿

> ￿

, 푢￿ 

> ￿

= 푣￿ 

> ￿

− 푣￿

> ￿

. (11) 

Here, 푟￿￿ describes the target direction relative to AUV 푖, and 푢￿ 

> ￿

describes relative motion. Relative states are more suitable 

for dynamic networking and reduce the influence of global coordinate scaling. 

To make tracking quality directly observable to the policy, the error -improvement and closing -trend variables are de fined 

as 

훥푒￿ 

> ￿

= 푒￿ 

> ￿￿￿

− 푒￿

> ￿

, 휌￿ 

> ￿

= 푑￿ 

> ￿

− 푑￿

> ￿￿￿

. (12) 

A positive 훥푒￿ 

> ￿

indicates that the tracking error decreases at the current step, while a negative 휌￿ 

> ￿

indicates that the AUV is 

approaching the target. The observation confidence is computed from the target distance and sensor range: 

푐￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿1 − 푑￿

> ￿

푅￿

, 0,1￿, (13) 

where 푅￿ is the effective sensing range. The tracking diagnostic vector is then defined as 

푧￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= ￿푑‾￿

> ￿

, 푒‾￿

> ￿

, 훥푒‾￿

> ￿

, −휌‾￿

> ￿

, mean ￿(푒￿), 푐￿

> ￿

, 푙￿

> ￿

, ℓ￿

> ￿

/푇￿. (14) 

In (14), barred variables are normalized values, mean ￿(푒￿) is the moving average of tracking errors over the latest 푘

steps, 푙￿ 

> ￿

is the target -loss indicator, ℓ￿ 

> ￿

is the consecutive loss duration, and 푇 is the maximum episode length. This vector 

transforms tracking distance, error trend, observation confidence, and loss state into policy -ready semantic features. 

4.3 Task phase and observation -quality semantics 

Tar get tracking exhibits clear task phases. An AUV must increase observation opportunities during searching, reduce target 

distance during approaching, maintain the desired distance band during stable tracking, and reacquire the target after loss. 

The task ph ase is defined as 

phase ￿ 

> ￿

∈ {search , approach , stable , lost }. (15) 

The phase is determined by the target -loss indicator, target distance, and error -improvement term. If 푙￿ 

> ￿

= 1, the node is in 

the lost phase. If the target is not lost and 푑￿ 

> ￿

is within the near range, it is in the stable phase. If the target is not lost and the 

error improvement is positive, it is in the approach phase. The remaining cases are assigned to the search phase. The 

observation -quality semantic variable is defined as 

quality ￿ 

> ￿

∈ {high , medium , low , unavailable }. (16) 

It is determined by thresholds on 푐￿ 

> ￿

. Both the phase and observation -quality variables are rule -based and physically 

interpretable rather than external labels or additional learned classifiers. They are encoded as one -hot vectors and used 

together with the tracking diagnostic vector. 

4.4 Semantic task graph encoding and autonomous networking representation 

In a communication -constrained underwater environment, cooperation relations should not be treated a s fixed topology. 

They vary with node positions, link quality, target -observation states, and neighbor tracking capability. The AUV swarm at 

time 푡 is represented by a semantic task graph 

풢￿ 

> ￿

= (풱, ℰ￿, 풵￿), (17) 

where 풱 is the AUV node set, ℰ￿ is the edge set formed by local communication or proximity relations, and 풵￿ contains 

node and edge semantic features. To reduce communication overhead, each node constructs a compact semantic graph 

summary instead of transmitting the full graph. For AUV 푖, t he semantic task graph feature is defined as 

푔￿ 

> ￿

= ￿|풩￿￿|

푁 , mean ￿∈풩￿￿ ￿푞￿￿  

> ￿

￿, max 

> ￿∈풩￿￿

￿푞￿￿  

> ￿

￿, mean ￿∈풩￿￿ ￿푒￿

> ￿

￿, adv ￿

> ￿

, role ￿

> ￿

￿. (18) 

The local advantage term is defined as 

adv ￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿mean ￿∈풩￿￿ ￿푒￿

> ￿

￿ − 푒￿

> ￿

, −1,1￿. (19) 7

If adv ￿ 

> ￿

> 0 and 푐￿ 

> ￿

exceeds the observation -confidence threshold, AUV 푖 is assigned a local primary -tracking role 

indicator. This role is not a fixed identity but changes with target position, observation quality, and neighbor states. The 

final policy input is 

표￿ 

> ￿￿￿ ,￿

= ￿표￿,￿￿￿  

> ￿

, 푧￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 푔￿

> ￿

￿, (20) 

where 표￿,￿￿￿  

> ￿

is the physical observation, 푧￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

is the tracking diagnostic vector, 푧￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

is the task -phase and observation -

quality encoding, and 푔￿ 

> ￿

is the semantic task graph su mmary. 

4.5 Distributed policy decision based on semantic task graphs 

With (20), the distributed actor of each AUV is expressed as 

푎￿ 

> ￿

∼ 휋￿￿⋅ |표￿

> ￿￿￿ ,￿

￿. (21) 

During execution, AUV 푖 uses only its own observation and neighbor summary. It neither accesses the global state nor 

relies on a centralized controller. When a node has high observation confidence, low tracking error, and reliable links, its 

local primary -tracking tendency incre ases. When its observation quality degrades or the target is lost, the policy can adjust 

its motion using neighbor tracking errors and link qualities. Thus, cooperation is generated through task -semantic evaluation 

rather than predefined roles. 

This mechan ism reflects task -driven autonomous networking. Nodes do not need to be manually assigned as leaders, 

followers, or relays; instead, they estimate their cooperative value from local and neighbor semantic states. Since the 

exchanged information consists of low -dimensional states such as position, velocity, observation confidence, tracking error, 

and link quality, the communication load is compatible with low -bandwidth acoustic links. 

4.6 Velocity -level action abstraction for six -degree -of -freedom AUV executi on 

If the actor directly outputs a six -dimensional force/torque vector, the policy must simultaneously learn cooperative tracking 

and low -level control in a strongly coupled dynamic space. STG -MAPPO therefore adopts a three -dimensional velocity 

action as the task -level decision interface: 

푎￿ 

> ￿

= ￿푎￿, 푎￿, 푎￿￿ ∈ [−1,1]￿. (22) 

The desired velocity is 

푣￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= 푠￿푎￿

> ￿

, (23) 

where 푠￿ is the velocity scale. The environment then generates six -degree -of -freedom control inputs from the desired 

ve locity and the current velocity. The force component is 

휏￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿퐾￿푅(휂￿

> ￿

)￿￿푣￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

− 푣￿

> ￿

￿, −휏￿￿￿ , 휏￿￿￿ ￿, (24) 

and the moment component for attitude stabilization and angular damping is 

휏￿￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿−퐾￿[휙￿

> ￿

, 휃￿

> ￿

, 0]￿ − 퐾￿[푝￿

> ￿

, 푞￿

> ￿

, 푟￿￿]￿, −휏￿,￿￿￿ , 휏￿,￿￿￿ ￿. (25) 

The final control input is 

휏￿ 

> ￿

= ￿휏￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

, 휏￿￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

￿. (26) 

Before execution, the action is clipped, rate -limited, and smoothed: 

푎￿￿￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

= (1 − 훼)푎￿￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

+ 훼푎￿￿￿. (27) 

This abstraction does not remove the six -degree -of -freedom dynamics. Instead, it restricts the policy output to task -level 

velocity decisions and lets the physical execution layer complete force/torque mapping, thereby preserving dynamic realism 

while reducing exploration difficult y. 

4.7 Semantic reward for persistent target tracking 

The reward function is designed for persistent target tracking rather than encirclement or formation closure. Let the stable 

tracking distance band be [푑￿, 푑￿]. The distance -band deviation is 

푏￿ 

> ￿

= max (0, 푑￿ − 푑￿

> ￿

, 푑￿ 

> ￿

− 푑￿), (28) 

and the correspondi ng band -stability score is 8

퐵￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿1 − 푏￿

> ￿

푒￿￿￿ 

, 0,1￿. (29) 

The tracking reward of AUV 푖 is 

푟￿￿￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= clip ￿푤￿퐵￿ 

> ￿

+ 푤￿푃￿￿ + 푤￿퐶￿￿ + 푤￿푅￿ 

> ￿

− 푤￿푈￿

> ￿

, −1,1￿, (30) 

where 푃￿￿ denotes error improvement, 퐶￿￿ denotes closing tendency, 푅￿ 

> ￿

denotes reacquisition benefit, and 푈￿ 

> ￿

denotes a too -

close penalty. The observation reward is 

푟￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= clip (푐￿ 

> ￿

− 푙￿

> ￿

, −1,1). (31) 

The coordination and communication rewards are 

푟￿￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

= clip ￿1 − mean ￿(푏￿

> ￿

)

푒￿￿￿ 

, 0,1￿, (32) 

푟￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

= mean (￿,￿)∈ℰ￿ 푞￿￿  

> ￿

. (33) 

The semantic phase reward adapts the optimization emphasis according to the current task phase: 

푟￿￿￿ ,￿ 

> ￿

= ￿

푃￿￿, phase ￿ 

> ￿

= lost ,

0.65 푃￿￿ + 0.35 퐶￿￿ − 0.25 푈￿

> ￿

, phase ￿ 

> ￿

∈ {search , approach },

0.55 푐￿ 

> ￿

+ 0.45 (1 − 푈￿

> ￿

), phase ￿ 

> ￿

= stable .

(34) 

The action cost is 

cost ￿ 

> ￿

= clip (0.6 ∥ 푎￿ 

> ￿

∥￿

> ￿

+ 0.4 ∥ 푎￿ 

> ￿

− 푎￿ 

> ￿￿￿

∥￿

> ￿

, 0,1). (35) 

The global reward is then 

푅￿ = 푤￿푟￿￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

+ 푤￿푟￿￿￿  

> ￿

+ 푤￿ 푟￿￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

+ 푤￿푟￿￿￿￿  

> ￿

+ 푤￿푟￿￿￿  

> ￿

− 푤￿cost ￿. (36) 

The tracking component carries the dominant weight, while semantic, communication, and coordination terms serve as 

auxiliary structures. Thus, the objective is not to maximize link quality itself, but to use communication and semantic 

information to support persistent target tracking. 

4.8 STG -MAPPO optimization 

STG -MAPPO follows the centralized -training and decentralized -execution paradigm. The joint policy is 

휋￿(푎￿|표￿) = ￿ 휋￿

> ￿
> ￿￿￿

￿푎￿

> ￿

|표￿

> ￿￿￿ ,￿

￿. (37) 

The objective is to maximize the discounted cumulative reward: 

퐽(휃) = 피￿￿ ￿￿ 훾￿

> ￿￿￿
> ￿￿￿

푅￿￿. (38) 

The temporal -difference residual and generalized advantage estimator are 

훿￿ = 푅￿ + 훾푉￿(푠￿￿￿) − 푉￿(푠￿), (39) 

퐴￿ = ￿ (훾휆 )￿

> ￿￿￿￿￿
> ￿￿￿

훿￿￿￿. (40) 

The PPO clipped actor objective is 

퐿￿￿￿￿￿ (휃) = 피￿[min (푟￿(휃)퐴￿, clip (푟￿(휃), 1 − 휖, 1 + 휖)퐴￿) + 훽퐻 (휋￿)], (41) 

where 

푟￿(휃) = 휋￿(푎￿|표￿)

휋￿￿￿￿ (푎￿|표￿). (42) 

The critic loss and overall optimization objective are 

퐿￿￿￿￿￿￿ (휙) = 피￿ ￿￿푉￿(푠￿) − 푉￿

> ￿￿￿￿￿￿

￿￿

￿, (43) 9

퐿(휃, 휙) = −퐿￿￿￿￿￿ (휃) + 푐￿퐿￿￿￿￿￿￿ (휙). (44) 

Compared with standard MAPPO, the main differences lie not in the optimizer but in the semantic actor input, the 

velocity -level action interface, and the task -oriented reward structure. 

## 5 Evaluations 

This sec tion evaluates the proposed STG -MAPPO framework in a six -degree -of -freedom AUV target -tracking simulator 

integrated with the DI -engine multi -agent training interface [11] . The experiments are designed to assess whether semantic 

task graph modeling, communi cation -aware state construction, semantic rewards, and velocity -level action abstraction 

jointly improve persistent target tracking under decentralized execution. 

5.1 Environment and training configuration 

Experiments are conducted in a six -degree -of -free dom AUV target -tracking simulator integrated with the DI -engine multi -

agent training interface. The environment contains four AUVs and one moving target. In this paper, we do not further study 

dynamic changes in the number of AUVs, since this issue has bee n addressed in our previous IEEE TMC work [28] , where 

a lightweight population -adaptation mechanism was developed to adjust the AUV team size after a single training process. 

Each episode lasts 500 steps, and all methods are trained for 2.0e6 environment s teps with evaluations every 5000 steps. We 

consider both medium and hard scenarios, where the medium scenario serves as the main benchmark and the hard scenario 

introduces more challenging target motion and observation conditions. All results are averaged over three random seeds, 

and final -stage statistics are computed over the last 20% of evaluation checkpoints. 

We compare STG -MAPPO with representative MARL baselines, including MAPPO [27] , HAPPO [29] , MASAC [30] ,

MADDPG [31] , MADQN [32] , and MATD3 [33] baselines . STG -MAPPO uses semantic -enhanced observations, 

semantic task graph summaries, semantic tracking rewards, and the velocity -level action interface, whereas the baselines 

use non -semantic observations and their corresponding action settings. The evaluation focuses on both task performance 

and execution stability, including evaluation return, mean tracking error, tail target distance, target lost rate, action 

saturation rate, and control cost. Distance -related metrics are reported in kilometers . This protocol is designed to assess 

whether the proposed semantic task graph and velocity -level execution mechanism improve persistent target tracking rather 

than only increasing cumulative reward. The detailed parameters are provided in the Appendix. 

5. 2 Main comparison in the medium scenario 

In the medium scenario, we evaluate all trained methods under two test settings: the nominal setting and the combined -

stress setting. The nominal setting follows the standard evaluation configuration, while the co mbined -stress setting 

increases target maneuverability, enlarges the initial AUV -target separation, and degrades sensing and communication 

conditions. For each method, we reload the best checkpoint obtained during medium -scenario training and report the re sults 

over three random seeds, with thirty evaluation episodes for each seed. Table 1 summarizes the average target distance, 

target lost rate, and evaluation return under the two settings. 

Table 1 Performance comparison in the medium scenario under nomina l and combined -stress test settings.                                         

> Algorithm Nominal dist. (km) Combined dist. (km) Nominal lost Combined lost Avg. return
> STG -MAPPO 0.012 ± 0.001 0.013 ± 0.002 0.000 ± 0.000 0.000 ± 0.000 1018.84 ± 15.93
> MAPPO 0.185 ± 0.182 0.221 ± 0.199 0.053 ± 0.091 0.121 ± 0.194 720.53 ± 299.58
> MADDPG 0.175 ± 0.258 0.256 ± 0.391 0.048 ± 0.083 0.178 ± 0.309 756.38 ± 366.89
> MATD3 0.594 ± 0.216 0.965 ± 0.100 0.440 ± 0.184 0.646 ± 0.083 200.58 ± 239.84
> HAPPO 0.421 ± 0.040 0.713 ± 0.045 0.019 ± 0.032 0.617 ± 0.076 267.96 ± 190.40
> MADQN 0.680 ± 0.092 0.749 ± 0.108 0.593 ± 0.153 0.611 ± 0.100 79.80 ± 73.67
> MASAC 1.172 ± 0.002 1.219 ± 0.038 0.938 ± 0.054 0.875 ± 0.042 -256.10 ± 39.26

Table 1 compares the best medium -trained checkpoints under the nominal and combined -stress test settings. STG -

MAPPO maintains an average target distance of only 0.012 km in the nominal setting and 0.013 km under combined stress, 

with zero target loss in both case s. By contrast, MAPPO and MADDPG, the two strongest non -STG baselines in this setting, 

show noticeably larger distances under combined stress, reaching 0.221 km and 0.256 km, respectively, and their target -loss 

rates also increase. Other baselines degrade more severely, especially in target distance and loss probability. These results 

suggest that STG -MAPPO learns a more stable tracking policy rather than a policy that only performs well under standard 10 

evaluation conditions. The semantic task graph helps th e agents use observation quality, link availability, and neighbor 

tracking states more effectively, while the velocity -level action interface supports persistent tracking without relying on 

unstable low -level force/torque exploration. 

> Figure 2 Convergenc e curves in the medium 4 -AUV scenario.

Figure 2 reports the training dynamics in the medium scenario from four perspectives: evaluation return, mean tracking 

error, tail target distance, and target lost rate. STG -MAPPO shows a consistent learning pattern a cross these metrics. Its 

return increases quickly and then remains stable, while both the tracking error and tail target distance decrease to a low le vel 

after the early training stage. More importantly, the target lost rate is reduced to nearly zero and d oes not rebound in later 

evaluations, indicating that the policy learns to maintain the target over time rather than only reducing the distance 

temporarily. In comparison, the baseline methods either converge more slowly or show larger fluctuations across seeds. 

Several of them also retain nonzero target -loss rates in the late stage, which suggests that their learned policies are less 

reliable for persistent tracking. These curves show that the advantage of STG -MAPPO lies not only in the final performance, 

but also in faster convergence and more stable late -stage behavior. 

Figure 3 summarizes the final -stage performance in the medium scenario, where each metric is averaged over the last 20% 

of evaluation checkpoints. STG -MAPPO achieves the best overall resul t. I t attains the highest return while keeping the tail 

target distance, tracking error, and target lost rate at the lowest levels. This is important because a high return alone doe s not 

necessarily imply stable tracking; the policy must also keep the targ et within an effective observation range and avoid late -

stage loss. MAPPO performs better than most other baselines, but its remaining tracking error and tail distance are still 

much larger than those of STG -MAPPO. The comparison indicates that the improve ment mainly comes from the task -

semantic policy representation and the velocity -level action interface, which make the tracking objective easier to learn than 

using raw non -semantic observations or low -level control actions. 

> Figure 3 Final -stage comparis on in the medium 4 -AUV scenario over the last 20 percent of evaluation checkpoints.

11 

5. 3 Robustness analysis in the hard scenario 

In the hard scenario, we further examine the robustness of each method under more challenging tracking conditions. 

Compared wit h the medium scenario, the target is harder to maintain within the sensing range, and useful neighbor 

information becomes less stable due to degraded observation and communication conditions. This setting therefore tests 

whether a learned policy can still identify the current tracking phase, use reliable neighbor cues, and execute stable control 

when the task becomes less favorable. We evaluate the hard -trained checkpoints under both nominal and combined -stress 

settings, and report the corresponding target distance, target lost rate, and evaluation return in Table 2.

Table 2 Performance comparison in the hard scenario under nominal and combined -stress test settings.                                           

> Algorithm Nominal dist. (km) Combined dist. (km) Nominal lost Combined lost Avg. return
> STG -MAPPO 0.013 ± 0.002 0.013 ± 0.004 0.000 ± 0.000 0.000 ± 0.000 981.71 ± 33.50
> MAPPO 0.064 ± 0.009 0.095 ± 0.040 0.000 ± 0.000 0.002 ± 0.003 899.77 ± 68.37
> MADDPG 0.346 ± 0.399 0.282 ± 0.308 0.187 ± 0.324 0.138 ± 0.234 613.34 ± 298.83
> MATD3 0.554 ± 0.378 0.584 ± 0.386 0.332 ± 0.292 0.308 ± 0.297 275.03 ± 279.69
> HAPPO 0.518 ± 0.256 0.674 ± 0.377 0.361 ± 0.288 0.576 ± 0.428 218.68 ± 282.49
> MADQN 0.735 ± 0.253 0.812 ± 0.296 0.514 ± 0.229 0.499 ± 0.232 36.53 ± 169.35
> MASAC 1.200 ± 0.117 1.254 ± 0.130 0.839 ± 0.010 0.881 ± 0.083 -274.77 ± 28.11

Table 2 reports the best -checkpoint results in the hard scenario under both nominal and combined -stress settings. STG -

MAPPO keeps the average target distance at 0.013 km in both settings and achieves zero target loss, showing that its 

tracking behavior remains st able even when the task difficulty increases. MAPPO is the closest baseline, with a low 

nominal target -loss rate and a combined -stress distance of 0.095 km, but it still shows a clear gap from STG -MAPPO in 

distance accuracy. The remaining baselines degrade more noticeably: MADDPG and MATD3 show larger variance across 

seeds, while HAPPO, MADQN, and MASAC suffer from higher target -loss rates under stress. These results indicate that 

the semantic task graph helps the policy maintain reliable tracking cues when observations and neighbor information 

become less stable, rather than only improving performance under easier evaluation conditions. 

Figure 4 presents the convergence behavior in the hard scenario. STG -MAPPO maintains a stable learning trajectory 

across a ll four metrics: the evaluation return increases steadily, while the mean tracking error, tail target distance, and target 

lost rate remain consistently low after convergence. In particular, the target lost rate drops to zero and does not show late -

stage r ebound, which indicates that the learned policy can sustain target visibility under more difficult tracking conditions. 

In contrast, most baselines either converge more slowly or exhibit clear oscillations in distance -related metrics. This 

suggests that ra w geometric observations alone are not sufficient for stable cooperation when both observation quality and 

communication reliability degrade. 

Figure 4 Convergence curves in the hard 4 -AUV scenario. 12   

> Figure 5Final -stage comparison in the hard 4 -AUV sce nario over the last 20 percent of evaluation checkpoints.

Figure 5 reports the final -stage performance in the hard scenario, averaged over the last 20% of evaluation checkpoints. 

STG -MAPPO achieves the highest return while keeping the tail target distance, tracking error, and target lost rate at the 

lowest levels. This result is important because the hard scenario places stronger demands on both observation reliability and 

neighbor cooperation. Most non -semantic baselines either maintain larger distance err ors or still suffer from target -loss 

events after training, suggesting that their policies are less robust when useful observations and communication links 

become unstable. By contrast, STG -MAPPO benefits from explicit task -phase, observation -confidence, l ink -quality, and 

local -role cues, which help the actors make more reliable decentralized decisions under degraded underwater conditions. 

5. 4 Test for the tracking trajectories  

> Figure 6 GEBCO -based qualitative visualization of STG -MAPPO in realistic underwater terrain. Red spheres denote AUVs, purple and
> green spheres denote targets, and black spheres denote obstacles. Figures (a) –(b), (c) –(d), (e) –(f), and (g) –(h) correspond to 4 -AUV/1 -
> target, 8 -AUV/1 -target, 12 -AUV/2 -target, and 20 -AUV/1 -target settings, respectively.

To further evaluate the applicability of STG -MAPPO in realistic underwater terrain, we conduct qualitative visualization 

experiments using GEBCO bathymetric data from 21.2°N to 22.5°N and 121.6°E to 122.9°E. We first test the basic setting 

with four AUVs tracking one target. Then, based on our previously published IEEE TMC work on incremental MARL -

based AUV population adaptation [28], we extend the swarm size to 8, 12, and 20 AUVs. Figure 6 presents four 

representative cases. F igures 6(a) and 6(b) show the initial positions and tracking trajectories of four AUVs tracking one 

target. Figures 6(c) and 6(d) show eight AUVs tracking one target. Figures 6(e) and 6(f) show twelve AUVs tracking two 13 

targets. Figures 6(g) and 6(h) show t wenty AUVs tracking one target. Red spheres denote AUVs, purple and green spheres 

denote moving targets, and black spheres denote obstacles. The trajectories are sampled every 60 time slots over 3000 time 

slots.The visualization results show that STG -MAPPO can maintain intelligent, stable, and scalable underwater target -

tracking behaviors over realistic seabed terrain under different swarm sizes and target configurations. 

5. 5 Ablation experiments 

In this subsection, we conduct ablation experiments to examin e the contribution of each major component in STG -MAPPO. 

Four variants are considered. MAPPO -raw -tau6 directly learns policies in the six -degree -of -freedom force/torque action 

space. MAPPO -velocity3 introduces the velocity -level action abstraction but does not use semantic task graph modeling. 

MAPPO -semantic -state further incorporates semantic state information, while removing the full semantic reward and graph -

driven decision loop. STG -MAPPO -full denotes the complete proposed method. This comparison allows us to distinguish 

the effect of action abstraction from that of semantic state construction and semantic task graph modeling.   

> Figure 7Ablation convergence curves.

Figure 7 provides a detailed ablation view of how different components affect learning. The raw force/torque variant, 

MAPPO -raw -tau6, shows large oscillations in the early stage: its return drops sharply, while the tracking error, tail target 

distance, and target lost rate all increase substantially. This indicates that directly exploring in the coupled six -degree -of -

freedom action space makes policy learning unstable. After replacing the raw action with the velocity -level interface, 

MAPPO -velocity3 becomes much mo re stable and quickly suppresses target -loss events, showing that action abstraction 

effectively reduces the difficulty of low -level control. However, its tracking error and tail distance remain at a relatively 

high level, which suggests that action abstra ction alone is insufficient for precise persistent tracking. MAPPO -semantic -

state further improves stability by introducing task -related semantic information, but its final distance -related errors are still 

close to those of MAPPO -velocity3. In contrast, S TG -MAPPO -full rapidly converges within the early training stage, keeps 

the target lost rate at zero, and reduces both mean tracking error and tail target distance to near -zero levels. These results 

show that the three components play complementary roles: v elocity -level actions stabilize physical execution, semantic 

states provide task context, and the full semantic task graph with semantic reward guides the agents toward more accurate 

and persistent cooperative tracking. 

Figure 8 reports the final -stage abl ation results averaged over the last 20% of evaluation checkpoints. STG -MAPPO -full 

achieves the best overall performance: it obtains the highest evaluation return while reducing the tail mean target distance to 

a near -zero level. This indicates that the co mplete design not only improves cumulative reward but also maintains the target 

within a stable tracking range at the end of each episode. MAPPO -velocity3 and MAPPO -semantic -state both eliminate 

target loss, but their tail target distances remain around 0. 2 km, showing that action abstraction or semantic states alone can 

improve stability but are insufficient for precise persistent tracking. MAPPO -raw -tau6 obtains a relatively high return and a 

smaller mean tail distance than the two partial variants, but i t exhibits a nonzero target lost rate with large variance, which 

suggests that direct force/torque exploration can occasionally approach the target but does not guarantee reliable target 

maintenance. The action saturation rate is close to zero for all vari ants, indicating that the superiority of STG -MAPPO -full 14 

does not come from more aggressive boundary actions. Instead, the improvement is mainly due to the joint effect of 

velocity -level execution, semantic state construction, and semantic task graph -guided optimization, which together enable 

accurate and stable underwater target tracking. 

Figure 8 Final -stage ablation comparison over the last 20 percent of evaluation checkpoints. 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper investigated distributed autonomous agent networking for underwater AUV swarm target tracking under 

constrained acoustic communication. We first de veloped an open -source MARL -AUV platform that integrates DI -engine 

with a six -degree -of -freedom AUV target -tracking simulator, providing a unified interface for training, testing, and 

comparing representative MARL algorithms in physically constrained under water tasks. On this basis, we proposed STG -

MAPPO, a semantic task graph -enhanced MARL framework that connects communication -constrained network states with 

decentralized policy decisions. By encoding tracking diagnostics, task phases, observation confiden ce, link availability, 

neighbor tracking quality, and local role advantage into semantic -enhanced observations, STG -MAPPO enables each AUV 

to reason about both its own tracking state and the task value of neighboring information. The velocity -level action 

abstraction further reduces the difficulty of direct exploration in the coupled six -degree -of -freedom force/torque space, 

while the component -wise semantic reward guides the policy toward persistent tracking rather than transient target 

approaching. Experi ments in medium, hard, and stress -test scenarios show that STG -MAPPO achieves more stable 

convergence, lower tracking error, lower target -loss rate, and smoother control than representative MARL baselines. Future 

work will extend the platform with more rea listic acoustic -channel models, explicit information -freshness constraints, 

heterogeneous AUV/USV collaboration, and field -test validation in physical underwater environments. 

Acknowledgements The work is supported by the Joint Funds of the National Natura l Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62572169 , 

> 62572107 and the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Acoustics and Marine Information under Grant SKLA202501.

References           

> 1Wen D Z, Liu P X, Zhu G X, et al. Task -oriented sensing, computation, and co mmunication integration for multi -device edge AI. IEEE Trans Wireless
> Commun, 2024, 23: 2486 -2502
> 2 Wen D Z, Jiao X, Liu P X, et al. Task -oriented over -the -air computation for multi -device edge AI. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun, 2024, 23: 2039 -2053
> 3 Wu W C, Yang Y Q, Deng Y S, et al. Goal -oriented semantic communications for robotic waypoint transmission: the value and age of information
> approach. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun, 2024, 23: 18903 -18915
> 4 Wang YH, Guo S S, Deng Y Q, et al. Privacy -preserving task -oriented semantic communications against model inversion attacks. IEEE Trans Wireless
> Commun, 2024, 23: 10150 -10165
> 5Wu G X, Wang H, Mao F L, Wu S B. Distributed deep reinforcement learning -based resource management for underwater acoustic communication
> networks. IEICE Trans Commun, 2026, E109 -B: 400 -412
> 6Yang Z, Zhu Z Q, Zhao Y, et al. Cognitive underwater acoustic networking and target tracking: a co mprehensive survey. IEEE Trans Cogn Commun
> Netw, 2026, 12: 5913 -5936
> 7Yang Y, Feng L, Sun Y, et al. Multi -cluster cooperative offloading for VR task: a MARL approach with graph embedding. IEEE Trans Mobile Comput,
> 2024, 23: 8773 -8788

15 

8 Zheng L J, He J, Zh u X H, et al. RSMA -enabled multi -UAV secure communication via MARL with multi -task attention DRNN. IEEE Trans Inf 

Forensics Secur, 2025, 20: 12624 -12639 

9 Peng K X, Li P Y, Hao J Y. Signaling -driven incentive communication for enhanced multiagent reinforce ment learning in dynamic environments. IEEE 

Trans Cybern, 2026, 56: 725 -738 

10 He J H, Deng Y J, Wu S H, et al. Task -adaptive semantic communication with feedback: a conditional rate -distortion approach. IEEE Trans Cogn 

Commun Netw, 2026, 12: 7157 -7171 

11 Niu Y Z, Xu J X, Pu Y, et al. DI -engine: A universal AI system/engine for decision intelligence. GitHub, 2021. https://github.com/opendilab/DI -engine 

12 Zhu S C, Han G J, Lin C, Tao Q Z. Underwater target tracking based on hierarchical software -defined mul ti -AUV reinforcement learning: a multi -AUV 

advantage -attention actor -critic approach . IEEE Trans Mobile Comput, 2024, 23: 13639 -13653 

13 Zhu S C, Han G J, Lin C, Zhang Y. Underwater target tracking based on interrupted software -defined multi -AUV reinforcem ent learning: a multi -AUV 

time -saving MARL approach . IEEE Trans Mobile Comput, 2025, 24: 2124 -2136 

14 Cao X, Ren L, Sun C Y. Dynamic target tracking control of autonomous underwater vehicle based on trajectory prediction . IEEE Trans Cybern, 2023, 

53: 1968 -1981 

15 Yang Y, Li Y C, Yu W B, Guan X P. Underwater target tracking based on acoustic -optical fusion for multi -AUV systems. IEEE Trans Netw Sci Eng, 

2026, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3667901 

16 Li Y C, Yang Y, Yu W B, Guan X P. Cooperative highly -maneuvering target tracking using multi -AUV networks: a bearing -only approach. IEEE 

Trans Mobile Comput, 2026, 25: 2365 -2381 

17 Xie G W, Xu J Z, Zhang Z Q, et al. Is FISHER all you need in the multi -AUV underwater target tracking task? IEEE Trans Mobile Comput, 2026, 25: 

2091 -2106 

18 Li Y C, Yu W B, Guan X P. Trajectory planning -aided cooperative localization for multi -AUV networks under harsh communication conditions: a co -

designed approach. IEEE Trans Netw, 2025, 33: 3088 -3103 

19 Xie H Q, Qin Z J, Li G Y, Juang B H. Deep learning enabled semantic communication systems. IEEE Trans Signal Process, 2021, 6 9: 2663 -2675 

20 Weng Z Z, Qin Z J, Tao X M, Pan C K, Liu G Y, Li G Y. Deep learning enabled semantic c ommunications with speech recognition and synthesis. 

IEEE Trans Wireless Commun, 2023, 22: 6227 -6240 

21 Ma S, Qiao W N, Wu Y L, et al . Task -oriented explainable semantic communications. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun, 2023, 22: 9248 -9262 

22 Liu C H, Guo C L, Yang Y, Ni W L, Quek T Q S. OFDM -based digital semantic communication with importance awareness. IEEE Trans Commun, 

2024, 72: 6301 -631 5

23 Wang Y N, Han S J, Xu X D, et al . Feature importance -aware task -oriented semantic transmission and optimization. IEEE Trans Cogn Commun Netw, 

2024, 10: 1175 -1189 

24 Liu C H, Guo C L, Yang Y, Chen J J, Zhu M Y, Sun L N. Intelligent task -oriented semant ic communications:theory, technology and challenges .

Journal on Communications, 2022, 43: 41 -57 

25 Liu C H, Guo C L, Yang Y, et al. Intelligent task -oriented semantic communication method in artificial intelligence of things . Journal on 

Communications, 202 1, 42: 97 -108 

26 Sun Y Y, Liu M Q, Zhang S L, Zheng R H, Dong S L. Graph -based strategy evaluation for large -scale multiagent reinforcement learning. Sci China Inf 

Sci, 2025, 68: 182206 

27 Yu C, Velu A, Vinitsky E, et al. The surprising effectiveness of PP O in cooperative multi -agent games. In: Proceedings of the 36th Conference on 

Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022: 24611 -24624 

28 Zhu S C, Han G J, Lin C, Zhang F. Underwater Multiple AUV Cooperative Target Tracking Based on Minimal Reward Particip ation -Embedded 

MARL . IEEE Trans Mobile Comput, 2025, 24: 4169 -4182 

29 Kuba J G, Chen R Q, Wen M N, et al. Trust region policy optimisation in multi -agent reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the International 

Conference on Learning Representations, 2 022 

30 Haarnoja T, Zhou A, Abbeel P, et al. Soft actor -critic: off -policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In: Proceedings 

of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018: 1861 -1870 

31 Lowe R, Wu Y, Tamar A, et al. Multi -agent actor -critic for mixed cooperative -competitive environments. In: Proceedings of the 31st Conference on 

Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017: 6382 -6393 

32 Tampuu A, Matiisen T, Kodelja D, et al. Multiagent cooperation and compet ition with deep reinforcement learning. PLoS One, 2017, 12: e0172395 

33 Chen G, Mu X Z, Liang H J, et al. Distributed RAN Slicing Based on MATD3 Joint With Evolutionary Game Assisted User Associ ation for MEC -

Enabled HetNets. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun, 202 5, 24: 260 -276 16 

# Supplementary Appendix “Task -Semantic Graph -Driven 

# Distributed Agent Networking for Underwater Target Tracking ”

This standalone appendix supplements the main manuscript with complete metric definitions, additional figures, full stress -

test tables, ablation results, and pseudocode. It is intended to be submitted as supplementary material or used as an interna l

experiment record. 

## Appendix Structure 

A. Metric definitions: explains the tra cking, stability, control, and robustness metrics. 

B. Medium -scenario supplementary experiments: includes additional figures and complete final -stage tables. 

C. Hard -scenario supplementary experiments: includes corresponding hard -scenario figures and table s. 

D. Best -checkpoint stress tests: reports all perturbation conditions and all key indicators. 

E. Ablation supplementary experiments: provides ablation figures and complete tables. 

F. Pseudocode: summarizes STG -MAPPO training and checkpoint stress -test ev aluation. 

## A. Metric Definitions 

Table S1 Metric definitions used in supplementary experiments. 

Metric Meaning 

Eval return Episode -level cumulative evaluation return. Higher is better. 

Tail mean target distance 

(km) Mean Euclidean distance between all AUVs and the target over the final evaluation tail. Lower is better. 

Mean tracking error (km) Mean absolute deviation between the AUV -target distance and the desired tracking distance. Lower is better. 

Target lost rate Fraction of evaluation steps in which the target is outside effective observation/tracking conditions. Lower is better. 

Action saturation rate Fraction of actions near clipping or actuator saturation. Lower values indicate smoother and less aggressive control. 

Control cost Penalty asso ciated with action magnitude, action variation, and motion effort. Lower is preferable when tracking accuracy 

is similar. 

Tracking reward Reward component directly associated with distance reduction, tracking progress, and maintaining effective observation. 

Semantic reward Reward component generated from task phase, observation quality, communication quality, and role semantics. 

Communication quality Diagnostic indicator of effective local observation/communication availability. Higher is bette r. 

All final -stage statistics in the medium, hard, and ablation tables are reported as mean +/ - standard deviation across seeds 

unless otherwise noted. For best -checkpoint stress tests, values are computed over independent evaluation episodes under 

each perturbation condition. 

Table S 2 Evaluation parameters .

Notation Description Value 

General simulation and evaluation settings 

N Number of AUV agents 4

Target Number of targets 1

T Episode length / evaluation horizon 500 

Training budget Maximum training budget per run 2.0 × 10 ￿

Time step Simulation time step 0.1 s

Workspace Three -dimensional workspace boundary x, y, z ∈ [−1.0, 1.0]

Seeds Random seeds {0, 1, 2}

Evaluation interval Evaluation interval 5000 

AUV six -degree -of -freedom dynamic parameters 

Model AUV dynamic profile REMUS100 MSS -style 6DOF model 

M Mass and added -mass model REMUS100 MSS -style parameters 

m Vehicle mass 31 .9 kg 

Inertia Rigid -body rotational inertia I￿ = 0.16 kg · m￿

I￿ = 4.10 kg · m￿, I￿ = 4.10 kg · m￿

Added mass Added -mass coefficients X￿￿￿￿ = −2.0, Y￿￿￿￿ = −35 .0, Z￿￿￿￿ = −35 .017 

Notation Description Value 

K￿￿￿￿ = −0.12 , M￿￿￿￿ = −4.5, N￿ ￿￿￿ = −4.5

D(ν) Hydrodynamic damping coefficients 

X￿ = 4.0, Y￿ = 8.0, Z￿ = 10 .0

X|￿|￿ = 18 .0, Y|￿|￿ = 30 .0, Z|￿|￿ = 35 .0

K￿ = −0.8, M￿ = −3.0, N￿ = −2.5

νlin Maximum body -frame velocity components u￿￿￿ = 1.5 m/s, v￿￿￿ = 0.5 m/s, w￿￿￿ = 0.5 m/s

νang Maximum angular -rate components p￿￿￿ = q￿￿￿ = r￿￿￿ = 1.2 rad /s

τ Maximum generalized force and moment τ￿ = 35 .0 N, τ￿ = 20 .0 N, τ￿ = 20 .0 N

τ￿ = 8.0 N · m, τ￿ = 10 .0 N · m, τ￿ = 10 .0 N · m

Initial -condition and target -motion settings 

Initial separation Minimum initial inter -AUV separation at least 0.10 

Medium Medium -stage reset profile 

||p￿(0)|| ∈ [0.25 , 0.55 ]

||p￿(0) − p￿(0)|| ∈ [0.25 , 0.45 ]

||v￿(0)|| ∈ [0.003 , 0.008 ]

Hard Hard -stage reset profile 

||p￿(0)|| ∈ [0.45 , 0.75 ]

||p￿(0) − p￿(0)|| ∈ [0.40 , 0.70 ]

||v￿(0)|| ∈ [0.006 , 0.014 ]

Tracking objective, sensing and action interfaces 

d∗ Desired tracking distance 0.015 

R￿ Effective sensing range 0.45 

Loss threshold Target -loss distance threshold 0.65 

o￿,￿￿￿ Raw observation component used in the manuscript positions , velocities , relative target and neighbor states 

o￿,￿￿￿ STG -MAPPO semantic policy input raw state + tracking diagnostics + semantic graph features 

a￿ STG -MAPPO velocity -level action interface a￿ ∈ [−1, 1]￿

action _scale = 0.75 , smoothing = 0.20 , Δa￿￿￿ = 0.35 

a￿ Raw baseline low -level action interface a￿ ∈ [−1, 1]￿

action _scale = 0.18 

Optimization and training hyperparameters 

γ Discount factor 0.95 

λ GAE parameter for PPO -family algorithms 0.95 

Actor learning rate PPO -family actor learning rate 3.0 × 10 ￿￿

PPO batch size Batch size for MAPPO / STG -MAPPO / HAPPO 800 

Q-network batch size Batch size for MADDPG / MATD3 / MASAC 1024 

Exploration noise Exploration noise for MADDPG / MATD3 / ATOC 0.10 / 0.10 / 0.15 

Replay buffer Replay -buffer capacity 1.0 × 10 ￿to 2.0 × 10 ￿

## B. Medium -Scenario Supplementary Experiments 

The main text reports the primary medium -scenario convergence curves and selected final -stage results. Here we provide 

additional distributional and diagnostic figures that support the interpretation of convergence stability, reward shaping, an d

seed robus tness. 

Figure S1 Medium scenario: final 20% boxplots for main metrics. 18 

Figure S2 Medium scenario: STG -MAPPO reward component diagnostics. 

Figure S 3 Medium scenario: Action saturation and control -cost diagnostics in the medium 4 -AUV scenario. 

Figure S 4 Medium scenario: per -seed comparison between STG -MAPPO and MAPPO. 19 

The supplementary medium figures show that the advantage of STG -MAPPO is not only reflected in mean curves. The 

final -stage distributions remain concentrated near low tracking distance and low target -loss values, and the reward -

component plot indicates that semantic shaping contributes without causing action saturation. 

Table S 3 Medium scenario: complete final -stage metrics over the last 20% evaluation points. 

Algorithm Seeds Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Sat. Control 

STG -MAPPO 3 254.81 +/ - 11.66 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.006 

MAPPO 3 233.06 +/ - 17.00 0.136 +/ - 0.107 0.133 +/ - 0.035 0.018 +/ - 0.022 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.029 +/ - 0.004 

MADDPG 3 130.89 +/ - 91.74 0.402 +/ - 0.241 0.349 +/ - 0.207 0.130 +/ - 0.162 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.028 +/ - 0.001 

MATD3 3 44.69 +/ - 49.05 0.647 +/ - 0.108 0.552 +/ - 0.130 0.367 +/ - 0.177 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.027 +/ - 0.004 

HAPPO 3 -25.42 +/ - 62.54 1.020 +/ - 0.276 0.858 +/ - 0.249 0.640 +/ - 0.223 0.103 +/ - 0.090 0.124 +/ - 0.062 

MADQN 3 -13.61 +/ - 55.28 0.940 +/ - 0.194 0.747 +/ - 0.185 0.564 +/ - 0.230 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC 3 -65.52 +/ - 7.39 1.239 +/ - 0.077 0.999 +/ - 0.055 0.779 +/ - 0.037 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.001 

Table S 4 Medium scenario: per -seed final -stage metrics. 

Algorithm Seed Eval pts Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Sat. Control 

STG -MAPPO 0 500 261.53 0.012 0.013 0.000 0.000 0.016 

STG -MAPPO 1 500 261.55 0.013 0.011 0.000 0.000 0.020 

STG -MAPPO 2 500 241.35 0.018 0.013 0.000 0.000 0.008 

MAPPO 0 500 231.59 0.077 0.135 0.002 0.000 0.029 

MAPPO 1 500 250.75 0.070 0.097 0.008 0.000 0.033 

MAPPO 2 500 216.84 0.259 0.168 0.043 0.000 0.026 

MADDPG 0 996 26.58 0.676 0.585 0.316 0.000 0.028 

MADDPG 1 996 167.09 0.308 0.265 0.054 0.000 0.030 

MADDPG 2 996 199.01 0.222 0.197 0.019 0.000 0.028 

MATD3 0 996 20.47 0.647 0.582 0.421 0.000 0.027 

MATD3 1 996 12.47 0.754 0.664 0.510 0.000 0.023 

MATD3 2 996 101.15 0.539 0.410 0.169 0.000 0.031 

HAPPO 0 500 45.70 0.708 0.575 0.395 0.006 0.060 

HAPPO 1 500 -71.81 1.232 1.043 0.831 0.184 0.184 

HAPPO 2 500 -50.16 1.120 0.957 0.693 0.119 0.129 

MADQN 0 500 -22.54 0.929 0.749 0.582 0.000 0.016 

MADQN 1 500 -63.88 1.140 0.930 0.785 0.000 0.015 

MADQN 2 500 45.59 0.752 0.560 0.327 0.000 0.016 

MASAC 0 996 -66.72 1.178 0.970 0.779 0.000 0.013 

MASAC 1 996 -57.60 1.213 0.964 0.741 0.000 0.015 

MASAC 2 996 -72.24 1.326 1.062 0.816 0.000 0.016 

## C. Hard -Scenario Supplementary Experiments 

The hard scenario increases target maneuvering difficulty and the initial separation between AUVs and the target. The 

supplementary hard -scenario figures and tables verify whether each algorithm remains stable under this more demanding 

setting. 

Figure S 5 Hard scenario: final 20% boxplots for main metrics. 20 

Figure S 6 Hard scenario: STG -MAPPO reward component diagnostics. 

Figure S 7 Hard scenario : Action saturation and control -cost diagnostics in the hard 4 -AUV scenario. 

Figure S 8 Hard scenario: per -seed comparison between STG -MAPPO and MAPPO. 21 

In the hard scenario, several raw baselines show larger tail distances or higher target -loss rates. STG -MAPPO maintains 

low target distance and stable reward components, indicating that semantic phase information and task -graph diagnostics 

improve robustness under harder target motion. 

Table S 5 Hard scenario: complete final -stage metrics over the last 20% ev aluation points. 

Algorithm Seeds Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Sat. Control 

STG -MAPPO 3 255.28 +/ - 1.90 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.022 +/ - 0.004 0.001 +/ - 0.001 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.018 +/ - 0.003 

MAPPO 3 109.46 +/ - 67.36 0.452 +/ - 0.249 0.411 +/ - 0.161 0.198 +/ - 0.147 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.026 +/ - 0.002 

MADDPG 3 126.14 +/ - 58.74 0.374 +/ - 0.150 0.362 +/ - 0.132 0.124 +/ - 0.099 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.029 +/ - 0.000 

MATD3 3 13.36 +/ - 61.51 0.695 +/ - 0.207 0.634 +/ - 0.194 0.462 +/ - 0.270 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.027 +/ - 0.004 

HAPPO 3 5.45 +/ - 24.47 0.854 +/ - 0.117 0.711 +/ - 0.093 0.447 +/ - 0.081 0.011 +/ - 0.011 0.067 +/ - 0.024 

MADQN 3 -27.22 +/ - 22.49 0.925 +/ - 0.022 0.770 +/ - 0.052 0.596 +/ - 0.100 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.002 

MASAC 3 -70.57 +/ - 3.21 1.215 +/ - 0.078 1.029 +/ - 0.035 0.801 +/ - 0.017 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.001 

Table S 6 Hard scenario: per -seed final -stage metrics. 

Algorithm Seed Eval pts Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Sat. Control 

STG -MAPPO 0 500 255.36 0.012 0.026 0.003 0.000 0.017 

STG -MAPPO 1 500 253.34 0.011 0.020 0.001 0.000 0.021 

STG -MAPPO 2 500 257.14 0.013 0.019 0.000 0.000 0.015 

MAPPO 0 500 58.89 0.704 0.539 0.301 0.000 0.024 

MAPPO 1 500 83.57 0.448 0.463 0.263 0.000 0.028 

MAPPO 2 500 185.92 0.205 0.231 0.030 0.000 0.027 

MADDPG 0 996 73.69 0.498 0.486 0.226 0.000 0.029 

MADDPG 1 996 115.12 0.416 0.375 0.118 0.000 0.030 

MADDPG 2 996 189.62 0.208 0.224 0.028 0.000 0.029 

MATD3 0 996 8.62 0.607 0.591 0.466 0.000 0.028 

MATD3 1 996 -45.64 0.932 0.845 0.730 0.000 0.023 

MATD3 2 996 77.11 0.547 0.465 0.190 0.000 0.032 

HAPPO 0 500 33.39 0.739 0.608 0.354 0.003 0.047 

HAPPO 1 500 -4.90 0.849 0.737 0.504 0.008 0.061 

HAPPO 2 500 -12.15 0.973 0.789 0.484 0.023 0.093 

MADQN 0 500 -7.75 0.901 0.711 0.518 0.000 0.018 

MADQN 1 500 -51.83 0.931 0.807 0.709 0.000 0.015 

MADQN 2 500 -22.07 0.944 0.791 0.562 0.000 0.014 

MASAC 0 996 -67.19 1.181 0.994 0.782 0.000 0.015 

MASAC 1 996 -70.93 1.160 1.028 0.808 0.000 0.016 

MASAC 2 996 -73.59 1.304 1.065 0.813 0.000 0.015 

## D. Best -Checkpoint Stress -Test Supplement 

The stress -test results reload the best checkpoint of each algorithm and evaluate it under multiple perturbations. Unlike 

training -curve statistics, this procedure directly tests whether a saved policy generalizes to modified target speed, 

initialization r ange, sensing range, and communication quality. 

Table S 7 Medium -trained best checkpoints under all medium stress conditions. 

Algorithm Condition Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Action Sat. Control Comm. 

STG -MAPPO Nominal -medium 1039.2 +/ - 5.0 0.013 +/ - 0.001 0.003 +/ - 0.001 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.250 +/ - 0.020 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.979 +/ - 0.005 

STG -MAPPO Fast target 1017.1 +/ - 34.0 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.241 +/ - 0.031 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.978 +/ - 0.005 

STG -MAPPO Far initialization 1011.2 +/ - 35.0 0.013 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.247 +/ - 0.018 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.957 +/ - 0.010 

STG -MAPPO Limited sensing 1031.4 +/ - 4.9 0.013 +/ - 0.001 0.003 +/ - 0.001 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.253 +/ - 0.020 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.969 +/ - 0.007 

STG -MAPPO Communication 

degraded 

1012.1 +/ - 4.8 0.013 +/ - 0.001 0.003 +/ - 0.001 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.253 +/ - 0.020 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.969 +/ - 0.007 

STG -MAPPO Combined stress 1002.0 +/ - 44.1 0.013 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.243 +/ - 0.027 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.003 0.945 +/ - 0.014 

MAPPO Nominal -medium 798.4 +/ - 362.8 0.185 +/ - 0.198 0.171 +/ - 0.197 0.052 +/ - 0.157 0.297 +/ - 0.032 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.010 +/ - 0.002 0.610 +/ - 0.306 

MAPPO Fast target 767.4 +/ - 430.6 0.205 +/ - 0.253 0.191 +/ - 0.253 0.111 +/ - 0.333 0.298 +/ - 0.029 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.010 +/ - 0.002 0.596 +/ - 0.328 

MAPPO Far initialization 697.1 +/ - 393.2 0.215 +/ - 0.235 0.200 +/ - 0.235 0.107 +/ - 0.287 0.297 +/ - 0.032 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.010 +/ - 0.002 0.509 +/ - 0.290 

MAPPO Limited sensing 741.0 +/ - 358.5 0.185 +/ - 0.198 0.171 +/ - 0.197 0.052 +/ - 0.157 0.297 +/ - 0.032 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.010 +/ - 0.002 0.490 +/ - 0.330 

MAPPO Communication 

degraded 

692.1 +/ - 328.0 0.185 +/ - 0.198 0.171 +/ - 0.197 0.052 +/ - 0.157 0.297 +/ - 0.032 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.010 +/ - 0.002 0.490 +/ - 0.330 

MAPPO Combined stress 627.1 +/ - 391.2 0.221 +/ - 0.244 0.206 +/ - 0.244 0.121 +/ - 0.301 0.300 +/ - 0.029 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.011 +/ - 0.002 0.380 +/ - 0.300 

MADDPG Nominal -medium 854.8 +/ - 324.8 0.175 +/ - 0.237 0.166 +/ - 0.233 0.048 +/ - 0.144 0.334 +/ - 0.055 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.005 0.644 +/ - 0.330 

MADDPG Fast target 818.9 +/ - 363.8 0.211 +/ - 0.286 0.200 +/ - 0.282 0.107 +/ - 0.241 0.334 +/ - 0.052 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.004 0.621 +/ - 0.344 

MADDPG Far initialization 676.7 +/ - 483.3 0.251 +/ - 0.347 0.240 +/ - 0.344 0.174 +/ - 0.333 0.336 +/ - 0.047 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.004 0.513 +/ - 0.375 

MADDPG Limited sensing 802.0 +/ - 338.0 0.175 +/ - 0.237 0.166 +/ - 0.233 0.048 +/ - 0.144 0.334 +/ - 0.055 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.005 0.532 +/ - 0.383 

MADDPG Communication 

degraded 

748.8 +/ - 300.6 0.175 +/ - 0.237 0.166 +/ - 0.233 0.048 +/ - 0.144 0.334 +/ - 0.055 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.005 0.532 +/ - 0.383 

MADDPG Combined stress 637.1 +/ - 469.0 0.256 +/ - 0.349 0.244 +/ - 0.347 0.178 +/ - 0.335 0.337 +/ - 0.048 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.004 0.443 +/ - 0.337 

MATD3 Nominal -medium 343.3 +/ - 330.0 0.594 +/ - 0.290 0.581 +/ - 0.290 0.440 +/ - 0.287 0.388 +/ - 0.026 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.002 0.164 +/ - 0.163 

MATD3 Fast target 323.0 +/ - 336.9 0.612 +/ - 0.323 0.597 +/ - 0.322 0.408 +/ - 0.251 0.387 +/ - 0.021 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.002 0.163 +/ - 0.188 

MATD3 Far initialization -18.5 +/ - 273.1 0.972 +/ - 0.378 0.957 +/ - 0.378 0.643 +/ - 0.319 0.403 +/ - 0.021 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.014 +/ - 0.037 

MATD3 Limited sensing 297.8 +/ - 307.6 0.594 +/ - 0.290 0.581 +/ - 0.290 0.440 +/ - 0.287 0.388 +/ - 0.026 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.002 0.042 +/ - 0.084 

MATD3 Communication 

degraded 

293.5 +/ - 302.9 0.594 +/ - 0.290 0.581 +/ - 0.290 0.440 +/ - 0.287 0.388 +/ - 0.026 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.002 0.042 +/ - 0.084 

MATD3 Combined stress -35.5 +/ - 259.0 0.965 +/ - 0.382 0.950 +/ - 0.381 0.646 +/ - 0.324 0.404 +/ - 0.018 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

HAPPO Nominal -medium 472.9 +/ - 83.1 0.421 +/ - 0.066 0.406 +/ - 0.066 0.019 +/ - 0.037 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.204 +/ - 0.082 

HAPPO Fast target 303.6 +/ - 124.5 0.598 +/ - 0.093 0.583 +/ - 0.093 0.411 +/ - 0.227 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.115 +/ - 0.069 

HAPPO Far initialization 44.6 +/ - 145.2 0.685 +/ - 0.088 0.670 +/ - 0.088 0.549 +/ - 0.229 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

HAPPO Limited sensing 387.8 +/ - 54.6 0.421 +/ - 0.066 0.406 +/ - 0.066 0.019 +/ - 0.037 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.007 

HAPPO Communication 

degraded 

387.6 +/ - 54.2 0.421 +/ - 0.066 0.406 +/ - 0.066 0.019 +/ - 0.037 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.007 

HAPPO Combined stress 11.3 +/ - 135.8 0.713 +/ - 0.085 0.698 +/ - 0.085 0.617 +/ - 0.208 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MADQN Nominal -medium 142.5 +/ - 152.2 0.680 +/ - 0.144 0.665 +/ - 0.144 0.593 +/ - 0.296 0.054 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.074 +/ - 0.050 

MADQN Fast target 118.9 +/ - 187.4 0.713 +/ - 0.193 0.698 +/ - 0.193 0.581 +/ - 0.301 0.055 +/ - 0.008 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.069 +/ - 0.049 

MADQN Far initialization 13.7 +/ - 167.0 0.733 +/ - 0.185 0.718 +/ - 0.185 0.630 +/ - 0.235 0.050 +/ - 0.010 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.021 

MADQN Limited sensing 109.6 +/ - 142.0 0.680 +/ - 0.144 0.665 +/ - 0.144 0.593 +/ - 0.296 0.054 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.026 

MADQN Communication 

degraded 

108.3 +/ - 142.2 0.680 +/ - 0.144 0.665 +/ - 0.144 0.593 +/ - 0.296 0.054 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.013 +/ - 0.026 

MADQN Combined stress -14.1 +/ - 155.4 0.749 +/ - 0.182 0.734 +/ - 0.182 0.611 +/ - 0.234 0.050 +/ - 0.009 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Nominal -medium -241.9 +/ - 73.9 1.172 +/ - 0.090 1.157 +/ - 0.090 0.938 +/ - 0.108 0.064 +/ - 0.010 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.026 +/ - 0.013 

MASAC Fast target -226.4 +/ - 74.8 1.195 +/ - 0.125 1.180 +/ - 0.125 0.873 +/ - 0.173 0.064 +/ - 0.009 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.026 +/ - 0.013 22 

MASAC Far initialization -278.6 +/ - 93.8 1.205 +/ - 0.152 1.190 +/ - 0.152 0.889 +/ - 0.132 0.063 +/ - 0.006 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MASAC Limited sensing -255.9 +/ - 70.7 1.172 +/ - 0.090 1.157 +/ - 0.090 0.938 +/ - 0.108 0.064 +/ - 0.010 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Communication 

degraded 

-255.9 +/ - 70.7 1.172 +/ - 0.090 1.157 +/ - 0.090 0.938 +/ - 0.108 0.064 +/ - 0.010 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Combined stress -277.9 +/ - 91.2 1.219 +/ - 0.164 1.204 +/ - 0.164 0.875 +/ - 0.125 0.063 +/ - 0.007 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

Table S 8 Hard -trained best checkpoints under all hard stress conditions. 

Algorithm Condition Return Tail dist. Track err. Lost Action Sat. Control Comm. 

STG -MAPPO Nominal -hard 994.2 +/ - 68.9 0.013 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.241 +/ - 0.050 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.005 0.956 +/ - 0.013 

STG -MAPPO Faster target 979.9 +/ - 78.0 0.014 +/ - 0.006 0.005 +/ - 0.004 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.233 +/ - 0.053 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.005 0.954 +/ - 0.012 

STG -MAPPO Farther initialization 994.2 +/ - 68.9 0.013 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.241 +/ - 0.050 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.005 0.956 +/ - 0.013 

STG -MAPPO Limited sensing 984.6 +/ - 71.4 0.012 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.245 +/ - 0.046 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.005 0.942 +/ - 0.018 

STG -MAPPO Communication 

degraded 

965.8 +/ - 71.1 0.012 +/ - 0.003 0.003 +/ - 0.002 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.245 +/ - 0.046 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.016 +/ - 0.005 0.942 +/ - 0.018 

STG -MAPPO Combined stress 971.5 +/ - 83.2 0.014 +/ - 0.006 0.005 +/ - 0.004 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.237 +/ - 0.049 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.015 +/ - 0.005 0.941 +/ - 0.017 

MAPPO Nominal -hard 950.8 +/ - 97.6 0.064 +/ - 0.032 0.050 +/ - 0.031 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.314 +/ - 0.019 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.724 +/ - 0.110 

MAPPO Faster target 911.1 +/ - 137.5 0.095 +/ - 0.088 0.081 +/ - 0.087 0.002 +/ - 0.006 0.312 +/ - 0.020 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.682 +/ - 0.151 

MAPPO Farther initialization 950.8 +/ - 97.6 0.064 +/ - 0.032 0.050 +/ - 0.031 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.314 +/ - 0.019 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.724 +/ - 0.110 

MAPPO Limited sensing 898.6 +/ - 114.7 0.064 +/ - 0.032 0.050 +/ - 0.031 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.314 +/ - 0.019 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.619 +/ - 0.147 

MAPPO Communication 

degraded 

836.7 +/ - 100.0 0.064 +/ - 0.032 0.050 +/ - 0.031 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.314 +/ - 0.019 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.619 +/ - 0.147 

MAPPO Combined stress 850.8 +/ - 161.5 0.095 +/ - 0.088 0.081 +/ - 0.087 0.002 +/ - 0.006 0.312 +/ - 0.020 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.012 +/ - 0.001 0.557 +/ - 0.208 

MADDPG Nominal -hard 645.8 +/ - 359.3 0.346 +/ - 0.365 0.331 +/ - 0.365 0.187 +/ - 0.305 0.343 +/ - 0.048 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.454 +/ - 0.301 

MADDPG Faster target 649.6 +/ - 390.4 0.282 +/ - 0.407 0.268 +/ - 0.407 0.139 +/ - 0.277 0.349 +/ - 0.043 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.466 +/ - 0.283 

MADDPG Farther initialization 645.8 +/ - 359.3 0.346 +/ - 0.365 0.331 +/ - 0.365 0.187 +/ - 0.305 0.343 +/ - 0.048 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.454 +/ - 0.301 

MADDPG Limited sensing 589.3 +/ - 353.4 0.346 +/ - 0.365 0.331 +/ - 0.365 0.187 +/ - 0.305 0.343 +/ - 0.048 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.340 +/ - 0.291 

MADDPG Communication 

degraded 

555.3 +/ - 326.4 0.346 +/ - 0.365 0.331 +/ - 0.365 0.187 +/ - 0.305 0.343 +/ - 0.048 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.340 +/ - 0.291 

MADDPG Combined stress 594.2 +/ - 373.7 0.282 +/ - 0.407 0.268 +/ - 0.407 0.139 +/ - 0.277 0.349 +/ - 0.043 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.350 +/ - 0.245 

MATD3 Nominal -hard 301.0 +/ - 407.0 0.554 +/ - 0.449 0.539 +/ - 0.448 0.332 +/ - 0.392 0.391 +/ - 0.025 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.205 +/ - 0.244 

MATD3 Faster target 295.5 +/ - 380.8 0.584 +/ - 0.452 0.569 +/ - 0.452 0.308 +/ - 0.414 0.393 +/ - 0.029 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.188 +/ - 0.200 

MATD3 Farther initialization 301.0 +/ - 407.0 0.554 +/ - 0.449 0.539 +/ - 0.448 0.332 +/ - 0.392 0.391 +/ - 0.025 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.205 +/ - 0.244 

MATD3 Limited sensing 260.3 +/ - 379.0 0.554 +/ - 0.449 0.539 +/ - 0.448 0.332 +/ - 0.392 0.391 +/ - 0.025 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.131 +/ - 0.173 

MATD3 Communication 

degraded 

247.3 +/ - 363.7 0.554 +/ - 0.449 0.539 +/ - 0.448 0.332 +/ - 0.392 0.391 +/ - 0.025 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.131 +/ - 0.173 

MATD3 Combined stress 245.0 +/ - 350.7 0.584 +/ - 0.452 0.569 +/ - 0.452 0.308 +/ - 0.414 0.393 +/ - 0.029 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.017 +/ - 0.002 0.090 +/ - 0.114 

HAPPO Nominal -hard 271.9 +/ - 294.0 0.518 +/ - 0.237 0.503 +/ - 0.237 0.361 +/ - 0.269 0.074 +/ - 0.111 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.128 +/ - 0.202 

HAPPO Faster target 161.8 +/ - 353.5 0.674 +/ - 0.345 0.659 +/ - 0.345 0.576 +/ - 0.392 0.075 +/ - 0.113 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.118 +/ - 0.198 

HAPPO Farther initialization 271.9 +/ - 294.0 0.518 +/ - 0.237 0.503 +/ - 0.237 0.361 +/ - 0.269 0.074 +/ - 0.111 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.128 +/ - 0.202 

HAPPO Limited sensing 240.6 +/ - 266.0 0.518 +/ - 0.237 0.503 +/ - 0.237 0.361 +/ - 0.269 0.074 +/ - 0.111 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.060 +/ - 0.120 

HAPPO Communication 

degraded 

234.6 +/ - 256.2 0.518 +/ - 0.237 0.503 +/ - 0.237 0.361 +/ - 0.269 0.074 +/ - 0.111 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.060 +/ - 0.120 

HAPPO Combined stress 131.3 +/ - 323.0 0.674 +/ - 0.345 0.659 +/ - 0.345 0.576 +/ - 0.392 0.075 +/ - 0.113 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.002 +/ - 0.003 0.061 +/ - 0.122 

MADQN Nominal -hard 45.9 +/ - 241.0 0.735 +/ - 0.337 0.720 +/ - 0.337 0.514 +/ - 0.343 0.056 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.001 +/ - 0.000 0.011 +/ - 0.026 

MADQN Faster target 48.3 +/ - 256.9 0.812 +/ - 0.397 0.797 +/ - 0.397 0.499 +/ - 0.345 0.051 +/ - 0.009 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.019 +/ - 0.044 

MADQN Farther initialization 45.9 +/ - 241.0 0.735 +/ - 0.337 0.720 +/ - 0.337 0.514 +/ - 0.343 0.056 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.001 +/ - 0.000 0.011 +/ - 0.026 

MADQN Limited sensing 27.0 +/ - 228.8 0.735 +/ - 0.337 0.720 +/ - 0.337 0.514 +/ - 0.343 0.056 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.001 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MADQN Communication 

degraded 

27.0 +/ - 228.8 0.735 +/ - 0.337 0.720 +/ - 0.337 0.514 +/ - 0.343 0.056 +/ - 0.005 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.001 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MADQN Combined stress 25.0 +/ - 241.0 0.812 +/ - 0.397 0.797 +/ - 0.397 0.499 +/ - 0.345 0.051 +/ - 0.009 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.001 +/ - 0.002 

MASAC Nominal -hard -275.2 +/ - 86.2 1.200 +/ - 0.146 1.185 +/ - 0.146 0.839 +/ - 0.165 0.062 +/ - 0.007 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Faster target -268.5 +/ - 79.7 1.254 +/ - 0.164 1.239 +/ - 0.164 0.881 +/ - 0.126 0.062 +/ - 0.006 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Farther initialization -275.2 +/ - 86.2 1.200 +/ - 0.146 1.185 +/ - 0.146 0.839 +/ - 0.165 0.062 +/ - 0.007 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.001 

MASAC Limited sensing -277.7 +/ - 84.3 1.200 +/ - 0.146 1.185 +/ - 0.146 0.839 +/ - 0.165 0.062 +/ - 0.007 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MASAC Communication 

degraded 

-277.7 +/ - 84.3 1.200 +/ - 0.146 1.185 +/ - 0.146 0.839 +/ - 0.165 0.062 +/ - 0.007 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

MASAC Combined stress -274.4 +/ - 74.6 1.254 +/ - 0.164 1.239 +/ - 0.164 0.881 +/ - 0.126 0.062 +/ - 0.006 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 

The full stress -test tables show that STG -MAPPO preserves low tail distance and target -loss rate across all perturbation 

types. This is important because the proposed method is intended for autonomous AUV networking rather than a single 

fixed training dist ribution. 

## E. Ablation Supplementary Experiments 

The ablation study decomposes the proposed method into action abstraction and semantic information. MAPPO -velocity3 -

nonsemantic tests whether the low -dimensional velocity action alone explains the improvement . MAPPO -semantic -state -

only tests semantic observations without semantic reward. STG -MAPPO -full combines semantic state, semantic graph 

diagnostics, semantic reward, and velocity -level action abstraction. 

Table S 9 Ablation summary over the last 20% evaluation points. 

Variant Seeds Seed IDs Return Tail dist. Lost Sat. Control 

MAPPO -raw -tau6 3 0,1,2 233.06 +/ - 17.00 0.136 +/ - 0.107 0.018 +/ - 0.022 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.029 +/ - 0.004 

MAPPO -velocity3 3 0,1,2 212.15 +/ - 18.96 0.208 +/ - 0.060 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.047 +/ - 0.002 

MAPPO -semantic -state 3 0,1,2 205.48 +/ - 10.04 0.215 +/ - 0.029 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.039 +/ - 0.003 

STG -MAPPO -full 3 0,1,2 254.81 +/ - 11.66 0.014 +/ - 0.003 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.000 +/ - 0.000 0.014 +/ - 0.006 

The Table S 9 indicate that velocity abstraction alone is insufficient to reproduce the full STG -MAPPO performance. 

Semantic state without semantic reward also does not fully exploit task -phase information. The stronge st behavior appears 

when semantic state, semantic graph diagnostics, semantic reward, and velocity -level execution are used together. 

## F. Pseudocode Algorithm S1 STG -MAPPO training with semantic task graph. 

Input: AUV6DOF environment, semantic feature builder, PPO actor -critic, horizon T. 23 

Initialize actor parameters theta, critic parameters phi, and rollout buffer D. 

for each training iteration do 

Reset parallel environments under the selected curriculum stage. 

for t = 1,...,T do 

For each AUV i, construct normalized local observation o_i. 

Build semantic phase, observation -quality, communication, and role features. 

Build semantic task -graph diagnostics from neighbor and target -tracking states. 

Actor p i_theta outputs normalized velocity action a_i in [ -1,1]^3. 

Map a_i to desired velocity and then to six -degree -of -freedom generalized force tau_i. 

Step AUV dynamics, target motion, reward decomposition, done, and info diagnostics. 

Store transition and reward terms in D. 

end for 

Estimate advantages and update actor/critic with clipped PPO objective. 

Periodically evaluate and save the best checkpoint. 

end for 

Algorithm S2 Best -checkpoint stress -test evaluation. 

Input: compl eted runs, algorithms, seeds, stress conditions, K evaluation episodes. 

for each scenario in {medium, hard} do 

for each algorithm and seed do 

Load ckpt_best.pth.tar from the completed training run. 

for each stress condition c do 

Apply condition -specific target -speed, initialization, sensing, or communication override. 

Run K independent evaluation episodes with horizon 500. 

Record return, tail100 distance, tracking error, target -lost rate, action, control, and 

communication metrics. 

end for 

end for 

Aggregate mean +/ - standard deviation and export paper tables. 

end for