Title: MAVEN A Multi-Agent Framework for Multicultural Text-to-Video Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16716v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 00:29:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# MAVEN: A Multi-Agent Framework for Multicultural Text-to-Video Generation 

Shuowei Li Yuming Zhao Parth Bhalerao Oana Ignat 

Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, USA 

oignat@scu.edu 

Abstract 

Text-to-video (T2V) generation has rapidly pro-gressed in visual fidelity, yet its ability to faith-fully represent multiple cultures within a single prompt remains underexplored. We introduce MAVEN, a multi-agent prompt refinement framework designed to improve cultural fidelity in both mono-cultural and cross-cultural T2V generation. MAVEN decomposes prompts into 

person , action , and location dimensions, han-dled by specialized agents operating in parallel or sequentially. To support systematic evalua-tion, we contribute a new benchmark of 243 cul-turally grounded prompts and 972 correspond-ing videos, spanning three cultures (Chinese, American, Romanian), three action categories, and both mono-cultural and cross-cultural sce-narios. Evaluations combining CLIP-based metrics, VLM-as-judge assessments, and video quality measures show that multi-agent refine-ment, particularly parallel specialization, sig-nificantly improves cultural relevance while preserving visual quality and temporal consis-tency. The dataset and code are available at 

> https://github.com/AIM-SCU/CRAFT

.

1 Introduction 

Text-to-video (T2V) generation has rapidly advanced (Yang et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2024), shifting the central challenge from visual realism alone to semantic faithfulness ,whether generated videos correctly reflect the meanings and world knowledge embedded in prompts. Among these dimensions, cultural grounding , how people, actions, and places are represented with respect to specific cultures, remains both critically important and insufficiently understood. While prior work has documented systematic cultural gaps in language and image models (Li et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025; Kannen et al., 2024), the video setting, where cultural content must remain coherent across both space and time, has received almost no dedicated study; to our knowledge, this work is among the first to systematically frame multicultural T2V generation as a problem in its own right. Culture is inherently compositional: a person from one cultural background may perform an action associated with another culture in a location tied to a third. Such cross-cultural scenarios parallel the cross-cultural composition problem studied in image transcreation (Khanuja et al., 2025) and matter for downstream uses such as inclusive content creation and accessibility. Yet current T2V benchmarks and evaluations overwhelmingly assume mono-cultural prompts (Huang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025), implicitly treating culture as a single, uniform attribute. Compounding this, most T2V systems convey all cultural information through a single prompt or refinement agent, even though person appearance, action execution, and location depiction each draw on distinct forms of cultural expertise. Building on recent multi-agent T2V frameworks (Yuan et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025), we introduce MAVEN ( Multi- Agent Video Enrichment for Cultural N arrative), which treats cultural fidelity in T2V generation as a structured, multi-agent reasoning problem and explicitly decomposes cultural grounding into three core dimensions, person , action , and location , each assigned to a culturally specialized agent. These agents enrich prompts with fine-grained, culturally specific details before video generation, and com-municate with one another either sequentially or in parallel. We evaluate on a new benchmark of 243 prompts and 972 corresponding videos that span three cultures, three action categories, and both mono-cultural and cross-cultural configurations (Section 3), using CLIP-based metrics (Radford et al., 2021), vision–language model (VLM) judgments of cultural relevance (Liu et al., 2025), and video quality assessments capturing visual quality and temporal consistency (Liu et al., 2024). 

> arXiv:2605.16716v1 [cs.CV] 16 May 2026

Concretely, we organize our investigation around three research questions: • RQ1. Can multi-agent prompt refinement sub-stantively improve cultural fidelity in T2V gen-eration, and does it close the gap between mono-cultural and cross-cultural prompts? • RQ2. How does the choice of agent commu-nication structure, specifically parallel special-ization versus sequential refinement, affect cul-tural fidelity, visual quality, and temporal con-sistency? • RQ3. To what extent do CLIP-based automatic metrics agree with VLM-based judgments of cultural relevance, and what does any disagree-ment reveal about the limits of current T2V evaluation? 

2 Related Work 

Cultural Understanding in LLMs and VLMs. 

On the language side, CULTURE-GEN (Li et al., 2024) finds that LLMs exhibit othering behaviors that marginalize non-western cultures by labeling them “traditional” and adding parenthetical ex-planations absent from western counterparts. In the vision–language domain, CultureVLM (Liu et al., 2025) benchmarks cultural understanding over 19,682 concepts, finding significantly stronger performance on Western regions than Asia, and CUBE (Kannen et al., 2024) demonstrates short-comings in artifact faithfulness and geographic di-versity for non-western cultures in text-to-image generation. Taken together, these findings suggest that sparse geographic coverage in training data drives systematic cultural knowledge gaps. Our work shares this concern, but identifies two further limitations in prior research: (1) cultures are stud-ied independently, with no existing work modeling cross-cultural composition , i.e., combining person, action, and location from distinct cultural sources within a single generation; and (2) all prior work focuses on static image understanding or genera-tion, leaving the temporal consistency challenges unique to video entirely unaddressed. 

Multi-Agent Text-to-Video Generation. 

MORA (Yuan et al., 2024), a foundational work in this space, decomposes T2V generation into five specialized agents spanning the text-to-image-to-video pipeline, and introduces an end-to-end training paradigm to dynamically balance agent contributions. Subsequent work extends this paradigm to film-crew simulation with hierarchical scene, camera, and keyframe planning (Xie et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025) and to cross-shot protagonist consistency (Hu et al., 2024). Most directly relevant to our work is MAViS (Wang et al., 2025), which introduces script-writing guidelines to improve alignment between agent-generated scripts and the downstream T2V model’s generation capabilities; our approach applies the same principle to cultural enrichment, where culturally specialized agents refine prompts with fine-grained cultural details to improve the model’s cultural fidelity. We follow these frameworks in decomposing generation into specialized subtasks, but reorient agent roles from production (director, editor, keyframe artist) to cultural dimensions 

(person, action, location), enabling systematic study of both mono- and cross-cultural fidelity within a single prompt. 

Cultural Text-to-Video Benchmarks. 

VBench++ (Huang et al., 2024) evaluates cultural fairness by combining 14 scenario types (e.g., wedding, dance, celebration) across 9cultural classes, using ViCLIP (Wang et al., 2024) to measure video–prompt alignment. SimCityNet (Caliskan et al., 2025) quantifies geo-cultural bias in AI-generated city landscapes using interpretable scene embeddings to compare color distributions and dynamic object rendering across regions. T2V-CompBench (Sun et al., 2025) targets a different axis of compositionality, evaluating whether T2V models can correctly combine multiple attributes, objects, and dynamic actions within a single prompt. T2VWorldBench (Chen et al., 2025) goes further on the cultural side, directly evaluating whether T2V models can integrate deep cultural knowledge (customs, gestures, implicit social norms) into coherent video well beyond the literal prompt. However, none of these benchmarks address cross-cultural composition, where person, action, and location originate from distinct cultures in a single prompt; our benchmark and framework directly target this gap. 

3 Dataset 

A central contribution of this paper is a new bench-mark for culturally grounded T2V evaluation. The benchmark comprises 243 unique prompts (Ta-ble 1); passing each through the four refinement pipelines (Base, SA, MAS, MAP; Section 4) yields 972 generated videos. The cross-cultural split is intentionally twice the mono-cultural split, since Component Count                

> Cultures (Chinese, American, Romanian) 3Action categories (food, music, dance) 3Actions per (culture ×category) 3Distinct actions 27 Landmarks per culture 3Distinct landmarks 9Mono-cultural prompts 81
> Cross-cultural prompts (novel) 162 Total unique prompts 243
> Refinement pipelines (Base, SA, MAS, MAP) 4
> Total generated videos 972
> Duration per video (seconds) 5
> Total video duration (minutes) 81

Table 1: MAVEN benchmark statistics. The cross-cultural split is intentionally 2× the mono-cultural split, since cross-cultural composition is the central novelty of our benchmark. 

cross-cultural composition is the central novelty of our benchmark and the regime where current T2V models fail most clearly. 

Cultures and actions. We span three cultures (Chinese , American , Romanian ) chosen for geo-graphic and linguistic distinctness, and three action categories ( food , music , dance ) chosen for visual distinctiveness and the existence of clearly filmable cultural variants. Each (culture × category) pair contributes 3 actions and each culture contributes 3 landmarks; the full list is given in Table 2. 

Prompt construction. Prompts follow the tem-plate “ P A at L” (person, action, location). Mono-cultural prompts fix all three roles to a single cul-ture, yielding 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 = 81 prompts. Cross-cultural prompts draw P , A, L from three distinct 

cultures ( cp̸ = ca̸ = cl), yielding 3! × 3 × 3 = 162 prompts. A representative example is “an American person eating dumplings at Bran Castle” 

(P =American, A=Chinese, L=Romanian), which requires rendering three distinct cultural sources within a single video. 

4 Methodology 

Our methodology covers three components: (1) agent-based prompt refinement pipelines, (2) a fixed T2V generation model to ensure fair com-parison across pipelines, and (3) implementation details for reproducibility. Prompt construction is described in Section 3; evaluation metrics are de-ferred to Section 5. Figure 1 provides an overview.                  

> Category Items Chinese
> Food Peking duck, mooncakes, dumplings Music guzheng, erhu, dizi Dance fan dance, ribbon dance, umbrella dance Locations Forbidden City, West Lake, Potala Palace
> American
> Food hot dogs, burgers, pizza slice Music banjo, electric guitar, saxophone Dance hip-hop, moonwalk, tap dance Locations Statue of Liberty, Grand Canyon, Mount Rushmore
> Romanian
> Food sarmale, mici, m˘ am˘ alig˘ aMusic nai, cob˘ z˘ a, ¸ tambal Dance Hora, Sârba, Brâul Locations Bran Castle, Palace of Parliament, Wooden Churches of Maramure¸ s

Table 2: Full list of cultural items in the MAVEN bench-mark. Actions in prompts are formed by prepending the canonical verb ( eating , playing , dancing ) to each Food/Music/Dance item. 

4.1 Agent-Based Prompt Refinement 

While base prompts include explicit cultural mark-ers, they often lack the fine-grained visual and con-textual details needed for culturally faithful video generation. We therefore introduce agent-based prompt refinement, guided by the hypothesis that cultural knowledge for person appearance, action execution, and location depiction belongs to dis-tinct domains. Each agent is assigned a culture-specific persona corresponding to the dimension it refines: for ex-ample, an ActionAgent refining a Chinese food action is instructed as a culturally grounded ob-server of Chinese dining practices. Each agent’s system prompt combines a dynamically generated cultural persona with a dimension-specific instruc-tion; concrete prompts are provided in Appendix C. 

Pipeline designs. We compare four prompt re-finement pipelines, all taking an original prompt Pr orig and producing a final prompt Pr final .

Base (No-Agent). 

Pr final = Pr orig 

This baseline evaluates the T2V model without cultural enrichment. 

Single-Agent (SA). A single general-purpose agent jointly refines all prompt dimensions using a unified instruction and persona: Pr final = SingleAgent (Pr orig ).Figure 1: Overview of MAVEN: agent-based prompt refinement pipelines feeding a fixed T2V model. 

Multi-Agent Parallel (MAP). Three specialist agents independently refine the prompt in parallel, each targeting a single dimension: Pr P = PersonAgent (Pr orig ),

Pr A = ActionAgent (Pr orig ),

Pr L = LocationAgent (Pr orig ).

A fusion agent then merges their outputs into a coherent prompt: Pr final = FuseAgent ([ Pr P , Pr A, Pr L]) .

Multi-Agent Sequential (MAS). The same three specialist agents refine the prompt sequen-tially, each operating on the previous agent’s out-put: Pr P = PersonAgent (Pr orig ),

Pr A = ActionAgent (Pr P ),

Pr final = LocationAgent (Pr A).

These pipelines allow us to compare general ver-sus specialized refinement, as well as parallel ver-sus sequential agent coordination. 

4.2 Text-to-Video Model 

All videos are generated using CogVideoX-5B (Yang et al., 2025), an open-source diffusion-based text-to-video model. We use a fixed generation setup across all experiments (5-second videos at 

720 × 480 resolution, 8 fps, 50 inference steps, guidance scale 6, fixed seed), ensuring that ob-served differences are attributable solely to prompt refinement strategies rather than model variation. CogVideoX-5B 1 offers a strong balance between generation quality, computational cost, and repro-ducibility, and directly supports text-only prompts, making it well suited to our framework. 

4.3 Implementation Details 

Prompt refinement is implemented using a unified agent interface, with all agent calls logged for re-producibility. For each prompt, we record the orig-inal prompt, intermediate agent outputs, the final refined prompt, and the path to the correspond-ing generated video. All pipelines are executed asynchronously, enabling parallel agent execution where applicable. All agents are instantiated using LLaMA-3.1-70B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), served locally via Ollama and orchestrated through the AutoGen multi-agent framework (Wu et al., 2023). 

5 Evaluation and Results 

5.1 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate generated videos along three com-plementary dimensions: cultural relevance, visual similarity, and text–image alignment. These di-mensions are chosen to capture both whether cul-tural content is faithfully represented and whether 

> 1https://github.com/THUDM/CogVideo

prompt refinement introduces meaningful visual change or simply rewrites surface form. 

Cultural Relevance. We define a Cultural Rel-evance Score (CRS) using CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) embeddings. For each prompt, we construct four cultural grounding statements (CGS) targeting distinct dimensions: OCGS (“This image belongs to {country}.”), PCGS (“This image shows {per-son description}.”), ACGS (“This image depicts {action}, a practice associated with {culture} cul-ture.”), and LCGS (“This image shows {landmark} in {country}.”). For each video, we uniformly sam-ple 5 frames and compute frame-level cosine simi-larity with each CGS using CLIP: CRS (v, CGS ) = 15

> 5

X

> i=1

sim (fi, CGS ).

The four dimension scores (OCRS, PCRS, ACRS, LCRS) are averaged to yield the overall CRS. 

Visual Similarity. We compute a Visual Similar-ity Score (VSS) to measure how much refinement alters visual content. For each prompt, we pair the base video vbase with an agent-refined video vagent ,uniformly sample 5 frames from each, and compute frame-wise CLIP similarity: VSS (v) = 15

> 5

X

> i=1

sim (fbase ,i , f agent ,i ).

A high VSS indicates that refinement enriches cul-tural and semantic details without substantially al-tering the overall scene layout, which we verify in the results below. 

Text–Image Alignment. We compute frame-level CLIP alignment scores between generated videos and text descriptions (original prompt, re-fined prompt, and cultural grounding statements). Two derived metrics quantify the effect of refine-ment: cultural enrichment (∆E ), the gain in align-ment with the original prompt for the agent video versus the base video; and cultural relevance im-provement (∆CRS ), the gain in alignment with the cultural grounding statements. Together, these met-rics allow us to distinguish pipelines that genuinely improve cultural fidelity from those that merely produce longer or more elaborate prompts, as we discuss in Section 5.5. CRS OCRS PCRS ACRS LCRS 

> Metric
> 0.18
> 0.20
> 0.22
> 0.24
> 0.26
> 0.28
> Score
> 0.239
> 0.236
> 0.239
> 0.270
> 0.213
> 0.246
> 0.244
> 0.247
> 0.267
> 0.224
> 0.248
> 0.248
> 0.246
> 0.261
> 0.239
> 0.250
> 0.250
> 0.246
> 0.265
> 0.240
> Pipeline
> Base
> SA
> MAS
> MAP

Figure 2: CRS and dimension-specific scores (OCRS, PCRS, ACRS, LCRS) for all four pipelines. Error bars show 95% CIs. MAP achieves the highest overall CRS (0.250), with statistically significant gains over Base (no-agent baseline) on CRS and LCRS. 

5.2 VLM-Based Evaluation 

To complement automatic metrics, we use a vision– language model (Gemini 2.5 Pro) (DeepMind, 2025) as a judge (Liu et al., 2025). The VLM evaluates cultural relevance, visual similarity, and text–image alignment using the middle frame of each video alongside structured reasoning prompts that require the model to reason step by step before assigning a score. Scores are reported on a 1–5 scale (1 = not culturally relevant; 5 = highly cultur-ally relevant) and aggregated across dimensions to obtain VLM-based counterparts to CRS and VSS; the exact evaluation prompts are provided in Ap-pendix D. 

5.3 Cultural Relevance Results 

Multi-agent pipelines outperform both the base and single-agent (SA) baselines on the Cultural Rele-vance Score (CRS), with the parallel variant (MAP) achieving the highest overall CRS (Figure 2). 

Overall performance. MAP improves CRS by +4.6% over the base pipeline and +1.6% over SA, with MAS following closely. This confirms that distributing refinement across specialized agents yields stronger cultural grounding than a single general agent. 

Dimension-level analysis. Improvements are not uniform across dimensions. Person-related rele-vance improves consistently across all pipelines, though culturally specific appearance traits occupy a narrow visual footprint and are therefore less reli-ably captured by frame-level embedding similarity. Action relevance remains comparatively stable, as action-related cues are inherently more ambiguous for CLIP embeddings and richer prompts introduce more competing visual elements. In contrast, loca-tion relevance shows the largest gains, with multi-agent pipelines improving LCRS by over 12% rel-ative to Base, more than double the improvement achieved by SA, since distinctive architectural fea-tures translate more directly into CLIP-measurable visual signals. Overall, MAP achieves the most bal-anced and statistically significant improvements, supporting our hypothesis that dimension-specific specialization is critical for cultural fidelity. AS(v, Pr orig ) AS(v, Pr final )

> Metric
> 0.250
> 0.275
> 0.300
> 0.325
> 0.350
> 0.375
> 0.400
> 0.425
> Score
> 0.325
> 0.274
> 0.336
> 0.377
> 0.334
> 0.353
> 0.341
> 0.358
> Pipeline
> Base
> SA
> MAS
> MAP

Figure 3: Alignment scores for all four pipelines with the original prompt Pr orig and refined prompt Pr final .Error bars show 95% CIs. All proposed methods (SA, MAS, MAP) improve significantly over Base (no-agent baseline) on refined prompt alignment, with MAP achieving the highest original prompt alignment (0.341). 

5.4 Visual Similarity 

Despite improving cultural relevance, agent-based pipelines preserve high visual similarity to base videos (VSS > 0.68 for all pipelines; differences among SA, MAS, and MAP are <1.2%). This indicates that refinement primarily enriches seman-tic and cultural details rather than altering overall scene layout, which is the intended behavior: cul-turally faithful generation should deepen the cul-tural grounding of a scene, not reconstruct it from scratch. 

5.5 Text–Image Alignment Results 

Agent-based refinement improves alignment with both the original and refined prompts (Figure 3). 

Alignment with original prompts. MAP achieves the strongest cultural enrichment, improv-ing alignment by +4.9% over base. This indicates that refinement helps T2V models better express the cultural intent already present in the original prompt, rather than drifting from it. 

Alignment with refined prompts. All agent pipelines dramatically improve alignment with re-fined prompts (+29% to +38%), reflecting the increased specificity of enriched prompts. SA achieves the highest alignment here, likely due to greater stylistic coherence from a single-agent rewrite. However, alignment with the original prompt, which is more indicative of cultural fidelity, remains highest for MAP, reinforcing its practical advantage. 

5.6 Mono vs. Cross-Cultural Results 

Cross-cultural prompts are consistently more chal-lenging than mono-cultural ones, with the average CRS decreasing by approximately 4 to 6% across all pipelines. The one exception is OCRS, which scores higher for cross-cultural prompts because it rewards explicit cultural fusion, whereas the per-dimension scores (PCRS, ACRS, LCRS) penalize the visual incoherence that arises when multiple cultures coexist within a single generated frame. Agent-based refinement narrows this gap, with MAP achieving the smallest per-dimension perfor-mance drop, suggesting that parallel specialization is particularly effective in cross-cultural scenarios. 

5.7 VLM-Judged Cultural Relevance Results 

VLM-based evaluation (Gemini 2.5 Pro) indepen-dently corroborates CLIP-based findings (Figure 4). MAP achieves the highest VLM-judged cultural rel-evance (VLM_CRS = 3.61), improving over base by +38% and over SA by +5.6%. Location remains the strongest dimension (VLM_LCRS: base 2.86 

→ MAP 4.43, +54.9%), while person-related cues remain the most challenging (VLM_PCRS: base 2.08 → MAP 3.12), indicating persistent difficulty in modeling culturally specific appearance. 

5.8 VLM-Judged Visual Similarity Results 

VLM-judged visual similarity scores (2.05–2.09 on a 1–5 scale) reveal a divergence from CLIP-based VLM_CRS VLM_OCRS VLM_PCRS VLM_ACRS VLM_LCRS 

> Metric
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> VLM Cultural Relevance Score
> 2.61
> 2.50
> 2.08
> 3.00
> 2.86
> 3.42
> 3.19
> 3.05
> 3.51
> 3.92
> 3.48
> 3.22
> 2.98
> 3.30
> 4.40
> 3.61
> 3.40
> 3.12
> 3.48
> 4.43
> Pipeline
> Base
> SA
> MAS
> MAP

Figure 4: VLM-judged cultural relevance scores (scored 1–5) for all four pipelines across overall and dimension-specific metrics. Error bars show 95% CIs. MAP achieves the highest VLM_CRS (3.61), with statistically significant improvements over Base (no-agent baseline) across all dimensions, most notably on VLM_LCRS (Base: 2.86 → MAP: 4.43). 

VSS: while CLIP reports high similarity ( >0.68), VLM assigns substantially lower scores. This gap indicates that agent refinement introduces cultur-ally meaningful visual changes that are perceptu-ally salient to a semantic judge but not captured by embedding distance. All three pipelines score simi-larly, confirming that the degree of visual change is driven by cultural enrichment itself rather than by the specific agent architecture. 

5.9 VLM-Judged Text–Image Alignment Results 

VLM-judged alignment further confirms MAP’s advantage in enriching original prompt meaning, with a +61.3% improvement over base (MAP: 3.00 vs. base: 1.86). Alignment with refined prompts is highest for SA (2.88), again reflecting stylistic coherence from single-agent rewriting rather than cultural depth. The large gap between alignment with the original prompt (MAP: 3.00) and the re-fined prompt (base: 1.04) confirms that enriched prompts contain substantially richer cultural con-tent than base videos represent. 

5.10 Metric Correlation Results 

CLIP-based (Radford et al., 2021) and VLM-judged metrics show moderate to strong Pear-son correlation on the person, action, and loca-tion dimensions, validating CLIP as a useful au-tomatic proxy: PCRS is the most consistent (r = 0.61 to 0.66 across pipelines), followed by ACRS (r = 0.40 to 0.53) and LCRS (r = 0.40 to 0.71). Correlation is near zero for the overall cul-tural dimension (OCRS), likely due to its abstract country-level framing. Notably, the base pipeline reaches the highest correlation on most dimensions, while agent-refined pipelines drop substantially: on LCRS, base reaches r = 0.71 while agent pipelines fall to r = 0.40–0.52, a 27% to 43% relative de-crease. This suggests that refinement introduces nuanced cultural cues better captured by VLM rea-soning than by embedding-based similarity. 

5.11 Video Quality and Temporal Consistency Results 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 

> Temporal Consistency
> 59.5
> 60.0
> 60.5
> 61.0
> 61.5
> 62.0
> 62.5
> Visual Quality
> Base
> SA
> MAS
> MAP
> Pipeline
> Base
> SA
> MAS
> MAP

Figure 5: Visual Quality vs. Temporal Consistency for all four pipelines. Each point represents one pipeline; er-ror bars show 95% CIs. All proposed methods improve over Base (no-agent baseline) on both metrics. SA leads on visual quality, MAS on temporal consistency, and MAP achieves the most balanced improvement across both. 

Agent-based refinement improves both visual quality and temporal consistency (Figure 5). While SA maximizes visual quality and MAS maximizes temporal consistency, MAP achieves the most bal-anced improvement across both metrics. This bal-ance, combined with its superior cultural relevance, makes MAP the most robust overall refinement strategy. 

5.12 Qualitative Analysis 

Qualitative results confirm quantitative trends (Figure 6 in Appendix B). We analyze the mono-cultural example “a Chinese person play-ing guzheng at the Potala Palace” across all four pipelines. 

Gradual prompt enrichment. The four pipelines show a clear progression of cultural detail. The Base pipeline uses the original prompt directly with no cultural enrichment (CRS = 0.237). SA adds basic cues across all dimensions, including traditional hair styling, a Tibetan rug, and a brief mention of the Palace’s golden roofs (CRS = 0.242, +2.1%). MAS substantially deepens all dimensions with a qipao-inspired updo, specific body posture and hand technique, and a comprehensive architectural description of the location (CRS = 0.249, +5.1%). MAP achieves the most comprehensive and balanced enrichment simultaneously across all three dimensions, with person detail matching MAS, the highest action accuracy by specifying playing technique for both hands, and a vivid focused location description (CRS = 0.271, +14.3%). 

Sources of MAP’s Advantage. MAP’s superi-ority stems from two factors. First, dimension-specific depth : each specialized agent brings fo-cused cultural expertise that a single agent can-not match, as seen in ActionAgent naming pro-fessional playing tools and LocationAgent captur-ing architectural features with precision. Second, 

cross-dimensional balance : parallel processing en-sures all three dimensions receive equally deep enrichment, whereas SA produces shallower and less balanced cultural details. These observations are consistent with the quantitative gains reported in Section 5.1. 

6 Lessons Learned 

Parallel specialization outperforms sequential and single-agent refinement. Across a con-trolled benchmark spanning three cultures and mul-tiple action types, parallel multi-agent refinement (MAP) consistently achieves the highest cultural relevance while delivering the most balanced im-provements in video quality and temporal consis-tency, outperforming both single-agent and sequen-tial designs. 

Cross-cultural generation benefits most from explicit decomposition. Cross-cultural prompts remain substantially more challenging than mono-cultural ones, yet benefit disproportionately from agent-based refinement, indicating that explicit de-composition and recomposition of cultural dimen-sions is a promising strategy for cross-cultural gen-eration. 

Automatic metrics underestimate culturally nu-anced improvements. While CLIP-based met-rics correlate reasonably with VLM judgments, they systematically underestimate fine-grained cul-tural nuances introduced by agent refinement, pointing to the need for richer semantic reasoning in both T2V systems and their evaluation. 

Cultural fidelity is a structural problem, not a scaling problem. These findings collectively sug-gest that improving cultural fidelity in T2V genera-tion is not primarily a question of model scale, but of better structure: decomposing cultural knowl-edge, specializing refinement, and reasoning explic-itly about how multiple cultural elements interact within a single generated video. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced MAVEN, a multi-agent prompt re-finement framework that addresses a fundamental limitation of current text-to-video models, namely their inability to faithfully represent culturally grounded content in settings where person, ac-tion, and location originate from different cultural sources. By decomposing prompts into three di-mensions and assigning each to a culturally spe-cialized agent, MAVEN provides a principled and extensible approach to multicultural video genera-tion. This work makes three contributions. First, we identify and formalize cross-cultural text-to-video generation as a distinct and challenging problem, and introduce a benchmark of 243 prompts and 972 videos that disentangles cultural grounding across person, action, and location dimensions. Second, we propose MAVEN, a multi-agent prompt re-finement framework that leverages culturally spe-cialized agents, coordinated either sequentially or in parallel, to improve T2V generation in both mono-cultural and cross-cultural settings. Third, we present a comprehensive evaluation combin-ing CLIP-based metrics, VLM-based judgments, and video quality analysis, offering empirical in-sights into cultural fidelity in generative video models and the limits of current automatic eval-uation. The dataset and code are publicly available at https://github.com/AIM-SCU/CRAFT .Limitations 

Limited cultural and activity coverage. Our study focuses on three cultures (Chinese, Ameri-can, Romanian) and three activity categories (food, music, dance), which represent only a small subset of global cultural diversity. These choices were driven by practical considerations, including avail-ability of culturally grounded visual resources and clarity of visual representation. Many cultural di-mensions such as gesture, social interaction, spatial organization, color symbolism, and abstract con-cepts like values or social norms are not explicitly modeled or evaluated. As a result, our findings should not be interpreted as comprehensive across cultures or forms of cultural expression. Future work should expand coverage to a broader range of cultures and activities and incorporate additional cultural dimensions to test the scalability and gen-erality of multi-agent refinement. Such expansion may also surface culture-specific challenges that are not visible in the current setting. 

Evaluation on a single text-to-video model. All experiments are conducted using a single open-source T2V model CogVideoX-5B (Yang et al., 2025) to ensure controlled comparison. While this isolates the effect of agent-based prompt refine-ment, different T2V models may exhibit varying sensitivity to culturally enriched prompts due to differences in training data and generation mecha-nisms. Evaluating the proposed framework across multiple T2V architectures is an important direc-tion for future work to assess model-agnosticity and identify potential model-specific adaptations. 

Model-level generation artifacts. We observe that CogVideoX-5B (Yang et al., 2025) frequently generates subjects from behind or at oblique angles, obscuring culturally specific facial features and clothing details. This tendency limits the model’s ability to render person-level cultural cues and likely contributes to the persistently lower PCRS scores observed across all pipelines. Future work should investigate generation strategies that encour-age frontal or culturally expressive subject framing. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our goal is to improve cultural fidelity and re-duce misrepresentation in generative video systems. However, culturally grounded generation also car-ries risks, including stereotyping or overgeneral-ization if cultural signals are treated as fixed or homogeneous. We emphasize that cultural repre-sentations in this work are illustrative rather than exhaustive, and we encourage future research to involve broader cultural perspectives and human evaluation to support more responsible and inclu-sive deployment. 

References           

> Cantay Caliskan, Abylay Iskakov, Yuanzhu Li, Brendan McCollum, and Yi Ren. 2025. SimCityNet: Quanti-fying Geo-Cultural bias in AI-generated urban videos through interpretable scene embeddings. SSRN. Ac-cessed 2025-10-10. Yubin Chen, Xuyang Guo, Zhenmei Shi, Zhao Song, and Jiahao Zhang. 2025. T2vworldbench: A bench-mark for evaluating world knowledge in text-to-video generation. CoRR , abs/2507.18107. Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini 2.5 pro. https:// deepmind.google/technologies/gemini/ . Accessed: 2025. Aaron Grattafiori et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of mod-els. CoRR , abs/2407.21783. Panwen Hu, Jin Jiang, Jianqi Chen, Mingfei Han, Shengcai Liao, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. Storyagent: Customized storytelling video generation via multi-agent collaboration. CoRR ,abs/2411.04925. Ziqi Huang, Fan Zhang, Xiaojie Xu, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Ziyue Dong, Qianli Ma, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Ying-Cong Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. 2024. Vbench++: Com-prehensive and versatile benchmark suite for video generative models. CoRR , abs/2411.13503. Nithish Kannen, Arif Ahmad, Marco Andreetto, Vinod-kumar Prabhakaran, Utsav Prabhu, Adji Bousso Di-eng, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and Shachi Dave. 2024. Beyond aesthetics: Cultural competence in text-to-image models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Simran Khanuja, Vivek Iyer, Xiaoyu He, and Graham Neubig. 2025. Towards automatic evaluation for image transcreation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL 2025 - Volume 1: Long Papers, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, April 29 - May 4, 2025 , pages 7034–7047. Association for Computational Linguistics. Huihan Li, Liwei Jiang, Jena D. Huang, Hyunwoo Kim, Sebastin Santy, Taylor Sorensen, Bill Yuchen

Lin, Nouha Dziri, Xiang Ren, and Yejin Choi. 2024. CULTURE-GEN: revealing global cultural percep-tion in language models through natural language prompting. CoRR , abs/2404.10199. Shudong Liu, Yiqiao Jin, Cheng Li, Derek F. Wong, Qingsong Wen, Lichao Sun, Haipeng Chen, Xing Xie, and Jindong Wang. 2025. Culturevlm: Char-acterizing and improving cultural understanding of vision-language models for over 100 countries. 

CoRR , abs/2501.01282. Yaofang Liu, Xiaodong Cun, Xuebo Liu, Xintao Wang, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Yang Liu, Tieyong Zeng, Raymond Chan, and Ying Shan. 2024. Evalcrafter: Benchmarking and evaluating large video generation models. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2024, Seattle, WA, USA, June 16-22, 2024 , pages 22139–22149. IEEE. OpenAI. 2024. Sora system card. Accessed 2025-10-09. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learn-ing transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 8748–8763. PMLR. Kaiyue Sun, Kaiyi Huang, Xian Liu, Yue Wu, Zihan Xu, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. 2025. T2v-compbench: A comprehensive benchmark for compositional text-to-video generation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2025, Nashville, TN, USA, June 11-15, 2025 , pages 8406–8416. Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE. Rui Sun, Yumin Zhang, Tejal Shah, Jiahao Sun, Shuoy-ing Zhang, Wenqi Li, Haoran Duan, Bo Wei, and Rajiv Ranjan. 2024. From sora what we can see: A survey of text-to-video generation. CoRR ,abs/2405.10674. Qian Wang, Ziqi Huang, Ruoxi Jia, Paul Debevec, and Ning Yu. 2025. Mavis: A multi-agent frame-work for long-sequence video storytelling. CoRR ,abs/2508.08487. Yi Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Kunchang Li, Jiashuo Yu, Xin Ma, Xinhao Li, Guo Chen, Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Ping Luo, Ziwei Liu, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. 2024. Internvid: A large-scale video-text dataset for multimodal understanding and generation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. CoRR , abs/2308.08155. Weijia Wu, Zeyu Zhu, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Au-tomated movie generation via multi-agent cot plan-ning. CoRR , abs/2503.07314. Zhifei Xie, Daniel Tang, Dingwei Tan, Jacques Klein, Tegawend F. Bissyand, and Saad Ezzini. 2024. Dreamfactory: Pioneering multi-scene long video generation with a multi-agent framework. CoRR ,abs/2408.11788. Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, Da Yin, Yux-uan Zhang, Weihan Wang, Yean Cheng, Bin Xu, Xiaotao Gu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2025. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net. Zhengqing Yuan, Ruoxi Chen, Zhaoxu Li, Haolong Jia, Lifang He, Chi Wang, and Lichao Sun. 2024. Mora: Enabling generalist video generation via A multi-agent framework. CoRR , abs/2403.13248. A Compute and Runtime 

Experiments are conducted on NVIDIA H100 GPUs. Generating a single 5-second video takes approximately 3 minutes. SA and MAP pipelines require one additional minute for prompt refine-ment, while MAS requires approximately 2 addi-tional minutes due to its sequential design. Across all prompts and pipelines, total runtime is approxi-mately 65 GPU hours. Notably, despite invoking more agents, the parallel design of MAP achieves runtime comparable to the single-agent baseline, highlighting its efficiency. 

B Qualitative Analysis C Agent System Prompts and Personas 

C.1 Persona Prompts 

Table 3 presents the persona prompts dynamically generated for each agent based on the cultural di-mension and culture source. 

C.2 Instruction Prompts for Single-Agent Pipeline 

Table 4 shows the complete instruction prompt used by the SingleShotAgent for refining all dimensions (person, action, location) simultaneously. 

C.3 Instruction Prompts for Multi-Agent Pipelines 

Tables 5, 6, 7, and 8 present the instruction prompts for the specialized agents used in multi-agent pipelines (MAS and MAP). 

D VLM Evaluation Prompts 

This appendix gives the verbatim prompts used for VLM-as-judge evaluation (Section 5.2). Tables 9, 10, and 11 present the prompts for cultural rele-vance, visual similarity, and text–image alignment, respectively. Agent Type Persona Template 

PersonAgent You are a {culture} individual who understands typical appear-ance traits from this culture. ActionAgent You are a {culture} observer skilled at describing how people typically eat, play music, and dance. LocationAgent You are a {culture} tour guide who knows how to visually de-scribe iconic landmarks. SingleShotAgent (mono-cultural) You are someone familiar with {culture} cultural settings and can enrich any part of the scene. SingleShotAgent (cross-cultural) You are someone familiar with {culture1}, {culture2} and {cul-ture3} cultural settings and can enrich any part of the scene. FuseAgent No culture-specific persona (fusion task only) 

Table 3: Persona prompts for different agent types. The {culture} placeholder is dynamically replaced with the specific culture (Chinese, American, or Romanian) based on the dimension being refined. For cross-cultural prompts in SingleShotAgent, all three cultures are listed. 

SingleShotAgent Instruction Prompt 

Your task is to improve the full prompt by refining the person, action, and location. Focus on: • appearance details (e.g., facial features, hairstyle, clothing) • how the action is performed (e.g., body posture, hand movement, visible objects) • iconic aspects of the place (e.g., landscape, architecture, lighting, environmental elements) Do not introduce new people, actions, or locations. Return JSON with: "refined_prompt": the updated sentence "justification": a brief explanation of how your changes improve the visual clarity or cultural specificity of the scene. 

Table 4: Instruction prompt for SingleShotAgent (SA) pipeline. The agent refines all three dimensions in a single pass. 

PersonAgent Instruction Prompt 

Your task is to improve only the appearance of the person in the prompt. Focus on visual traits like facial features, hairstyle, or clothing. Do not change the action or the location. Return JSON with: "refined_prompt": the updated sentence "justification": a brief explanation of how your addition makes the person more visually distinctive or culturally aligned. 

Table 5: Instruction prompt for PersonAgent. This agent refines only the person dimension. 

ActionAgent Instruction Prompt 

Your task is to improve only the action portion of the prompt. Focus on how the action is performed: body posture, hand movement, or any visible objects. Do not change the person or the location. Return JSON with: "refined_prompt": the updated sentence "justification": a brief explanation of why your added details enhance the clarity, vividness, or cultural alignment of the action. 

Table 6: Instruction prompt for ActionAgent. This agent refines only the action dimension. t=1 t=2 t=3 t=4 t=5 

base: a Chinese person playing guzheng at the Potala Palace. 

SA: A young Chinese woman with long, dark hair styled in a traditional bun and wearing a vibrant silk cheongsam dress 

sits cross-legged on a intricately patterned Tibetan rug, her slender fingers deftly plucking the strings of a guzheng 

as she gazes out at the majestic Potala Palace's golden roofs and snow-capped Himalayan mountains rising behind it. 

MAS: A Chinese woman with long, dark hair styled in a traditional qipao-inspired updo and adorned with silver hairpins, 

wearing an elegant cheongsam dress with intricate silk embroidery, sits upright with her back straight and feet tucked 

under her, playing guzheng with her right hand plucking the strings while her left hand presses the frets to produce 

resonant tones on the steps of the Potala Palace, surrounded by its majestic white walls and sloping roofs with golden 

finials glinting in the sunlight, set against a backdrop of the snow-capped Nyainqentanglha Mountains and the Lhasa 

Valley below. 

MAP: A Chinese woman with long, dark hair styled in a traditional qipao-inspired updo and adorned with silver hairpins, 

wearing an elegant cheongsam dress with intricate silk embroidery, sits cross-legged on a cushion with back straight at 

the majestic Potala Palace, its whitewashed walls and golden roofs glistening in the high-altitude sunlight of Lhasa, 

Tibet, gently plucking the strings of the guzheng with her right-hand plectrum and pressing the strings down with her 

left hand. 

Original Prompt: a Chinese person playing guzheng at the Potala Palace. 

CRS: base=0.237, SA=0.242, MAS=0.249, MAP=0.271 Figure 6: Qualitative comparison for a mono-cultural example (“a Chinese person playing guzheng at the Potala Palace”). Five temporal frames are shown for each pipeline (base, SA, MAS, MAP). MAP achieves the highest cultural relevance (CRS: base 0.237, SA 0.242, MAS 0.249, MAP 0.271). 

LocationAgent Instruction Prompt 

Your task is to improve only the location part of the prompt. Add iconic visual details that make the place recognizable (e.g., landscape, architecture, lighting, environmental elements). Do not change the person or the action. Return JSON with: "refined_prompt": the updated sentence "justification": a brief explanation of how your addition makes the location more vivid or culturally recognizable. 

Table 7: Instruction prompt for LocationAgent. This agent refines only the location dimension. FuseAgent Instruction Prompt 

Your task is to merge three versions of the same scene into one sentence. Keep all appearance, action, and location details. Make the result vivid, coherent, and natural-sounding. Do not add new people, actions, or places. Return JSON with: "refined_prompt": the fused sentence "justification": a brief explanation of how you combined the three inputs (e.g., merged phrasing, reordered elements, kept best details). 

Table 8: Instruction prompt for FuseAgent. This agent fuses the three independently refined prompts from PersonAgent, ActionAgent, and LocationAgent into one coherent prompt. 

VLM Cultural Relevance Evaluation Prompt 

You will be given one image and four culturally annotated sentences describing different aspects of it (overall scene, person, action, and location). Your task is to evaluate how culturally aligned the image is with respect to each sentence — that is, whether the visual features in the image reflect the cultural cues or identities expressed in the text. Specifically, consider appearance, clothing, architecture, symbols, traditions, or any other visual cues linked to a specific country or culture. For each sentence, reason step by step and assign a score between 1 and 5, where: 1 = The image is not culturally relevant to the description 5 = The image is highly culturally relevant to the description image: [image_path] text_overall: "[overall cultural grounding statement]" text_person: "[person cultural grounding statement]" text_action: "[action cultural grounding statement]" text_location: "[location cultural grounding statement]" The output should be a JSON object ONLY with the following format: {"overall_reasoning": "...", "overall_score": number, "person_reasoning": "...", "person_score": number, "action_reasoning": "...", "action_score": number, "location_reasoning": "...", "location_score": number }

Table 9: VLM evaluation prompt for cultural relevance. The VLM evaluates how culturally aligned the video frame is with respect to four cultural grounding statements. VLM Visual Similarity Evaluation Prompt 

You will be shown two images. Your task is to evaluate how visually similar the second image is compared to the first image. Consider all visible aspects, including the person (appearance, pose, clothing), the action (what is happening), the location (environment, background), and any cultural or stylistic details. Please explain your reasoning step by step, and then assign a score between 1 and 5: 1 = Very different visually 5 = Nearly identical visually image_1: (reference image) image_2: (comparison image) The output should be a JSON object ONLY with the following format: {"reasoning": "...", "score": number }

Table 10: VLM evaluation prompt for visual similarity. The VLM compares the visual similarity between base video frames and agent-refined video frames. 

VLM Text-Image Alignment Evaluation Prompt 

You will be shown one image and multiple sentences that describe what the image is expected to show. Your task is to evaluate how well the visual content of the image aligns with each description. Focus on whether the image clearly reflects the elements described — such as people, actions, locations, objects, or any culturally or visually specific features. For each sentence, please explain your reasoning step by step, and assign a score between 1 and 5, where: 1 = The image does not match the description 5 = The image clearly and fully matches the description Please evaluate all sentences and return your response as a JSON object with this exact format: {"text1_reasoning": "...", "text1_score": number, "text2_reasoning": "...", "text2_score": number, "text3_reasoning": "...", "text3_score": number, "text4_reasoning": "...", "text4_score": number, "text5_reasoning": "...", "text5_score": number, "text6_reasoning": "...", "text6_score": number }Note: text1-text4 are the four cultural grounding statements (overall, person, action, location), text5 is the original prompt, and text6 is the final refined prompt. 

Table 11: VLM evaluation prompt for text-image alignment. The VLM evaluates the alignment between video frames and multiple text descriptions including cultural grounding statements and prompts.