Title: TO-Agents: A Multi-Agent AI Pipeline for Preference-Guided Topology Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.21622v1

Published Time: Fri, 22 May 2026 00:10:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
## TO-AGENTS: A MULTI-AGENT AI PIPELINE FOR PREFERENCE-GUIDED TOPOLOGY OPTIMIZATION 

Isabella A. Stewart 1 Hongrui Chen 2 Faez Ahmed 2∗

> 1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA, 02139 USA 

> 2

Department of Mechanical Engineering Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA, 02139 USA 

ABSTRACT 

Topology optimization can generate efficient structures, but designers often must manually translate qualitative intent, such as desired visual style, product experience, or manufacturabil-ity into solver settings that are not directly tied to those prefer-ences. We present TO-Agents, a multi-agent AI framework that connects natural-language design intent with iterative topology optimization. The framework converts a human-provided prob-lem description into validated solver inputs, runs a topology op-timization solver, renders the resulting 3D topology, and uses multiview vision-language reasoning with an independent judge agent to critique each result and revise solver parameters. We evaluate the framework on two long-horizon design tasks: a can-tilever beam benchmark and a phone-stand product design. In both tasks, the designer specifies an aesthetic preference for hi-erarchically branched structures inspired by natural tree mor-phologies, and the system performs four revision cycles across ten independent replicates. TO-Agents produces at least one preference-aligned design in 60% of trials for each case study, corresponding to up to 6× more successful trials than an ablated pipeline without visual or historical feedback. Judge scores and human evaluations show that the pipeline can identify effective parameter levers, recover from poor revisions, and expand de-sign exploration. A manufacturing agent further post-processes top-ranked designs for additive manufacturing, enabling end-to-end intent-to-prototype design. We also identify failure modes, including overshooting, selective memory, misplaced tools, and incorrect parameter reasoning. These results suggest that agen-tic topology optimization can shift designers from low-level pa-

> ∗Address all correspondences to istewart@mit.edu

rameter tuning toward higher-level specification of form and function, while highlighting safeguards needed for reliable au-tonomous engineering design. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

A central challenge in engineering design is the human effort required to operationalize computational tools toward an envi-sioned product, particularly when multiple tools must be coordi-nated and their parameters carefully tuned to achieve the desired outcome. Parameters often interact in conflicting ways, and op-timization goals may clash with downstream post-processing or manufacturability requirements, forming complex long-horizon workflows [1, 2, 3]. Designers therefore rely on intuition and experimentation, manually iterating through alternatives to ap-proach the desired outcome. Topology optimization (TO) makes these difficulties partic-ularly apparent. The designer formulates the problem by speci-fying objective functions (e.g., minimizing compliance, mass, or thermal response) and constraints (loads, boundary conditions, material behavior, geometric limits, manufacturability) [4, 5], to-gether with parameters specific to the chosen algorithm [6]. Out-comes are highly sensitive to these initial choices, so designers must anticipate not only how coupled decisions affect quantita-tive performance, but also how they shape the resulting design relative to designer preferences [7, 8]. In practice this means an informed initial guess, a forward run, inspection, and iterative trial-and-error [9, 10], which is costly both computationally and cognitively. Optimization tools evaluate measurable objectives, but qualitative criteria such as aesthetics and user experience are typically only implicitly defined [11,12], thus much of the burden 1 Copyright © by ASME    

> arXiv:2605.21622v1 [cs.AI] 20 May 2026 Human Designer
> “Bottom face is fixed.
> Forces in -y are
> placed along
> diagonal of the box”
> Pydantic Agent
> {"physics": [{"E": 1.0,
> "nu": 0.3}], "mesh":
> [{"nx": 128, "ny": 64,
> "nz": 16, "lx": 1.0, "ly":
> 0.5, "lz": 0.125}]
> FE Solver Call
> “Improve the design
> by making it have
> more branch-like,
> complexity like a
> tree”
> Topology
> Optimization Agent Human Designer Vision Agent
> Problem Formulation
> Judge Agent

Inject Judge 

Decision 

> How to meet
> human designer
> requirements?
> Score
> 1-5
> Post-
> Rerun

Feed-in & Revise (n = 2, 3 … ∞)                          

> TO Design Original TO Design Revision 1
> Manufacture
> Agent
> Design to Manufacture TO Design Revision 2
> Long Horizon Design Journey
> Design Intent Encoding Design Feedback Evaluation Guide Scoring Criteria Manufacturing
> Input: Goals &Constraints Output: Speci fi cation Output: Density Field Input: Goals &Constraints Output: Insights &
> Metrics
> Output: Score &
> Decision Output: Final Design

Feed-in & Revise (n = 1) FIGURE 1 : The TO-Agents pipeline consisting of a sequence of subagents that interact with a human designer in a multi-turn conversa-tion architecture. Agents iteratively adjust the design parameters until the resulting structure satisfies the human designer’s qualitative objective of a bioinspired, dendriform architecture with hierarchical branching. Injection of judge agent feedback enables the system toward this design goal as the number of revisions grows. of aligning outputs with designer intent falls on manual parame-ter tuning and ad hoc post-processing. 

Generative AI Impact on Human Behavior in Engineer-ing Design. AI-driven generative design tools shift this interac-tion by producing hundreds of diverse alternatives at once, ex-panding exploration of the design space and automating much of the effort required to satisfy quantitative objectives [8, 13, 14, 15, 16]. This delegation reduces cognitive load and lets designers focus on qualitative properties [1]. However, generative meth-ods are not fully autonomous: expert designers must still ad-just problem formulations, constraints, and selection criteria to steer generated solutions and judge alternatives [17,18]. There is therefore growing interest in systems that can reason over design knowledge and let designers operate at a higher level of abstrac-tion, specifying qualitative intent rather than managing low-level tools. Large Language Models (LLMs) such as OpenAI’s Chat-GPT and Anthropic’s Claude have demonstrated strong reason-ing across domains [19, 20, 21, 22, 23] and are increasingly ap-plied in scientific and engineering contexts to generate ideas, form hypotheses, and support analysis [24, 25, 26, 27]. Yet they remain fundamentally passive: users must still formulate inputs and interpret outputs, so they lack the autonomous agency to rea-son across multiple stages of design. 

AI Agents Impact on Human Behavior in Engineering Design. This gap has driven the development of AI agents: au-tonomous systems in which LLMs serve as reasoning engines that perceive their environment, plan actions, and use external tools through memory-augmented reasoning [28, 29, 30]. Un-like purely reactive generation, agents begin with a goal, de-compose it into intermediate steps, and select tool invocations to accomplish each one [31]. Orchestrated multi-agent architec-tures with specialized roles have shown emergent collaborative behavior [32, 33, 34, 35, 36], and early engineering-design ap-plications team agents with simulation or code to support se-lected stages of the design process [37, 38, 39]. Agents have not yet been widely studied in settings where they define their own workflows and carry out end-to-end design without a pre-defined sequence of steps, which is especially relevant for long-horizon tasks where the appropriate problem formulation is itself 2 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 2 : Manufacturing agent prepares the best design made by the agentic system for additive manufacturing which includes post-processing the raw TO structure with solid padding fol-lowed by meshing of dense regions. This structure can be di-rectly imported and sliced in a 3D-printing slicer. We verify this pipeline end-to-end with the final print shown in the result. unknown in advance. 

Our Contributions. This work reframes topology opti-mization from a single-shot optimization problem defined by a fixed human-specified objective into an exploratory, agent-mediated process in which the problem formulation itself be-comes part of the search space. Our framework leverages agents to interpret high-level design intent from human designers, trans-late it into executable topology optimization tasks, and iteratively perform evaluation and refinement. We examine (i) how agents convert qualitative design requirements expressed in natural lan-guage into TO parameter selections that reflect the designer’s intent and navigate multi-objective trade-offs; (ii) how agents improve their decision-making through experimentation and col-laboration with other agents, autonomously learning from one another to better align with human preferences; and (iii) how the visual reasoning capabilities of modern vision–language models can be leveraged alongside TO to support this self-learning. To-gether, these mechanisms allow agents to gradually refine their design strategies and converge toward the human designer’s vi-sion. 

2 METHODS 

This section describes the design and implementation of the TO-Agents pipeline. We first present the overall agentic archi-tecture, detailing how specialized agents are coordinated through a logic-based conversation flow that spans problem formulation, initialization, optimization, human preference feedback, iterative vision-based refinement, AI judge evaluation, and final produc-tion. We then specify the underlying models and libraries used to instantiate each agent. Finally, we describe the tools and memory available to the agents at inference time. 

2.1 Agentic Architecture 

Our agentic pipeline is composed of a sequence of agents equipped with specialized expertise and tools. Each expert ap-plies their knowledge and responds only when it is their turn to respond, as determined by our predefined logic-based conversa-tion turn architecture. The full agentic architecture is illustrated in Figure 1. 

Problem Formulation Case Studies We evaluate our long-horizon agentic design pipeline through a case study based on the classic cantilever beam problem, which is commonly used as a benchmark for evaluating new TO methods [6]. In addition, we apply the design pipeline to a scenario where human-preference design and aesthetics play a more prominent role by considering a real-world product with practical relevance. Specifically, we formulate a simple set of boundary conditions and loading sce-narios corresponding to a phone stand designed to hold a smart-phone on a desk. The exact problem formulation is shown in Appendix C, Figures 11 and 12. 

Initialization To initialize the pipeline, the human designer provides a description of the problem formulation. A Pydantic-based agent interprets the description and transforms it into val-idated, structured JSON that matches the solver’s expected in-put format. Pydantic [40] is a python-based validation frame-work linked to the agentic framework. This structured output provides a reliable interface for passing the problem formulation to the topology optimization solver. In Appendix C (Figures 11 and 12), we assume that the human designer provides a verbose technical natural language description of the problem formula-tion so that all inputs required for the topology optimization are specified. Future work will investigate how simplifying this de-scription into more accessible, layman language impacts the pro-cess. 

Optimization Next, the topology optimization agent in-vokes the topology optimization solver, pyFANTOM [41], to ex-ecute the optimization based on the generated input parameters. We chose this open-source solver because it avoids the black-box constraints of proprietary software, giving us engineers full visibility into the parameters the agent can access and adjust to influence internal algorithmic behavior. With PyFANTOM, the agent can tune parameters throughout a Python-native, scalable, multi-constraint topology optimization framework that supports both structured and unstructured meshes, as well as a wide range of topology optimization objective functions. The resulting topology is rendered in 3D, and images of the structure are captured from the top, bottom, front, back, left, and right views. These images are saved in the chat history for sub-sequent reasoning steps. To improve spatial reasoning clarity, the topology optimization agent applies a color mapping with 3 Copyright © by ASME an accompanying colorbar. Voxels closer to the camera are ren-dered in darker colors, while voxels further from the camera ap-pear in lighter colors, as described in Appendix D. This visual-ization enables both the human designer and agents utilizing vi-sion–language models to better interpret the topology by clearly indicating the relative proximity of different regions of the struc-ture. 

Human Preference Feedback Following this, the human designer provides one qualitative feedback describing an aes-thetic requirement that the initial topology optimization result fails to satisfy. This is the only point at which the human de-signer provides input beyond the initial verbose technical de-scription used to initialize the topology; all subsequent stages of the agentic pipeline proceed fully autonomously without further human involvement. In this study, we have the designer request a structure with increased structural skeletonization and branch-ing complexity promoting a tree-like structure where there exists structural hierarchy and connectivity. 

Agentic Deep Reasoning and Refinement This request is passed to the vision agent, which is responsible for implementing the designer’s feedback through a three-stage process. In the first stage, the vision agent analyzes the full chat history, including the previous topology optimization problem parameters and the rendered 3D images of prior structures. In the second stage, the vision agent evaluates the designer’s request alongside the solver parameters available for modification. Based on this information, the vision agent proceeds to the third stage, where it determines which topology optimization parameters should be adjusted and to what extent in order to achieve the designer’s objective. The vision agent is allowed to change any and all of the parameters used to run the optimizer. This multi-stage reasoning workflow is detailed in Appendix B, Figures 9 and 10. The vision agent outputs detailed reasoning that identifies which parameters should be changed and explains why those modifications are expected to better satisfy the designer’s intent. Importantly, the agent is not provided with explicit definitions of the topology optimization parameters or any prior guidance about how changing each parameter affects the resulting topol-ogy. Instead, the vision agent relies entirely on knowledge ac-quired from its foundational training to infer the meaning and relative sensitivity of these parameters when attempting to satisfy the designer’s feedback. In this sense, the multi-objective reason-ing process is performed autonomously. The vision agent’s sug-gestions are returned in natural language and subsequently con-verted into structured output, which is passed back to the topol-ogy optimization agent for a newly revised solver run. The re-sulting optimized topology is again visually rendered and saved from multiple viewpoints. 

Agentic Critic Feedback Loop Following this revised opti-mization, an AI judge agent evaluates both the initial and revised designs. The judge scores the structures based on whether the human designer’s criterion of a more branching, intricate struc-ture has been achieved. The scoring criteria and system prompt are detailed in Appendix A, Figure 8. The judge must assign a score from 1 to 5 for each design after all revisions have com-pleted. We intentionally design the AI judge to be powered by a larger language model that is trained independently from the vision–language model used in the vision agent. This separa-tion helps promote a more neutral and unbiased evaluation of the outputs. The judge’s feedback is then added to the conversation his-tory and provided to the vision agent for another revision. At this stage, the vision agent receives a richer context, including the judge’s evaluation, the images of both topology optimization results, and their corresponding solver parameters. As the re-vision history expands, the vision agent is instructed to use the most recent highest-scoring design in its history as the basis for its next revision while continuing to align with the designer’s request. The maximum number of iterations can be specified by the engineer. For interpretability, we limit the process to five total iterations: one original topology optimization followed by four revision cycles. We demonstrate this over 10 total trial replicates with the exact same system set up for both the cantilever beam and phone stand case study. Figure 13 and Figure 15 show suc-cessful designs where the human designer’s intent has been met, whereas Figure 14 and Figure 16 show contrasting failure cases. 

Production Finally, the highest-scoring structure, as deter-mined by the AI judge, is passed to a manufacturing agent. This agent performs post-processing to convert the topology into a functional phone stand geometry. The final geometry is meshed and exported as an object file to Bambu Studio [42] for slicing, then 3D printed in standard PLA using a Bambu Lab X1C printer. 

2.2 Models and Libraries 

We utilize the open-source AutoGen [32] framework to con-struct our multi-agent architecture, as it represents a state-of-the-art solution for production-grade orchestration of multiple con-versational agents. The models deployed in the system are selected according to the functional role of each agent. The primary model used across the AutoGen framework is the vision–language model Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [43]. This open-source model was selected for its lightweight 7B parameter footprint and strong benchmark per-formance, while providing both vision–language reasoning and instruction-following capabilities suited to multimodal analysis and agent dialogue within a unified architecture. Within the pipeline, the vision agent leverages the model’s vision capabili-ties to analyze the 3D structure of topology optimization outputs. In addition, the model is responsible for generating the textual responses returned by each agent to the AutoGen chat interface. We initialize the model client, which provides a function to send prompts and return the model’s generated response. 4 Copyright © by ASME Successful Attempts     

> Successful Attempts
> Case Study:
> Cantilever-Beam
> Original Design First Revision Second Revision Third Revision Final Design
> Case Study: Phone-
> Stand Problem
> SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES FROM TO-AGENTS

FIGURE 3 : Two case studies illustrating successful multi-turn revision trajectories across the full TOAgents pipeline: phone stand case study (top) and cantilever beam case study (bottom). Both case studies are initialized with the same human preference to increase the hierarchical dendriform visual complexity of the overall topology. AI Judge scores for each successive revision are noted below each design. To provide a more reliable evaluation stage, we incorporate an AI judge model from a different model family than Qwen [44, 45]. Specifically, we use the open-source Gemma-3-27b-it model [46] from Google to assess the results generated by the system. The 27B variant is chosen because its larger parameter size provides stronger evaluation capacity relative to the Qwen model. While the pipeline can also operate with closed-source models such as the Gemini-3 family, this work reports results obtained using the lightweight open-source Gemma-3 model. All open-source models were served locally using VLLM.ai [47] serving engine. 

2.3 Tools 

Topology Optimization Solvers We utilize PyFANTOM [41], an open-source fast and efficient GPU-ready general pack-age for Finite-Element (FE) based topology optimization. All features are built for general purpose use cases with object ori-ented setup enabling customization and adaptation to different problem formulations. PyFANTOM serves as the main solver tool call at the disposal of the TO agent. PyFANTOM solves a SIMP-based minimum-compliance problem, which we summarize here. The design domain is discretized into n elements with element-wise densities x =[x1, x2, . . . , xe, . . . , xn]T ∈ [0, 1]n. A linear density filter of radius 

rmin maps x to filtered densities ˜ x, and each element’s stiffness is interpolated as E( ˜xi) = Emin + ˜x pi (E0 − Emin ), where E0 and Emin 

are the solid and void Young’s moduli and p is the SIMP penalty exponent. With Poisson’s ratio ν fixed, the assembled global dis-placements U(˜x) satisfy the FE equilibrium K(˜x)U(˜x) = F for the applied load vector F. The optimization problem is find x = [ x1, x2, . . . , xe, . . . , xn]T

minimize c(˜x) = FTU(˜x)

subject to v(˜x) = ˜xTv − ¯v ≤ 0

x ∈ X , X = {x ∈ Rn : 0 ≤ x ≤ 1},

(1) where c is the structural compliance, v is the vector of element volumes, and ¯ v = f V tot is the volume budget set by the volume fraction f . The compliance sensitivity used by the gradient-based optimizer takes the standard SIMP form 

∂ c(˜x)

∂ ˜xi

= udi (˜x)T h

p ˜x p−1 

> i

(E0 − Emin )k0

> i

i

ui(˜x), (2) where k0 

> i

is the element stiffness matrix evaluated at unit modu-lus, and ui and udi are the displacement and adjoint displacement vectors restricted to element i.

Spatial Perception Tools We render each topology from six orthogonal viewpoints (top, bottom, left, right, front, back) us-ing a depth-based Viridis color map so that voxels closer to the camera appear brighter than distant ones. This depth encoding lets the vision agent disambiguate front/back features and reason about 3D spatial geometry when proposing parameter changes. Force vectors and boundary conditions are overlaid as glyphs. Full implementation details (VTK / K3D / Playwright pipeline, camera-derivation logic, density thresholding, and HTML ex-port) are provided in Appendix D. 

Post-Processing Tools The manufacturing agent applies de-terministic geometric operations to add functional supports to 5 Copyright © by ASME the optimized density field, with support thickness scaled to the agent-selected mesh resolution. For the phone-stand case study these include a diagonal back surface, a reinforcement band along that surface, an anti-slip lip at the lower front edge, and a solid base layer for stability. The resulting density volume is converted to a polygonal mesh via marching cubes and exported in OBJ format for slicing. Full geometric definitions and the marching-cubes export procedure are provided in Appendix E. 

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The agentic pipeline reveals collective behavior resulting from the autonomy granted to the agents in their interpersonal in-teractions. The agents are therefore able to influence one another without human intervention, experimentally moving the system closer to the human designer’s intended objective, with optimiza-tion simulations and tool invocations serving as validation and feedback. 

3.1 History-Conditioned Adaptation 

Across our experimental replicates, we consistently observe a cycle of refinements in which the vision agent uses the growing history of prior designs, parameter settings, and AI-judge feed-back to progressively learn how to manipulate TO parameters toward the human designer’s qualitative objective. We first il-lustrate this behavior with a single representative replicate, then aggregate over all replicates in both case studies to character-ize which parameters the agents actually use as their levers. An exemplar set of successful runs enabled by history-conditioned adaptation for both case studies is shown in 3. 

3.1.1 Numerical Example We take Figure 13 repli-cate B as a running example. Table 1 summarizes how the agent moves the parameters across the four revisions, and Figure 13 shows the corresponding structures. The full vision-agent rea-soning and AI-judge evaluation for each turn can be found in the supplementary material; here we extract only notable highlights in their reasoning. 

Identifying the Right Levers. After viewing the structure, the vision agent judged the baseline original design as too plate-like. 

> The structure appears relatively flat and lacks significant branching. There are some thin members but they do not form a complex network. The over-all shape suggests it might be more plate-like rather than truss-like.

The vision agent immediately identifies the volume fraction 

f and SIMP penalty p as the two parameters most likely to pro-mote a thinner, more branched structure, and respects the lower bound on the filter radius rmin :

> Lowering the volume fraction increases the amount of void space, which encourages the optimizer to create thinner members . . . A higher penalty parameter penalizes thicker structures more heavily . . . The filter radius should not be reduced further as it could lead to overly fine elements that might not be practically feasible.

Accordingly, it drops f from 0 .15 to 0 .10 and raises p from 3 to 5. The AI judge scores the resulting design ( s = 4) above the original ( s = 3) and explicitly attributes the increase to the ap-pearance of richer hierarchy. This appeal to well-defined arches and supports confirms that the multimodal channel is being used. 

Doubling Down on the Working Strategy. Looking at the re-vised design, the vision agent observes progress but is not satis-fied:    

> The current structure appears to have some branching but lacks significant thinness and complexity. It still has areas that look like thick plates, and there isn’t enough internal hierarchy or connectivity.
> 1. Thinning Members: The structure is not sufficiently thin, which is cru-cial for achieving a skeletal design.
> 2. Internal Load Paths: The structure seems to rely heavily on a single dominant load path, lacking multiple internal load paths.
> 3. Connectivity: There is room for increased internal connectivity to pro-mote a more truss-like behavior.

With two designs in its context, the vision agent observes that thick columns still dominate revision 1 and pushes the same two levers further: p from 5 → 7 and f reduced again to 0 .05. Revision 2 exhibits clear hierarchical branching and the judge scores it 0 .5 points higher than revision 1, although with 5% lower confidence as the comparison becomes finer. Interestingly, the agent also claims that the optimizer settings seem fine, so no changes are necessary and opts to focus its targeted adjustments only to TO hyperparameters. In revision 3 the agent acknowledges that the previous re-vision was already complex but pushes for more improvement. The agent now diversifies its strategy, increasing the mesh res-olution (nelx × nely × nelz ) from 128 ×64 ×16 to 160 ×80 ×20 and tightening the optimizer function tolerance, producing some small void regions but no large global change; the judge correctly assigns it the same score as revision 2. One faulty behavior is that the agent can give mismatched instructions, an artifact of model hallucination. Specifically, the agent prose suggests increasing function tolerance, but the suggested numerical values suggest a decrease.   

> Higher mesh resolution can help capture finer details and promote more complex branching.
> PGD optimizer might benefit from slight adjustments to improve conver-gence towards a more skeletal structure. . . Increase the fun tol slightly to allow for more exploration (from 0.0001 to 0.00005).

The judge affirms, based on visual inspection, that the orig-6 Copyright © by ASME Case Study:      

> Cantilever-Beam
> Original Design First Revision Second Revision Third Revision Final Design
> Case Study: Phone-
> Stand Problem Failed Attempts
> Failed Attempts
> FAILED OUTCOMES FROM TO-AGENTS

FIGURE 4 : Two case studies illustrating failed multi-turn revision trajectories across the full TOAgents pipeline: phone stand case study (top) and cantilever beam case study (bottom). Both case studies are initialized with the same human preference to increase the hierarchical dendriform visual complexity of the overall topology. AI Judge scores for each successive revision are noted below each design. inal is the most simple with only a few dominant load paths and that higher scores were given to these later revisions for achiev-ing a richer network of load paths. 

Overshooting. With these successes in store, the agent con-tinues to push in the same direction with increasing p to 12, f to 0.02 and mesh further refined. The consequence of these changes are that there is so little material afforded that the optimizer can only afford a few primary members and thus the design fails to improve. The judge now scores the result below revisions 2 and 3, identifying that the parameters have been pushed too far. From our perspective, the design still satisfies the qualita-tive objective, and the judge’s confidence is notably lower in this evaluation; the run ends before any recovery from the overshoot is possible. Even so, the trajectory as a whole moves clearly to-ward the human designer’s intent, and we treat this replicate as a representative successful run. Three behaviors highlighted by this replicate recur across the dataset: (i) the agent discovers a small set of effective levers within the first revision; (ii) it amplifies a strategy that the judge has rewarded; and (iii) it eventually overshoots, providing the judge with a clear negative signal. We next show that these be-haviors generalize across replicates and case studies. 

3.1.2 Aggregate Parameter Usage To quantify which parameters the agents actually exercise, we compare ev-ery revision of all 10 replicates to its original baseline and report, for each parameter, the average signed change, the average abso-lute change, and the count of revisions in which it was modified. Results for both case studies are summarized in Table 2. In the phone-stand study, the SIMP penalty p is the single 

TABLE 1 : Parameter trajectory across revisions for Figure 13 replicate B.                                            

> Parameter Original Rev. 1 Rev. 2 Rev. 3 Rev. 4
> Filter radius, rmin 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.20
> nelx 128 128 128 160 192
> nely 64 64 64 80 96
> nelz 16 16 16 20 24 Opt. fun. tol. 10 −410 −410 −45×10 −510 −5
> SIMP penalty, p3.0 5.0 7.0 10.0 12.0 Volume fraction, f0.150 0.100 0.050 0.030 0.020

most reliable lever: it is increased in every one of the 40 revi-sions, by an average of +4.8. Mesh refinement is the next dom-inant pattern with nelx , nely , and nelz are each modified in 33–34 revisions, and the near-equality of signed and absolute averages shows the agents almost exclusively increase resolution rather than coarsen. The volume fraction f is touched as often (32 re-visions) but with much smaller magnitude (avg |∆| = 0.08), con-sistent with fine-tuning rather than exploration. The filter radius 

rmin shows the opposite signature: a similar count, but a near-zero signed average against a much larger absolute average (0 .09 vs. 0 .68), indicating that the agents lack a single consistent di-rection here and instead push it both ways depending on context. Material properties ( E0, ν) and the iteration budget are reserved for a small number of revisions, suggesting the agents recognize them as more drastic levers. The cantilever-beam study reveals a markedly more focused 7 Copyright © by ASME TABLE 2 : Top parameters modified by the agents across both case studies (across 40 revisions of 10 replicates each). Set A corresponds to the phone stand problem and Set B to the cantilever beam problem. “n/m” indicates the parameter was available to the agent but never modified in that case study.                                                                                          

> Set A Case Study Set B Case Study Parameter Avg. ∆Avg. |∆|Count Avg. ∆Avg. |∆|Count
> SIMP penalty, p+4.81 4.81 40 +3.75 3.86 36
> nelx +131 .8132 .734 n/m n/m n/m
> nelz +16 .516 .634 n/m n/m n/m
> nely +68 .068 .433 n/m n/m n/m Filter radius, rmin +0.09 0.68 32 +0.36 0.64 20 Volume fraction, f−0.03 0.08 32 −0.10 0.12 35 Heaviside, βn/m n/m n/m −1.00 1.00 15 Multigrid tolerance −10 −410 −413 n/m n/m n/m Number of iterations +91 .791 .76+87 .587 .510 Young’s modulus, E0−0.32 0.38 6n/m n/m n/m Poisson ratio, ν−0.05 0.05 4n/m n/m n/m Opt. fun. tol. n/m n/m n/m −10 −410 −42

strategy: only six numeric parameters are modified across all 40 revisions, and mesh resolution and material properties are never touched. The SIMP penalty p is again the dominant lever (36 re-visions, +3.75 on average), and the volume fraction f is consis-tently reduced (35 revisions, signed average −0.10). The Heav-iside projection toggle β is exercised in every case where it is touched (15 revisions, signed and absolute averages both 1 .0), functioning as a binary switch the agents flip on or off. We at-tribute the narrower lever set to the more constrained problem formulation: the cantilever uses a single point load, whereas the phone stand applies multiple loads along a diagonal that admit more distributed load paths and therefore reward exploration of mesh and material parameters. We elaborate on the qualitative behavior of the cantilever replicates in the supplementary ma-terial; here it suffices that history-conditioned adaptation is ob-served in both studies, but with study-specific parameter strate-gies that the agents discover from the feedback signal alone. 

3.2 Observed Recovery from Low-Scoring Revisions 

Another behavior observed in this agentic system is its ca-pacity for recovery from low scoring revisions, enabling the agents to detect and adapt to their own errors and recover when their decisions diverge from the intended objective. In these cases, the agents leverage the history of prior revisions to reason backward and adapt their decisions in response to critical feed-

> FIGURE 5

: AI judge scores across 10 replicates per revision where set A (red solid) represents the phone stand case study and set B (orange hatched) represents the cantilever beam case study. Set A shows both an upward shift in central tendency (μ : 2 .5 → 3.5 across revisions) and a broadening distribution to-ward higher scores. Set B’s mean remains roughly stable near 

μ ≈ 3.0, but its distribution widens comparably, expanding from a tight initial cluster around 3 to span the full 2–5 range by Revi-sion 4. 8 Copyright © by ASME back from the AI judge, weighing its previous successful and unsuccessful choices. By identifying the most effective prior re-vision, the agents adjust the relevant parameters and continue the process from that point, guiding the optimization back toward the desired trajectory. A prime example of this is shown in Figure 13 replicate C. In the first revision, the agent demonstrates strong intuition in se-lecting parameter adjustments that promote the desired branch-ing structure which yields a high score over the original design. However, in revisions 2 and 3, the degree of branching progres-sively decreases. This is reflected in the AI judge’s assessment after revision 3 was completed: 

AI Judge Agent Evaluation 

Comparative Analysis: 

Here’s an evaluation of the aesthetic quality of the four topology optimiza-tion results, focusing on global structural complexity. 

1. Image A (Original): Score – 2 

Justification: The structure exhibits a very simple global form. It consists of a single dominant arch and a minimal number of supporting members. There is little branching and almost no hierarchical organization beyond the primary load path. Confidence: 95% 

2. Image B (Revision 1): Score – 4 

Justification: This design demonstrates a significantly higher level of global complexity. Multiple arches and branching supports form a rich hierarchical structure. The network of load-carrying members is dense and interconnected, providing several possible load paths. Confidence: 90% 

3. Image C (Revision 2): Score – 3 

Justification: Image C presents a moderate level of complexity. It contains a primary arch with secondary branching supports, but the branching net-work is less extensive and the hierarchy less developed than in Image B. The structure is more intricate than Image A but does not reach the com-plexity of Image B. Confidence: 85% 

4. Image D (Revision 3): Score – 3 

Justification: Similar to Image C, this design exhibits moderate global complexity. It features a single arch with branching supports. While the form appears slightly more refined, the overall level of branching and hi-erarchy is comparable to Image C. Confidence: 80% 

Summary: Image B stands out as the most globally complex design, char-acterized by a dense network of interconnected members and a clear hier-archical structure. Images C and D exhibit comparable levels of moderate complexity, while Image A represents the simplest structure. The scoring reflects this progression in global structural richness. 

Tracing the revision history reveals a foundational error that contaminates the agent’s subsequent credit assignment. At revi-sion 1, the agent made two mechanically sound moves, reducing the volume fraction and increasing the SIMP penalty, but simul-taneously increased the filter radius under the mistaken belief that a larger rmin would promote thinner members. A human expert in TO intuitively knows that the opposite is true since a larger filter radius enforces a larger minimum feature size and therefore produces thicker, smoother members. 

A larger r min value will allow for the removal of smaller, less critical ele-ments, promoting the formation of a more skeletal structure. 

Given that the first revision achieved a high score, it assumed that including this choice was a good decision. However, further increasing the filter radius in the same incorrect direction led to an observed reduction in score. In the subsequent final revision, the vision agent finally recognizes the error based on the opti-mization history. It attributes the decline in performance to its earlier faulty decision to increase rmin . Accordingly, the vision agent reverses its prior reasoning and recommends drastically re-ducing rmin from rmin = 3.75 to rmin = 2.5. The agent was able to arrive at this adjustment by revisit-ing revision 1, which holds the highest score in the revision his-tory, and using it as a reference point for subsequent parameter refinement. By building from this earlier successful state and im-plementing these suggestions, the vision agent helps the system recover and produce a high-scoring design for the final revision. The adjustments made across this revision can be seen in Table 3. 

TABLE 3 : Observed recovery in parameter values across revi-sions for Figure 13 replicate C.                                                      

> Parameter Original Revision 1 Revision 2 Revision 3 Revision 4
> Filter radius, rmin 233.5000 3.7500 2.5000
> nelx 128 128 160 256 512
> nely 64 64 80 128 256
> nelz 16 16 20 32 64 Multigrid tolerance 0.00010 0.00005 0.00001 0.00005 0.00005 Optimizer change tolerance ––0.00010 0.00005 0.00010 Optimizer function tolerance 0.00010 0.00010 0.00010 0.00005 0.00010 SIMP penalty, p34568Volume fraction, f0.1500 0.1000 0.1500 0.1200 0.0500

This recovery behavior is also evident in Figure 13, replicate E. In this case, the first few revisions successfully improved the score relative to the baseline, but performance plateaued at s = 4in revisions 1 and 2. This plateau placed pressure on the agent to take more drastic actions by adjusting multiple levers simulta-neously in revision 3. Here, the agent wrestles with two compet-ing interpretations of the objective: increasing structural branch-ing, which requires additional material, while producing thin-ner members which requires reducing material usage. The agent chose to simultaneously raise f from 0.05 to 0.15, drop rmin from 1.5 to 1.0, refine the mesh from 256 ×128 ×32 to 512 ×256 ×64, and halve E, among other changes. The result was a failure state for revision 3 in which branch-ing disappeared entirely and the AI judge correctly assigns this 9 Copyright © by ASME design a score of s = 1, describing the structure as ”almost a monolithic shell.” There was simply too much material available and not enough filter-enforced minimum feature size, to force the optimizer toward a branching topology. In the final revision, the agent is able to recover by return-ing to a prior more successful configuration, which enables it to fix its reasoning that reducing f produces more favorable results. The resulting design introduces even greater branching than the earlier designs, ultimately producing a structure that strongly sat-isfies the human designer’s objective. For the cantilever beam problem, recovery behavior is like-wise evident across several replicates. For example, in Figure 15, replicate E, the first few revisions produced excessively thick branches. Consequently, by revision 3, the agent effectively re-verted to the original design and corrected its earlier parameter adjustments, ultimately achieving a record-high score of s = 4. In some cases, however, progress is non-monotonic. Inter-mediary revisions can outperform the final revision, indicating that the agent is not always able to fully build on earlier suc-cesses. For example, in Figure 13, replicate A, revision 3 re-ceives a higher score than the final revision 4. Similarly, in Figure 13 replicate D, revision 1 clearly represents the best-performing design. Despite this, we still consider these runs suc-cessful, as at least one design within the evolution of revisions achieves the human designer’s vision for the objective. This is evident also in the case for the cantilever beam study for instance in Figure 15 replicate D. 

3.3 Trajectory-Level Exploration 

Earlier, we observed that the agents discovered that focusing on a small set of optimization parameters, including the SIMP penalty p and the volume fraction f , was sufficient to achieve the objective. However, emergent behavior arises when the agent begins to reason over the design space more broadly. This shift is evident when the agent starts to consider additional factors such as material properties, boundary condition placement, load placement, and the optimizer selection itself, effectively altering the problem as a whole in order to better achieve the human de-signer’s envisioned outcome. In Figure 13 replicate E, the agent reaches beyond the stan-dard optimization settings and attempts to reason about how ma-terial properties interact with the TO solver. In revision 2, it leaves the Young’s modulus E0 at 1 .0 and reduces the Poisson ratio to ν = 0.25. By revision 4, it halves the Young’s modulus to E0 = 0.5 and restores ν = 0.3, justifying the change with the claim that a lower E0 ”promotes thinner members.” This reasoning is mechanistically incorrect for the problem at hand. From the compliance sensitivity in Eq. (2), E0 enters as a uniform scalar multiplier on every element sensitivity. Scal-ing E0 rescales the gradient by the same constant at every de-sign variable, leaving the ranking of elements and therefore the optimal density field unchanged. Halving E0 would double the reported compliance values but produce an identical topology. Poisson’s ratio is the only material property that genuinely af-fects the optimum: ν enters the elasticity tensor non-uniformly through the 1 /[( 1 + ν)( 1 − 2ν)] prefactor and the differing scal-ing of normal and shear blocks, so element sensitivities shift non-uniformly across the domain. Furthermore, in this replicate, the vision agent maintains the existing boundary conditions to preserve the structural function-ality of the phone stand. This behavior suggests that the agent recognizes how the problem setup relates to the functional role of the design. In particular, it is cautious about modifying the di-agonal face, which serves as the primary contact surface for the phone. The vision agent’s reasoning on this point in revision 2 reads:  

> Boundary Conditions. Boundary conditions can affect how the structure responds to loads. Ensure the boundary conditions are correctly applied to maintain functionality while allowing for more complex deformation pat-terns.

At another meta-thinking level, agents can reason over the selected optimization algorithm. For example, in Figure 14, replicate D, the vision agent experiments with different opti-mization strategies, alternating between the Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA) optimizer and the Projected Gradient De-scent (PGD) optimizer, which can produce substantially different visual outcomes. In the first revision, the vision agent suggests applying an alternative optimizer in place of PGD. The vision agent suggests using plain gradient descent (GD) instead. However, since plain GD was not available to the agent as a tool, the TO agent pro-ceeded with the MMA optimizer as a more robust alternative to PGD, while keeping to the remaining parameter adjustments as suggested. This design was punished by the AI judge for result-ing in an overly simplistic design with little branching hierarchy. Thus, the vision agent returns to the PGD optimizer in the second revision. In revision 3, the vision agent calls for the use of MMA explicitly despite previous failures with this algorithm, but this time with a much lower volume fraction f applied to increase void space based on its learnings from the success of revision 2. As a result, this third revision is the highest scoring in the sequence. Although the manufactured design is not classified by the human designer as fully meeting the objective (placing this repli-cate in the failure category overall), the revision 3 result demon-strates that the agent can explore a method using a completely different algorithm that can yield a uniquely rich branching that the judge values highly. With additional revision cycles, this pro-ductive direction could potentially have been refined further. A similar pattern appears in the cantilever beam case study. In Figure 15, replicate A, the agent applies MMA during the first three revisions but switches back to PGD by revision 4 after rec-10 Copyright © by ASME ognizing that MMA was not providing sufficient improvement. The agent’s output shows that it correctly identifies the current optimizer as MMA based on the history, explicitly names PGD as an alternative, and interprets the switch from MMA to PGD as evidence that it is tracking its own optimizer state across revi-sions. 

> Optimizer Type: Switching from MMA to PGD might provide a more robust exploration of the design space, leading to a more complex and intricate structure... While the MMA optimizer was effective in Revision 3, exploring other op-timizers like PGD might yield different results.

This suggests that the agent can determine through itera-tive experimentation when switching optimizers is beneficial for aligning the design more closely with the intended objective. 

3.4 Failure Cases 

This pipeline reveals several weaknesses of the agents when performing a multi-objective, long-horizon task, particularly due to the stochastic nature of the responses and the inconsistent re-trieval of information from memory. 

3.4.1 Meeting Human Preferences There are cases in which the agent struggles to produce designs that align with the human designer’s vision. Sometimes agents double down on a bad strategy, thinking they had not pushed it far enough but this only causes further stray from the desired final form. A rep-resentative failure of this kind appears in Figure 4: in the initial revision the agent increased the volume fraction, and in subse-quent revisions it continued in the same direction, expecting that adding more material would spread into a branch-like structure. Other selected replicates are shown as a collection in Figure 14 for the phone stand study where the designs do not meet the hu-man designer’s mental model. In other cases, all of the mechanistic changes made to the parameters are sound but the final structure does not meet the human rubric for an aesthetically successful design even when the AI Judge concludes that it does. In Figure 14, replicate C, the final structure appears somewhat disordered and does not ex-hibit the organized hierarchical branching envisioned by the hu-man designer that other runs were better able to achieve. The agent however still exhibits good decision-making: it increases the optimizer’s change tolerance while decreasing the function tolerance to encourage broader exploration of the design space. As a result, the final revision does appear the most branch-like and is judged by the AI judge favorably among the generated designs receiving the highest score. 

3.4.2 Use of Available Tools Other times the agent makes suggestions that are not within the tool-set. In Figure 14, replicate B, the agent attempts to introduce a continuation sched-ule on the SIMP penalty p. However, the system did not provide the agent with the capability to implement this function, leading it to attempt to invoke a feature that was not available to it. As a result, the agent neither learned nor recognized later in review of the history that the intended functionality was not applied. Even still, the agent’s intent was sound: it proposed gradually increasing p in order to penalize compliance more effectively without overly stiffening the structure too quickly. The agent had hoped to introduce a p-continuation schedule that penalizes thick regions more heavily over time. Without this ability, the optimization results shown in this figure do not accurately reflect the agent’s intended strategy and appear as failures with little to no branching. As a result, the agent remains unaware and cannot realize this limitation on its own. Implementing a mechanism to detect such unsupported functionality is left for future work. Figure 16 shows the replicates in the cantilever beam case study for which none of the generated designs satisfy the hu-man designer’s requested qualitative specifications. In Figure 16 replicate A, the agent does not recognize until the final revision that reducing the volume fraction f produces a more skeletal, branching structure that is evaluated more favorably by the AI judge. This case is therefore considered a failure because the re-duction occurs too late, and not aggressively enough, to achieve the desired result within the allotted number of revisions, even though the agent may have succeeded if additional revision cy-cles had been allowed. 

3.4.3 Selective Memory The agent does not reliably adhere to explicit constraints. The rule stated: “Do NOT go below 1.5 in density filter radius,” The agent nevertheless recommends reducing the filter ra-dius to increase visible branching detail. While the intuition be-hind adjusting the parameter is reasonable, the behavior demon-strates that the agent may ignore or override constraints when it believes doing so will help it achieve its goal. More generally, this suggests that instructions are not followed consistently and that attention to constraints may be selective. In Figure 15, replicate E, the agent recommends rmin = 1.0in revision 1 and rmin = 0.5 in revision 2 without acknowledg-ing the imposed constraint. By the third revision, however, the agent identifies the rule and explicitly requests adherence to the minimum radius constraint of rmin = 1.5. Furthermore, agents engage with available information se-lectively. The agent reliably retains forward-pointing facts (current state, goal, generic claims) but often loses backward-pointing facts (what worked, what didn’t, why). Access to con-versation history does not mean that the agent exploits it as a useful tool for its reasoning in order to better trace score deltas back to specific parameter changes. The agent sometimes will di-11 Copyright © by ASME rectly claim in its response that it is reasoning based on insights gained from previous iterations, but will proceed to report key observations that are generic mechanistic claims without directly referencing previous designs. The agent’s selective memory is partially compensated by deterministic structural memory from the rebase to the best scoring design demonstrating how the en-gineered architecture of the set up can be a useful guardrail. 

3.4.4 Physical Intuition As discussed in prior sec-tions, the agents can form internally plausible but mechanisti-cally incorrect explanations. For example, the agent may reason that increasing the volume fraction should enable more branch-ing by allowing more material to be used, when in practice this can otherwise move the design further from the objective where reducing volume fraction would in fact more easily promote thin branching. Another failure mode is that agents conflate doing more work with being more productive. If scores are unable to increase after several revisions, the agent will escalate the situation by bundling multiple parameter changes at once. In Figure 13 repli-cate E, after two successive revisions with scores of 4, the agent calls for six simultaneous parameter changes in the third revision. While each change was defensible, the bundle caused a catas-trophic collapse in score ( s = 1), defeating credit assignment and making it difficult for agents to track which levers helped and which hurt. 

3.5 AI Judge Scoring Trends 

The AI judge scores across replicates shown in Figure 5 reveal that early revisions display relatively constrained perfor-mance, with mean scores largely clustered between 2 and 4. In later revisions, the agent begins to explore a broader design space: the distribution of scores expands substantially, with out-comes ranging from roughly 1 to 5 by the third revision for both sets. For Set A, corresponding to the phone stand case study, the mean scores increase steadily across revisions. In contrast, Set B, representing the cantilever beam case study, exhibits greater variability, with scores declining in the early revisions before par-tially recovering, though the final mean remains slightly below the initial value. This difference may be partly explained by the higher starting performance in Set B (3.3) compared with Set A (2.5), leaving less room for measurable improvement. As a result, Set A appears to benefit more clearly from the iterative revision process, showing a consistent upward trajectory in per-formance. This widening spread in scores by late revisions supports the observation that the agent increasingly explores diverse design solutions as revisions progress. For Set A, several replicates im-prove steadily across revisions, contributing to the rising mean. In Set B, replicate trajectories are more heterogeneous: some runs improve substantially in later revisions, while others stag-nate or decline. These results suggest that the revision process enables exploration of higher-performing designs, but the out-comes remain sensitive to the stochastic behavior of individual runs. 

3.5.1 Prototyping and Production We validate the designs by allowing the manufacturing agent to select the highest-scoring design from each replicate. In cases where mul-tiple designs receive the same highest score, the most recent re-vision is selected. Each selected design is then post-processed to add solid supports at key functional regions of the stand, in-cluding the base, the diagonal back support where the phone rests, and the bottom hook that prevents the phone from sliding. The manufacturing agent then meshes the design and exports an object mesh file that can be directly imported into Bambu Stu-dio [42]. For the stand, we printed a pair of each design to hold the smartphone. We scale the exported mesh file such that the longest edge is 120mm. We 3D printed multiple best scor-ing structures using standard PLA filament on a Bambulab X1C printer with the default 0.2mm layer height setting in Bambu Stu-dio to ensure that they are structurally sound designs. We show one exemplar physical prototype in Figure 2 to demonstrate the process. 

4 HUMAN BASELINE 

To assess how closely the AI judge’s scores align with a hu-man baseline, we conducted a study with four participant human reviewers. Each participant was tasked with independently eval-uating each replicate. All the designs evaluated are shown in Figures 13, 14, 15, and 16. 

4.0.1 Protocol Each replicate, consisting of one origi-nal design and four revisions, was treated as a separate question. Reviewers received the same instructions as the AI judge and evaluated the images without additional context. Designs were rated from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent) based on overall visual com-plexity, particularly hierarchical, tree-like branching relative to the original structure. Reviewers were instructed to evaluate de-signs only within the same sequence. This baseline has several limitations. Human reviewers may experience fatigue or develop implicit biases from previously evaluated designs, despite instructions to assess each sequence independently. In contrast, the AI judge evaluates each replicate in isolation without carryover between questions. Accordingly, our goal is not a perfect one-to-one comparison, but rather to de-termine whether the AI judge exhibits reasonably reliable judg-ment overall. 12 Copyright © by ASME 4.0.2 Correlation The correlation between the human reviewers and the AI judge is shown in Figure 6. At the aggre-gate level, the AI judge (Gemma-3-27B) and the human raters yielded comparable mean scores, with s = 3.04 and s = 3.15, re-spectively, for Set A, and s = 3.00 and s = 2.97, respectively, for Set B. Both capture the general upward trend across revisions. An exception appears in Set B, where there is a larger discrep-ancy between human and AI judge ratings of the original design. 

4.0.3 Human-AI Inter-Rater Agreement We further looked at the inter-rater agreement between all human rater scores compared against the AI judge’s score. Since each of the four human raters independently evaluated every design using the same 1–5 integer scale as the AI judge, we obtain 200 paired scores per set (4 raters × 10 replicates × 5 revisions). For Set A, shown in Figure 6 B, the confusion matrix reveals a visible diagonal ridge. Overall, 32% of pairs are in exact agreement and 72% fall within ±1 (Cohen’s κ = 0.138), indicating modest but structured alignment. For Set B in Figure 6 D, the matrix does not show the same diagonal concentration. Instead, a single off-diagonal cell at (Hu-man=2, AI=3) dominates with 31 of 200 pairs, meaning that when human raters judged a cantilever design as poor, the AI judge assigned it a middling score ( s = 3). A key factor un-derlying this discrepancy is the AI judge’s compressed scoring confidence: 89% of its scores fall in the 2–4 range, compared to human raters who use the full 1–5 scale more liberally. Humans are more willing to commit to extreme judgments, confidently giving extremely low scores ( s = 1) when something looks bad and extremely high scores ( s = 5) when something looks great. In contrast, the AI judge hedges toward middling scores. The cantilever beam case study is inherently more difficult to evalu-ate, even for human raters, in terms of whether it satisfies the de-signer’s intent regarding aesthetic branching thus judges hedge toward safer scoring. 

4.0.4 Human-Human Variability Comparison We further examined whether AI–human disagreement falls within the natural variability observed among human raters. In Set A (Figure 6B), human–human agreement was relatively strong, with exact agreement of 40–66%, agreement within ±1 of 84– 96%, and positive κ values (0.24–0.58). Human–AI agreement was lower but followed a similar pattern, with exact agreement of 30–32%, agreement within ±1 of 66–76%, and κ values of 0.12–0.16. Although weaker than human–human agreement, the AI remained within a comparable range, suggesting potential for AI to function as an additional fifth rater. In Set B (Figure 6D), human–human agreement again re-mained strong, with exact agreement of 40–46%, agreement within ±1 of 80–98%, and κ values of 0.22–0.32. However, human–AI agreement declined: exact agreement dropped to 10– 25%, agreement within ±1 to 58–75%, and κ values approached zero or became negative ( −0.11 to 0 .02). Unlike Set A, the AI appeared misaligned with human judgment, tending to fa-vor mid-range scores when uncertain. Despite weaker agreement at the individual level in Set B, the AI judge maintained strong aggregate-level agreement across both studies and multiple repli-cates, supporting its effectiveness as a directional feedback signal for guiding the revision process toward improved designs. 

5 ABLATION 

We conduct an ablation study in which all feedback mech-anisms are removed and the vision agent is effectively blinded within the TO-Agents pipeline. 

5.0.1 Protocol Under this condition, the vision agent receives the same task as before from the human designer to im-prove the aesthetic branching quality of the design, along with the original problem description to identify the set of modifiable parameters. However, the agent is not provided with any history of prior iterations during the revision process, preventing it from leveraging information from previous updates. Additionally, it is deprived of visual input, such that it cannot observe the evolving structure or assess how parameter modifications influence aes-thetic quality. No JSON representations of intermediate or final revisions are supplied. All other agents retain their original func-tionality. 

5.0.2 Impact of Feedback on Iterative Refinement 

The ablation produces lower design scores than the full TO-Agents pipeline and shows no consistent improvement across revisions. Unlike the full pipeline, which enables iterative re-finement, the ablation often regresses, suggesting the removed component is essential for learning from feedback. In Set A, the full pipeline shows steady improvement ( s ≈

2.5 → 3.5) with ( +0.25/revision), whereas the ablation declines and stagnates ( s ≈ 3.0 → 2.7) with ( −0.06/revision). This likely reflects the stronger initial baseline, where revisions that fail to improve are scored lower relative to the original design. Only 1 of 10 ablation replicates satisfied the human designer’s branching criterion, compared to 6 of 10 in the full pipeline (Figure 13). All ablation replicates are available in the supplementary files. In Set B, the full pipeline remains largely stable across re-visions ( s ≈ 3.3 → 3.1), with a flattened but still positive slope (+0.02/revision), suggesting limited opportunity for iterative im-provement within the constrained cantilever beam design space. The ablation shows a less stable trajectory, dipping early before partial recovery ( s ≈ 3.2) and yielding a slightly negative slope (−0.03/revision). Overall, the ablated condition produces con-sistently lower scores, indicating that the full pipeline more reli-ably generates successful designs even when successive revisions 13 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 6 : (A) Mean scores across revisions in Set A (the phone stand case study), showing similar upward trends for both human raters and the AI judge. (B) Confusion matrix for Set A ratings, showing human–AI agreement (32% exact agreement, 72% within 

±1, κ = 0.138). (B right) Pairwise agreement comparisons for the Set A task, where human–AI agreement is positive but lower than human–human agreement. (C) Mean scores across revisions in Set B (the cantilever beam study), where human scores improve while AI scores remain more stable but follow the overall trend. (D) Confusion matrix for Set B ratings, showing weaker human–AI alignment (20% exact agreement, 68% within ±1, κ = −0.062). (D right) Pairwise agreement comparisons for the Set B task, where human–AI agreement falls near the lower end of the human inter-rater range. do not substantially improve performance. This trend is also reflected qualitatively in Set B, where replicates contain fewer successful designs meeting the human designer’s criteria. The full pipeline enables the vision agent to build on prior successful strategies, increasing the likelihood of effective designs. In the ablated study, the judge occasionally as-signs higher scores to structurally unsuccessful designs because it evaluates only within the limited context of each replicate and lacks examples of stronger designs available in the full pipeline. As a result, evaluations are somewhat inflated, though the judge still assigns lower scores overall compared to the full pipeline. This suggests that the complete system enables agents to iter-atively refine parameter modifications using visual feedback to guide decision-making. 

6 LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 

We present a framework for studying how agents tune topol-ogy optimization parameters toward broad qualitative design goals specified by a human designer, enabling iterative parameter exploration, revision, and cross-agent feedback. Across our case studies, agents demonstrate a strong understanding of param-eter effects, occasionally discovering creative multi-parameter strategies that better align with human design preferences, while consistently respecting design constraints so that resulting ge-ometries can be post-processed and manufactured by the down-stream manufacturing agent. Score trends and the diversity of final designs further suggest that agents become increasingly ex-ploratory as context accumulates across revisions. These results should be interpreted as a preliminary investi-gation rather than a comprehensive evaluation. We do not con-14 Copyright © by ASME Original Revision 1 Revision 2 Revision 3 Revision 4      

> Revision
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Score
> Full pipeline: slope = +0.25/rev
> Ablation: slope = -0.06/rev
> Set A (Phone Stands): Full Pipeline vs Ablation
> Full pipeline (overall=3.04)
> Ablation (overall=2.58)
> 2.5 3.0
> 2.7
> 2.4
> 3.3
> 2.4
> 3.2
> 2.4
> 3.5
> 2.7
> Original Revision 1 Revision 2 Revision 3 Revision 4
> Revision
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Score
> Full pipeline: slope = +0.02/rev
> Ablation: slope = -0.03/rev
> Set B (Cantilever Beams): Full Pipeline vs Ablation
> Full pipeline (overall=3.00)
> Ablation (overall=2.74)
> 3.3
> 3.3 2.7
> 2.5
> 2.6
> 2.3
> 3.3
> 2.4
> 3.1
> 3.2
> A
> B

FIGURE 7 : AI judge score trends for the full pipeline versus the ablation baseline across revision rounds in the phone stand case study (Set A) and Cantilever Beam Case Study (Set B). Linear regression slopes confirm that the full pipeline maintains a pos-itive or near-zero trend, while the ablation shows stagnation or slight degradation. duct a controlled human-user study comparing designer perfor-mance, effort, or decision-making on the same task, and our eval-uation relies on an AI judge whose scores may be sensitive to model choice and prompting configuration; although we adopted a deliberately broad and minimally constrained prompting strat-egy, prompting is inherently biased and may systematically in-fluence evaluations. System behavior likewise depends on the underlying models, and we evaluate only a single state-of-the-art open-source vision–language model for both the vision and judge agents, leaving systematic comparison with other open-and closed-source alternatives to future work. Despite these limitations, the framework offers a foundation for deeper study of agentic behavior, improved trust in agent decision-making during autonomous multistep workflows, and insight into how agents integrate multimodal inputs (images of 3D structures for spatial reasoning and long-context conversa-tional history) into engineering decisions. This raises the pos-sibility of human designers operating one level removed from direct parameter control, with natural-language descriptions in-terpreted by agents and translated into actionable design out-comes. Beyond the present case studies, the approach extends naturally to domains where topology optimization is established but qualitative or human-preference objectives are hard to en-code directly: automotive and consumer product design (form, packaging, brand language, manufacturability), architecture and the built environment (lightweight structural systems balancing efficiency with spatial and aesthetic goals), and healthcare (med-ical devices, assistive technologies, implants, and rehabilitation products, where performance must be weighed against comfort, usability, safety, and patient experience). Future work includes new feedback-loop architectures that improve inter-agent reasoning and collaboration, strategies for managing growing conversational context to support more reli-able retrieval-augmented reasoning across revisions, and inves-tigation of agents’ spatial reasoning together with more efficient 3D representations that vision-based agents can readily interpret. Finally, while our study focuses on specific examples, the frame-work is built for scalability and can incorporate a broader array of case studies spanning more diverse human-designer descriptions and natural-language instructions. 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

I.A.S developed the methodology and conducted the experi-ments. H.C. and I.A.S wrote the manuscript. H.C. contributed to development of experimental design and assisted with prototype production. F.A. supervised and directed the research. 

FUNDING 

I.A.S. acknowledges that this material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Sci-ence, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, under Award Number DE-SC0026073. H.C. acknowledges support by Tata Steel. 

CODE AND SUPPLEMENTARY FILES 

All code, analysis notebooks, and computational protocols developed in this study are publicly available at https:// github.com/bellastewart/TO-Agents . The reposi-tory also contains supplementary materials, including the full agent outputs referenced throughout this manuscript. 

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The authors declare no competing interests. 15 Copyright © by ASME REFERENCES 

[1] Krish, S., 2011. “A practical generative design method”. 

Computer-Aided Design, 43 (1), Jan., pp. 88–100. [2] Lazarov, B. S., Wang, F., and Sigmund, O., 2016. “Length scale and manufacturability in density-based topology op-timization”. Archive of Applied Mechanics, 86 (1-2), Jan., pp. 189–218. [3] Regenwetter, L., Abu Obaideh, Y., and Ahmed, F., 2025. “Multi-Objective Counterfactuals for Design: A Model-Agnostic Counterfactual Search Method for Multi-Modal Design Modifications”. Journal of Mechanical Design, 

147 (2), Feb., p. 021401. [4] Sigmund, O., 2001. “A 99 line topology optimization code written in Matlab”. Structural and Multidisciplinary Opti-mization, 21 (2), Apr., pp. 120–127. [5] Andreassen, E., Clausen, A., Schevenels, M., Lazarov, B. S., and Sigmund, O., 2011. “Efficient topology opti-mization in MATLAB using 88 lines of code”. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43 (1), Jan., pp. 1–16. [6] Sigmund, O., 2022. “On benchmarking and good scientific practise in topology optimization”. Structural and Multi-disciplinary Optimization, 65 (11), Nov., p. 315. [7] Loos, S., Wolk, S. V. D., Graaf, N. D., Hekkert, P., and Wu, J., 2022. “Towards intentional aesthetics within topology optimization by applying the principle of unity-in-variety”. 

Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 65 (7), July, p. 185. [8] Saadi, J. I., Chong, L., and Yang, M. C., 2024. “The effect of targeting both quantitative and qualitative objectives in generative design tools on the design outcomes”. Research in Engineering Design, 35 (4), Oct., pp. 409–425. [9] Schiffer, G., Ha, D. Q., and Carstensen, J. V., 2023. “HiTop 2.0: combining topology optimisation with multiple feature size controls and human preferences”. Virtual and Physical Prototyping, 18 (1), Dec., p. e2268603. [10] Mueller, C. T., and Ochsendorf, J. A., 2015. “Combining structural performance and designer preferences in evolu-tionary design space exploration”. Automation in Construc-tion, 52 , Apr., pp. 70–82. [11] Oduguwa, V., Tiwari, A., and Roy, R., 2003. “Handling integrated quantitative and qualitative search space in a real world optimisation problem”. In The 2003 Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2003. CEC ’03., Vol. 2, IEEE, pp. 1222–1229. [12] Brintrup, A. M., Ramsden, J., and Tiwari, A., 2007. “An interactive genetic algorithm-based framework for handling qualitative criteria in design optimization”. Computers in Industry, 58 (3), Apr., pp. 279–291. [13] Saadi, J., and Yang, M., 2023. “OBSERVATIONS ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF GENERATIVE DESIGN TOOLS ON DESIGN PROCESS AND DESIGNER BE-HAVIOUR”. Proceedings of the Design Society, 3, July, pp. 2805–2814. [14] Alam, M. F., and Ahmed, F., 2024. “GenCAD: Image-Conditioned Computer-Aided Design Generation with Transformer-Based Contrastive Representation and Diffu-sion Priors”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16294 .[15] Yu, N., Ferdous Alam, M., Hart, A. J., and Ahmed, F., 2026. “GenCAD-Three-Dimensional: Computer-Aided Design Program Generation Using Multimodal Latent Space Alignment and Synthetic Dataset Balancing”. Jour-nal of Mechanical Design, 148 (3), Mar., p. 031703. [16] Regenwetter, L., Obaideh, Y. A., Chiotti, F., Lykourent-zou, I., and Ahmed, F., 2025. “BikeBench: A Bicycle De-sign Benchmark for Generative Models with Objectives and Constraints”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00830 .[17] Elrefaie, M., Dai, A., and Ahmed, F., 2025. “DrivAerNet: A Parametric Car Dataset for Data-Driven Aerodynamic Design and Prediction”. Journal of Mechanical Design, 

147 (4), Apr., p. 041712. [18] Sung, N., Spreizer, S., Elrefaie, M., Samuel, K., Jones, M. C., and Ahmed, F., 2025. “BlendedNet: A Blended Wing Body Aircraft Dataset and Surrogate Model for Aero-dynamic Predictions”. In Volume 3B: 51st Design Automa-tion Conference (DAC), American Society of Mechanical Engineers, p. V03BT03A049. [19] Zhou, Y., Muresanu, A. I., Han, Z., Paster, K., Pitis, S., Chan, H., and Ba, J., 2022. “Large Language Mod-els Are Human-Level Prompt Engineers”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910 .[20] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I., 2017. “Attention Is All You Need”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762 .[21] Zhao, W. X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y., Min, Y., Zhang, B., Zhang, J., Dong, Z., Du, Y., Yang, C., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Jiang, J., Ren, R., Li, Y., Tang, X., Liu, Z., Liu, P., Nie, J.-Y., and Wen, J.-R., 2023. “A Survey of Large Language Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 .[22] Wei, J., Tay, Y., Bommasani, R., Raffel, C., Zoph, B., Borgeaud, S., Yogatama, D., Bosma, M., Zhou, D., Metzler, D., Chi, E. H., Hashimoto, T., Vinyals, O., Liang, P., Dean, J., and Fedus, W., 2022. “Emergent Abilities of Large Lan-guage Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682 .[23] Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi, A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P., Bhosale, S., Bikel, D., Blecher, L., Ferrer, C. C., Chen, M., Cucurull, G., Esiobu, D., Fernandes, J., Fu, J., Fu, W., Fuller, B., Gao, C., Goswami, V., Goyal, N., Hartshorn, A., Hosseini, S., Hou, R., Inan, H., Kardas, M., Kerkez, V., Khabsa, M., Kloumann, I., Korenev, A., Koura, P. S., Lachaux, M.-A., Lavril, T., Lee, J., Liskovich, D., Lu, Y., Mao, Y., Martinet, X., Mihaylov, T., Mishra, P., Molybog, 16 Copyright © by ASME I., Nie, Y., Poulton, A., Reizenstein, J., Rungta, R., Saladi, K., Schelten, A., Silva, R., Smith, E. M., Subramanian, R., Tan, X. E., Tang, B., Taylor, R., Williams, A., Kuan, J. X., Xu, P., Yan, Z., Zarov, I., Zhang, Y., Fan, A., Kambadur, M., Narang, S., Rodriguez, A., Stojnic, R., Edunov, S., and Scialom, T., 2023. “Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 .[24] Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., and Zhou, D., 2022. “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 .[25] Song, Z., Lu, J., Du, Y., Yu, B., Pruyn, T. M., Huang, Y., Guo, K., Luo, X., Qu, Y., Qu, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, H., Guo, J., Gan, J., Shojaee, P., Luo, D., Bran, A. M., Li, G., Zhao, Q., Luo, S.-X. L., Zhang, Y., Zou, X., Zhao, W., Zhang, Y. F., Zhang, W., Zheng, S., Zhang, S., Khan, S. T., Rajabi-Kochi, M., Paradi-Maropakis, S., Baltoiu, T., Xie, F., Chen, T., Huang, K., Luo, W., Fang, M., Yang, X., Cheng, L., He, J., Hassoun, S., Zhang, X., Wang, W., Reddy, C. K., Zhang, C., Zheng, Z., Wang, M., Cong, L., Gomes, C. P., Hsieh, C.-Y., Nandy, A., Schwaller, P., Kulik, H. J., Jia, H., Sun, H., Moosavi, S. M., and Duan, C., 2025. “Evaluating Large Language Models in Scientific Discovery”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15567 .[26] Zhou, Y., Liu, H., Srivastava, T., Mei, H., and Tan, C., 2024. “Hypothesis Generation with Large Language Mod-els”. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for Sci-ence (NLP4Science), Association for Computational Lin-guistics, pp. 117–139. [27] Zhang, Y., Khan, S. A., Mahmud, A., Yang, H., Lavin, A., Levin, M., Frey, J., Dunnmon, J., Evans, J., Bundy, A., Dzeroski, S., Tegner, J., and Zenil, H., 2025. “Exploring the role of large language models in the scientific method: from hypothesis to discovery”. npj Artificial Intelligence, 

1(1), Aug., p. 14. [28] Stewart, I. A., and Buehler, M. J., 2026. “Higher-Order Knowledge Representations for Agentic Scien-tific Reasoning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04878 , Jan. arXiv:2601.04878 [cs]. [29] Nisa, U., Shirazi, M., Saip, M. A., and Pozi, M. S. M., 2025. “Agentic AI: The age of reasoning—A re-view”. Journal of Automation and Intelligence , Aug., p. S2949855425000516. [30] Chowa, S. S., Alvi, R., Rahman, S. S., Rahman, M. A., Raiaan, M. A. K., Islam, M. R., Hussain, M., and Azam, S., 2025. “From Language to Action: A Review of Large Language Models as Autonomous Agents and Tool Users”. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17281 .[31] Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., and Cao, Y., 2022. “ReAct: Synergizing Reason-ing and Acting in Language Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 .[32] Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., Awadallah, A. H., White, R. W., Burger, D., and Wang, C., 2023. “AutoGen: En-abling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Con-versation”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 .[33] Duan, Z., and Wang, J., 2024. “Exploration of LLM Multi-Agent Application Implementation Based on Lang-Graph+CrewAI”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18241 .[34] Wang, J., and Duan, Z., 2024. “Agent AI with Lang-Graph: A Modular Framework for Enhancing Machine Translation Using Large Language Models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03801 .[35] Stewart, I. A., Hage, T. P., Hsu, Y.-C., and Buehler, M. J., 2026. “GraphAgents: Knowledge Graph-Guided Agentic AI for Cross-Domain Materials Design”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07491 .[36] Ghareeb, A. E., Chang, B., Mitchener, L., Yiu, A., Szostkiewicz, C. J., Laurent, J. M., Razzak, M. T., White, A. D., Hinks, M. M., and Rodriques, S. G., 2025. “Robin: A multi-agent system for automating scientific discovery”. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13400 .[37] Elrefaie, M., Qian, J., Wu, R., Chen, Q., Dai, A., and Ahmed, F., 2025. “AI Agents in Engineering Design: A Multi-Agent Framework for Aesthetic and Aerodynamic Car Design”. In Volume 3B: 51st Design Automation Conference (DAC), American Society of Mechanical En-gineers, p. V03BT03A048. [38] Ni, B., and Buehler, M. J., 2023. “MechAgents: Large lan-guage model multi-agent collaborations can solve mechan-ics problems, generate new data, and integrate knowledge”. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08166 .[39] Massoudi, S., and Fuge, M., 2025. “Agentic Large Lan-guage Models for Conceptual Systems Engineering and Design”. In Volume 3B: 51st Design Automation Confer-ence (DAC), American Society of Mechanical Engineers, p. V03BT03A045. [40] Colvin, S., Jolibois, E., Ramezani, H., Badaracco, A. G., Dorsey, T., Montague, D., Matveenko, S., Trylesinski, M., Runkle, S., Hewitt, D., and Hall, A., 2024. Pydantic (version 2.9.0). GitHub repository, https://github. com/pydantic/pydantic . Accessed: 2026-05-18. [41] Ahnobari, A., 2024. pyfantom. GitHub repository, 

https://github.com/ahnobari/pyFANTOM . Ac-cessed: 2026-05-18. [42] Bambu Lab, 2026. Bambu Studio (version 2.5.0) .Computer software. Available at https://bambulab. com/en-us/download/studio , accessed 2026-05-18. [43] Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Fan, Y., Dang, K., Du, M., Ren, X., Men, R., Liu, D., Zhou, C., Zhou, J., and Lin, J., 2024. “Qwen2-VL: Enhancing Vision-Language Model’s 17 Copyright © by ASME Perception of the World at Any Resolution”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 .[44] Wataoka, K., Takahashi, T., and Ri, R., 2024. “Self-Preference Bias in LLM-as-a-Judge”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21819 .[45] Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E. P., Zhang, H., Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I., 2023. “Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685 .[46] Gemma Team, 2025. “Gemma 3”. Kaggle Tech-nical Report . Available at https://goo.gle/ Gemma3Report , accessed 2026-05-18. [47] Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu, C. H., Gonzalez, J. E., Zhang, H., and Stoica, I., 2023. “Efficient Memory Management for Large Lan-guage Model Serving with PagedAttention”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06180 .[48] Schroeder, W., Martin, K., and Lorensen, B., 2006. The Visualization Toolkit: An Object-Oriented Approach to 3D Graphics . Kitware. [49] K3d Project, n.d.. K3d: Lightweight wrapper to run k3s in docker. https://k3d.io/stable/ . Accessed: 2026-05-18. 

A AI Judge Agent Prompt 

The exact text supplied to the AI Judge for each layer is reproduced verbatim in Figure 8. 

B Vision Agent Prompt 

Vision Agent system prompt is reproduced in Figure 9, and the revision instructions injected at each turn are reproduced in Figure 10. 

C Human Designer Requests 

The two case studies are initiated by a natural-language problem description authored by the human designer and sup-plied to the agentic pipeline as the starting context. We render these requests in a distinct blue style to visually separate human-authored input from agent-generated prompts elsewhere in the appendix. Within each request, boundary conditions are high-lighted in red and applied loads in green , matching the corre-sponding setup figure. 

D Spatial Perception Pipeline 

An automated pipeline was developed and added to pyFAN-TOM [41] to generate consistent three-dimensional visualiza-tions of finite element solutions and export high-resolution im-               

> AI Judge Agent Prompt Identity: You are an expert judge in topology optimization specializing in evaluating structural morphology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Context: Your task is to evaluate the aesthetic quality only of the struc-ture shown in each image, strictly based on perceived global structural complexity and richness at the global scale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Priority: Global structural organization takes absolute priority over local detail. If a structure exhibits a highly branched, intricate, and hierar-chically rich global form , it should score highly even if some members are thick, coarse, or locally simple. Do NOT reward local intricacy unless it meaningfully contributes to increased overall perceived global structural complexity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Task: For each image, assign a score from 1 to 5 (half points allowed) based on global structural complexity: (1) extremely simple global structure; very few branches, strong mini-malism, little hierarchy. (2) low global complexity; limited branching with clear dominant mem-bers. (3) moderate global complexity; noticeable branching with some hierar-chy. (4) high global complexity; many major branches and a rich, multi-level hierarchy. (5) extremely complex and intricate at the global level; dense branching network, multiple competing load paths, and exceptional structural rich-ness.

FIGURE 8 : System prompt supplied to the AI judge agent, orga-nized into Identity, Context, Priority, and Task layers. ages from multiple viewpoints. The implementation integrates the Visualization Tool Kit (VTK) [48] for mesh processing, K3D [49] for WebGL-based rendering, and Playwright for automated screenshot capture within an asynchronous Python workflow. Input data consist of nodal coordinates, element connectiv-ity, nodal forces, boundary constraints, and element density vari-ables from topology optimization. When density variables are provided, elements with density ρ < 0.5 are excluded from visu-alization. For multi-material cases, elements are separated into material subsets and rendered as independent meshes. Finite element geometry is first converted to a VTK unstruc-tured grid, where elements are represented as tetrahedral or hexa-hedral cells. A surface extraction filter (vtkDataSetSurfaceFilter) is applied to obtain a triangular surface mesh suitable for real-time rendering. The resulting vertices and connectivity are trans-ferred to K3D mesh objects. External forces and boundary conditions are visualized us-ing glyphs generated with vtkGlyph3D. Force vectors are repre-18 Copyright © by ASME Vision Agent System Prompt Identity: You are analyzing the result of a 3D topology optimization problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              

> Context: Take the judge’s feedback into account. If the judge indicated the structure is not complex enough, suggest more aggressive changes. If the judge noted improvement, continue in that direction but push further. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Priority: Revision {best[‘revision’] }scored highest at
> {best[‘judge score’] }.IMPORTANT: Base your suggested changes on this best-scoring configuration, NOT the most recent one (un-less they are the same). Build on what worked best. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Task: Analyze the optimized structure shown in the image(s) and recom-mend specific, actionable changes to the optimization parameters that will produce a significantly more skeletal, highly branched structure with many thin members and multiple internal load paths.
> Your goal is to increase structural skeletonization and skinny branch-ing complexity. This means promoting the formation of thin structural members instead of thick plates, encouraging splitting into multiple load paths rather than a single dominant path, increasing internal structural hierarchy and connectivity, and reducing continuous sheet-like regions while promoting truss-like behavior.

FIGURE 9 : System prompt supplied to the vision agent, orga-nized into Identity, Context, Priority, and Task layers. The Prior-ity block is templated with the best-scoring revision and its judge score, which are filled in at each turn. sented as arrow glyphs scaled relative to the approximate element size, while boundary conditions are visualized using directional constraint markers indicating fixed or free degrees of freedom. To enhance spatial perception in perspective views, a depth-based color encoding is applied. For each camera configuration, vertex depths are computed along the camera viewing direction and normalized. These values are mapped using the Viridis color map so that surfaces closer to the camera appear brighter than distant regions. Six orthogonal camera views (top, bottom, left, right, front, and back) are automatically defined based on the model bound-ing box. For each view, the camera position and orientation are set relative to the model center and the scene is exported as a stan-dalone HTML visualization. High-resolution figures are gen-erated using the Playwright browser automation framework: a headless Chromium instance loads each HTML file, renders the WebGL canvas, and captures a screenshot of the visualization at a resolution of 1920 × 1080 pixels. This automated workflow ensures consistent rendering parameters and reproducible visu-alization outputs across all generated images which are fed as   

> Vision Agent Revision Instructions Read Complete History: Below is the complete history of all previous optimization iterations. Each entry shows the TO parameters used, the AI Judge’s score (1–5) with feedback, and the resulting structure image. Study the visual progression to understand which parameter changes im-proved or worsened the structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Learn from History:
> 1. Visually compare the structures. 2. Identify which parameter changes correlated with higher scores. 3. Identify which changes led to worse results. 4. Build on what worked and avoid repeating what didn’t. 5. Be specific about which parameters to change and by how much. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
> Follow these rules:
> 1. The design must remain functional as a phone stand where the phone lies along the diagonal surface. 2. Do not go below a density filter radius of 1.5.

FIGURE 10 : Revision instructions injected into the vision agent’s context at each turn, governing how it ingests prior iterations and what hard constraints it must respect. context to the vision agent. 

E Post-Processing Geometry Rules 

Following topology optimization, the optimized density vol-ume xPhys is modified through a set of deterministic geometric operations that enforce manufacturable support structures for the phone-stand case study. First, remaining voxels located above a prescribed diagonal plane are removed to generate the char-acteristic inclined surface used to support the device. A diago-nal reinforcement band of fixed thickness is then inserted along this plane. To prevent sliding, an anti-slip lip is added at the lower front edge of the model by enforcing solid material within a rectangular region defined by the lip thickness and height pa-rameters. Additionally, a solid base layer of fixed thickness is imposed along the bottom of the volume to increase stability and provide a flat contact surface for printing. Support thickness is prescribed relative to the mesh resolution selected by the agents. For visualization and fabrication, the processed density field is converted to a polygonal surface mesh using the marching cubes algorithm. The binary volume is first padded and reori-ented to ensure consistent surface extraction. An isosurface is then generated at a density threshold, producing vertices, faces, and surface normals. The resulting triangular mesh is rendered. During production, this mesh is exported in OBJ format for CAD inspection and downstream additive manufacturing. 19 Copyright © by ASME Case Study: Phone-Stand Problem Human Designer Request 

Phone-Stand Problem 

“In this setup, the finite element analysis (FEA) uses linear elasticity physics with a Young’s modulus E = 1.0 and a Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3. A three-dimensional struc-tured mesh is defined with nx = 128, ny =

64, nz = 16 elements and physical dimen-sions lx = 1.0, ly = 0.5, lz = 0.125. The mesh is linked to the linear elastic physics so the material properties apply uniformly throughout the domain. A multigrid solver is configured with tol = 1e −4, maxiter =

50, and n level = 5. One Dirichlet bound-ary condition is imposed: the bottom face ( y = 0), where all nodes are fixed in the ux, uy, and uz directions. One force is applied along a diagonal: with a force of −1.0 in the y-direction distributed among all nodes. Use a density filter with radius 1 .5. Set up a minimum compliance topology optimization problem with a vol-ume fraction of 15%, SIMP penalty of 3 .0, void material stiffness of 1e −9, and enable Heaviside projection. Use the PGD opti-mizer with a function tolerance of 1e −4and no change tolerance.” 

FIGURE 11 : Phone-stand case study: the human designer spec-ifies the FEA setup, boundary conditions (red), applied loads (green), and TO parameters as a single natural-language request. 

F Full Set of Replicate Runs 

Figures 13 and 14 report the phone-stand replicates, sepa-rated into successful and failure cases. Figures 15 and 16 report the corresponding cantilever-beam replicates. 

Case Study: Cantilever Beam Problem Human Designer Request 

Cantilever Beam Problem 

“In this setup, the finite element analysis (FEA) uses linear elasticity physics with a Young’s modulus E = 1.0 and a Pois-son’s ratio ν = 0.3. A three-dimensional structured mesh is defined with nx = 128, 

ny = 64, nz = 64 elements and physical di-mensions lx = 1.0, ly = 0.5, lz = 0.5. The mesh is linked to the linear elastic physics so the material properties apply uniformly throughout the domain. A multigrid solver is configured with tol = 1e −4, maxiter =

200, and n level = 5. Two Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed: (1) Left face: nodes where x = 0 are fixed in the ux and uz directions while uy remains free, with zero displacement. (2) Right-bottom corner: nodes where x = 1.0 and 

y = 0 are fixed in the uy and uz direc-tions while ux remains free, with zero displacement. One point force is ap-plied: nodes where x = 0 and y = 0.5

have a force of −1.0 in the y-direction distributed among all nodes. Use a den-sity filter with radius 1 .5. Set up a min-imum compliance topology optimization problem with a volume fraction of 40%, SIMP penalty of 3 .0, void material stiff-ness of 1e −9, and enable Heaviside pro-jection. Use the PGD optimizer with a function tolerance of 1e −4 and no change tolerance.” 

FIGURE 12 : Cantilever-beam case study: the human designer specifies the FEA setup, boundary conditions (red), applied loads (green), and TO parameters as a single natural-language request. 20 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 13 : Successful Replicates. The set of replicates in which at least one design in the sequence aligns with the human designer’s request for a branching, tree-like skeletal structure. Replicates A through F correspond to separate runs of the same pipeline in the phone-stand case study, where each sequence of revisions reflects the outcomes produced by passing through the agentic pipeline. The score from the AI judge is presented below each design where scores are made relative to the other revisions within the same replicate. 21 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 14 : Failure Replicates. The set of replicates in which none of the designs in the sequence align with the human designer’s request for a branching, tree-like skeletal structure. Replicates A through D correspond to separate failure cases in the phone-stand case study, where each sequence of revisions reflects the outcomes produced by passing through the agentic pipeline. The score from the AI judge is presented below each design where scores are made relative to the other revisions within the same replicate. 22 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 15 : Successful Replicates. In the cantilever beam case study, we focus on the set of replicates in which at least one design in the sequence aligns with the human designer’s request for a branching, tree-like skeletal structure. Replicates A through F correspond to separate runs of the process, where each sequence of revisions reflects the outcomes produced by passing through the agentic pipeline. The score from the AI judge is presented below each design where scores are made relative to the other revisions within the same replicate. 23 Copyright © by ASME FIGURE 16 : Failure Replicates. In the cantilever beam case study, we focus on the set of replicates in which none of the designs in the sequence align with the human designer’s request for a branching, tree-like skeletal structure. Replicates A through D correspond to separate failure cases of the process, where each sequence of revisions reflects the outcomes produced by passing through the agentic pipeline. The score from the AI judge is presented below each design where scores are made relative to the other revisions within the same replicate. 24 Copyright © by ASME