Title: A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11267v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:10:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

# Tong Li 

University of Toronto Canada tongli@cs.toronto.edu 

# Travis Mandel 

University of Hawai‘i at Hilo United States tmandel@hawaii.edu 

# Goldie Phillips 

Independent Researcher Trinidad and Tobago 

# Anna Rafferty 

Carleton College United States arafferty@carleton.edu 

# Eric M. Schwartz 

University of Michigan United States 

# Dehan Kong 

University of Toronto Canada dehan.kong@utoronto.ca 

# Joseph J. Williams 

University of Toronto Canada williams@cs.toronto.edu 

## Abstract 

Scientific experimentation is largely driven by statistical hypothesis testing to determine significant differences in interventions. Tradi-tionally, experimenters allocate samples uniformly between each intervention. However, such an approach may lead to suboptimal outcomes - multi-armed bandits (MABs) addresses this problem by allocating samples adaptively to maximize outcomes. Yet, two challenges have hindered the use of MABs in scientific domains. First, common hypothesis tests (e.g., 𝑡 -tests) become invalid under adaptive sampling without correction, leading to inflated type I and type II errors. This is an understudied problem, and prior solutions suffer from issues such as low statistical power which prevent adop-tion in many practical settings. Second, practitioners must explicitly balance cumulative reward with statistical efficiency, yet no general methodology exists to quantify this trade-off across algorithms. In this paper, we study assumption modification and critical region correction approaches for hypothesis testing that enable common tests to be applied to adaptively collected data. We provide heuristic justification for its power efficiency and show in simulation that it achieves higher power than existing approaches. Further, we de-rive a theoretically and practically motivated objective function for adaptive experiment evaluation, which we integrate into a unified ex-perimental framework. Our framework asks experimenters to specify an experiment extension cost for their problem, and based on that enables our proposed optimization procedure to select the bandit algorithm that best balances reward and power in their setting. We show that our approach enables practitioners to improve outcomes with only slightly more steps than uniform randomization, while retaining statistical validity. 

## Keywords 

adaptive experimentation; multi-armed bandits; hypothesis testing; power analysis; reward–inference tradeoff 

## 1 Introduction 

Hypothesis-testing–driven experiments are ubiquitous across scien-tific domains, including clinical trials [ 2], psychology [ 6 ], education [ 23 ], and biology [ 35 ]. Scientists in these domains are often pri-marily concerned with statistically significant differences between interventions, for instance, to argue that an intervention is superior to a control. When designing experiments, scientists often use power analysis to determine how many samples to collect for a chosen hypothesis test (e.g., a 𝑡 -test) and target type I and type II error rates [4, 6, 10 ], and then collect that many samples using uniform random-ization (UR). However, this uniform approach may allocate many samples to interventions which result in very poor outcomes (for instance, harming participants [ 21 ] or resulting in a loss of revenue). The multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework offers a promising alter-native by allocating participants to better-performing interventions (arms ) and improving cumulative outcomes ( reward ) [17, 27]. However, MAB algorithms collect samples adaptively , that is, the arm selected for sample 𝑡 depends on the reward collected from samples 1 . . . 𝑡 − 1, violating the assumptions of classic statistical tests and causing them to not be statistically valid in this setting [ 8,13 , 25 , 29 ]. Practically, this leads to inflated type I and type II errors, incentivizing scientists to largely avoid adaptive sampling despite the potential for greatly increased reward. Prior work has addressed this problem typically through generating specialized tests [ 7 ] or bandit algorithms [ 32 ], which may be undesirable for practitioners who wish to use familiar and well-studied tests and algorithms. General-purpose solutions have been understudied - to the best of our knowledge, the Adaptive Randomization Test (ART) [ 14 ] is the only correction approach that theoretically generalizes to all bandit algorithms and tests. However, there is no practical analysis of its performance with common hypothesis tests and multi-armed bandit algorithms, and as we show in Section 7, it can have exceptionally low statistical power for some popular algorithms and tests, leading it to be unattractive to practitioners. There is a lack of practical and statistically sound alternatives to address this problem. Even if statistical tests are corrected to return valid results, there exists a fundamental trade-off between reward (achieved through 

> arXiv:2603.11267v1 [stat.AP] 11 Mar 2026 Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams

more exploitation) and hypothesis testing efficiency (which requires more balanced exploration among arms). Naïvely applying popular bandit algorithms such as Thompson Sampling (TS) [ 5, 22 , 27 ], will require large numbers of additional samples (longer horizon )to achieve the desired power compared to the traditional UR ap-proach [ 30 ]. There remains a lack of tools to help practitioners select bandit algorithms that balance reward and horizon according to their problem-specific preferences. To address these gaps, we make three key contributions. First, we propose a general-purpose algorithm-induced testing correction that constructs the null distribution of the test statistic by simulating data collection under the same adaptive algorithm. We show this approach consistently achieves higher power than ART, performing an order of magnitude better on deterministic algorithms such as UCB [ 1]. Second, we develop an objective function for adaptive experiment evaluation that allows experimenters to explicitly adjust the priority between reward maximization and the number of samples required to achieve a desired statistical power. Third, we present an optimization framework and toolkit 1 that efficiently recommends the best bandit algorithm parameters and experiment length for the user’s desired cost and statistical constraints. 

## 2 Problem Setup 

We consider an adaptive experimentation design problem in which the experimenter seeks to both maximize reward during the experi-ment and conduct valid hypothesis testing at its conclusion. In this section, we introduce the experimental setting, notation, and basic concepts that will be used throughout the paper. 

Basic MAB setup. We start by introducing the basic multi-armed bandit (MAB) data collection setup. Let 𝐾 be the number of dis-tinct interventions/ arms in an experiment. We consider a stochas-tic setting where each arm 𝑎 is associated with a fixed but un-known reward distribution 𝜈 𝑎 , and denote the arm mean reward as 𝜇 𝑎 = E[𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 = 𝑎 ]. Let ®𝜈 = (𝜈 1, . . . , 𝜈 𝐾 ) denote the reward distributions for all arms. Prior to the experiment, the experimenter specifies an MAB algorithm 𝜋 and the experiment length 𝑇 . At each time step 𝑡 = 1, 2, . . . ,𝑇 , the bandit algorithm 𝜋 selects an arm 

𝑎 𝑡 ∈ A = {1, . . . , 𝐾 } and observes reward 𝑟 𝑡 ∼ 𝜈 𝑎 𝑡 . We denote the random ordered tuple of the experiment history up to time 𝑡 as 

ℎ𝑡 = (𝑎 1, 𝑟 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑟 2, . . . , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 ), and let H𝑡 be the (possibly infinite) set of all possible values of ℎ𝑡 .

Hypothesis testing. Based on the MAB experiment data ℎ𝑇 , the experimenter wishes to conduct a hypothesis test between two com-peting assumptions about the reward distributions of all arms ®𝜈 , 𝐻 0

against 𝐻 1 (often called the null and the alternative hypothesis, re-spectively). To conduct the test, the experimenter specifies a critical region 𝐶 ⊂ H 𝑇 , and they reject 𝐻 0 if ℎ𝑇 ∈ 𝐶 , sometimes loosely referred to as determining statistical significance. The set 𝐶 should be defined in a way that ℎ𝑇 ∈ 𝐶 means there is strong statistical evidence against 𝐻 0 and in favor of 𝐻 1, although the details differ based on the chosen hypothesis test. In this paper, we focus on classical hypothesis tests such as 𝑡 -tests, ANOVA, and Tukey’s test. While both the problem formulation and our proposed solution can be extended more broadly, we restrict 

> 1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Bandit-Simulation-4B02

attention to tests whose critical regions are specified through a test statistic function 𝑆 and take the form of one- or two-sided rejection regions. For example, in a two-arm 𝑡 -test with hypotheses 𝐻 0 : 𝜇 1 =

𝜇 2 and 𝐻 1 : 𝜇 1 ≠ 𝜇 2, the test statistic 𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 ) is the standard 𝑡 -statistic (or its normal approximation for large samples). A two-sided 95% test rejects 𝐻 0 when |𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 )| > 1.96 , yielding the critical region 

𝐶 = {ℎ𝑇 : |𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 )| > 1.96 }.Experimenters want to control Type I error 𝛼 and Type II error 

𝛽 for their test of interest, using the data adaptively collected for algorithm 𝜋 . The Type I error of a test, also known as the False Positive Rate (FPR), is the chance of rejecting 𝐻 0 when it is true, defined as 𝛼 = Pr (ℎ𝑇 ∈ 𝐶 | 𝐻 0, 𝜋,𝑇 ). In contrast, the Type II error is the probability of failing to reject 𝐻 0 when 𝐻 1 is true, defined as 

𝛽 = Pr (ℎ𝑇 ∉ 𝐶 | 𝐻 1, 𝜋,𝑇 ) . We refer to power as the complement of the Type II error, 1 − 𝛽 .

Power Analysis. Statistical tests are commonly used to analyze experimental data; however, practitioners often wish to determine the sample size required to achieve a desired power 1 − 𝛽 (at a fixed FPR 

𝛼 ) before the experiment. This process is known as power analysis. Note that Type II error (and power) depends on the distribution of the experiment history ℎ𝑇 under 𝐻 1. Such a distribution varies across underlying arm distributions ®𝜈 ∈ 𝐻 1. Therefore, when conducting a power analysis in practice, power is evaluated with respect to a specified restriction on ®𝜈 , reflecting the experimenter’s design priorities when distinguishing 𝐻 1 from 𝐻 0 [ 10 ]. Continuing our 𝑡 -test example, one may wish to guarantee 80% power at 5% FPR when the gap between arm means satisfies |𝜇 1 − 𝜇 2 | = 0.1. The output of the power analysis is the number of samples required to meet these constraints. 

Our problems. To summarize, at the beginning of an experiment, the experimenter specifies 𝐻 0, 𝐻 1, and desired error levels (𝛼, 𝛽 ).They then seek to determine the algorithm 𝜋 , a valid 𝐶 , and the required 𝑇 . Note that controlling the FPR and evaluating power for MAB data is more challenging than in traditional experiments. In this work, we consider two related problems: Problem 1 (test correction): For any algorithm 𝜋 that collects data adaptively, we seek test-correction methods that can construct a valid critical region 𝐶 𝜋,𝛼 controlling FPR at level 𝛼 . Such correction may be applied either to the classical test statistic 𝑆 or directly to the critical region 𝐶 . Subject to valid FPR control, we further aim to achieve higher power for a given sampling budget and algorithm. We discuss this problem in Section 4. Problem 2 (algorithm comparison): The experimenter seeks to select an algorithm 𝜋 that achieves higher reward while requiring fewer samples 𝑇 to reach a desired power level. Note that these ob-jectives are often in tension across different choices of the algorithm 

𝜋 . In Section 5, we first examine the associated power analysis con-siderations for MAB experiments, and then formalize this trade-off through an objective function to guide algorithm selection. The problems are interconnected: a proper estimate of power (Problem 1) is required to subsequently analyze its trade-off with reward (Problem 2). A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

## 3 Related Work 

In this work, we discuss approaches for conducting valid hypothesis tests for adaptive experiments and their tradeoff with experimental outcomes (reward). To maximize the likelihood of real-world impact, we focus on an algorithm-agnostic framework that can be applied across commonly used adaptive multi-armed bandit algorithms and hypothesis tests. To the best of our knowledge, there is limited discussion of generalizable test correction methods for arbitrary algorithms and tests, nor is there a formalized objective function concerning such a general tradeoff. Hence, in this section, we review the most closely related work. 

Hypothesis Testing with Adaptively Collected Data. Given the variety of commonly used hypothesis tests and MAB algorithms, relatively little analysis-focused work attempts to provide a general framework that is agnostic to both algorithm and test choice. One line of work has focused on specially constructed tests for an adaptive setting. Deliu et al. [7] proposed an allocation-probability-based test statistic, which is restricted to TS. Other work has proposed testing approaches based on martingales [ 33 ] and probability clipping [ 34 ], which guarantee statistical validity for all bandit algorithms, but rely on a restricted set of hypotheses and custom statistical tests. Another line of work has discussed custom bandit algorithms that achieve good statistical performance in certain settings. Xiang et al. [32] proposed a fixed allocation strategy that guarantees statistical power at least as high as uniform randomization in two-armed ex-periments; their analysis is limited to binary rewards and two-arm settings. Building on this line of work, Kong et al. [16] proposed an elimination-based MAB algorithm that achieves Type I and Type II error control for specified pairwise tests, with a focus on best-arm identification. However, these methods do not allow full freedom in algorithm choice, nor generalization to all common statistical tests. Williams et al. [30] introduced the concept of critical region cor-rection to generalize across bandit algorithms and tests; however, they considered only a two-armed setting in which the ground-truth reward distributions are known a priori, limiting its applicability in practice. Inspired by their work, we formalize a procedure that re-moves these practical constraints. Moreover, we provide theoretical justification and empirical evaluation demonstrating that our method achieves strong power while maintaining valid FPR control. To the best of our knowledge, the Adaptive Randomization Test (ART) [ 14 ] is the only approach that can correct arbitrary tests run under arbitrary bandit algorithms in arbitrary environments. ART controls Type I error by using bootstrap resampling to simulate the null distribution of the test statistic while fixing the observed reward sequence. While theoretical promising in terms of Type 1 error, no analysis of its Type II error is provided. We evaluate this method empirically in Section 4 and find it to have extremely low power in some settings, limiting its practical applicability. 

Balancing Reward and Inference Objectives. Another key dis-tinction of our work compared to the testing-correction methods discussed above is that they do not formalize the trade-off between reward and hypothesis testing or statistical inference more generally. We now discuss work that examines how to formulate related trade-offs between reward and quantities related to statistical infer-ence. Some work [ 24 , 36 ] adopts a Pareto-frontier perspective on related problems, proposing algorithms that achieve Pareto optimal-ity between reward and best-arm identification (BAI) or average treatment effect (ATE) accuracy, respectively. However, this differs fundamentally from our problem, which focuses on balancing reward against the finite horizon induced by statistical hypothesis testing under explicit Type I and Type II error constraints. Our problem is therefore less amenable to a Pareto analysis, which in the bandit literature is typically asymptotic rather than finite-horizon in nature. Similarly, prior work [ 9, 18 ] has proposed objective functions that use a weighting parameter to trade off scaled estimation error with reward. However, this does not easily translate to statistical hypothesis testing, especially in an interpretable fashion. Lastly, we also want to highlight work that introduces the cost concept into MAB problem formulations [ 3, 15 , 31 ]. Though they do not trade off reward with inference, their ideas inform the con-struction of our objective function. 

## 4 Problem 1: Adjusting Efficiently for Hypothesis Testing Confidence 

Hypothesis testing with MAB data presents unique challenges [ 14 ,25 ]. For classical hypothesis tests involving multiple arms, it is often assumed that the sampling follows a fixed (non-adaptive) ratio among arms over time. However, when data are sampled using MAB algorithms, the sampling ratio depends on the observed reward history. To see why this matters, consider the null setting with two identical arms. If one arm happens to look worse early on due to random noise, an adaptive algorithm will sample it less frequently. This “freezes” the arm at an underestimated value while the other arm continues to be sampled, artificially inflating the apparent gap. This can cause various statistical inference issues, including biased estimation of arm means, distorted test statistic distributions, and inflated Type I error/FPR. 

Table 1: FPR under the null hypothesis 𝐻 0 : 𝜇 1 = 𝜇 2 = 𝜇 for varying values of 𝜇 . Results compare the classical one-sided two-sample 𝑡 -test with a fixed critical threshold of 1.64 (from the 

𝑧 -table) to its AIT-corrected counterpart.                   

> True location of 𝜇 in 𝐻 00.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 FPR (AIT corrected) 0.052 0.050 0.050 0.049 0.050 FPR (using z-table) 0.071 0.086 0.099 0.108 0.132

Table 1 illustrates the FPR inflation when using a classical critical region for a one-sided 𝑡 -test ( 1.64 using a 𝑧 -table). Moreover, we note that the degree of FPR inflation varies with the specification of the null setting. This implies that the null distribution of a classical test statistic can change according to the exact specification of ®𝜈 

under the null hypothesis 𝐻 0. Such dependency/sensitivity poses a challenge for applying classical tests to MAB data. In this section, we seek to develop a method to correct the FPR of arbitrary statistical tests and bandit algorithms. Similar to the assumption made by Ham et al. [14] , we relax the problem and focus on controlling FPR on a subset of the given classical 𝐻 0.Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams 

Assumption 1 (Equal arm distributions under the null) 

Under the 𝐻 0, all arms share the same reward distribution: 

𝜈 1

> 𝑑

= 𝜈 2

> 𝑑

= · · · 𝑑 

= 𝜈 𝐾 . (1) This assumption restricts some hypotheses; however, it matches the common understanding of a null hypothesis 𝐻 0, that is, that under a null hypotheses all conditions are identical. Under this assumption, we can use all data in ℎ𝑇 collectively and use MLE (or bootstrap) to estimate the null hypothesis reward distribution 𝜈 𝐻 0 . In what follows, we state our proposed test correction procedure, assuming the estimation on 𝜈 𝐻 0 is given. Later in this section, we discuss and empirically show that it can achieve good power while controlling the FPR reasonably well. 

Our proposed test correction method. We propose a plug-in cor-rection called algorithm-induced test (AIT) correction. It is illus-trated for a one-sided test in Procedure 1. Note that 𝜈 𝐻 0 is estimated from the full collected dataset ℎ𝑇 under Assumption 1. At a high level, given an MAB setting (𝐾,𝑇 , 𝜋, ®𝜈 = (𝜈 𝐻 0 , . . . , 𝜈 𝐻 0 )) , our ap-proach simulates the distribution of a given test statistic 𝑆 . Note that even if the algorithm 𝜋 is deterministic, the repeated simulation is important given the stochasticity in rewards drawn from 𝜈 𝐻 0 . Us-ing that simulated distribution, we follow the critical region form (e.g., a one-sided interval for a one-sided test) to manually calibrate the thresholds for FPR control. The output of the test is a critical region for each timestep; in many cases the next step would be to compare the actual test statistic 𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 ) with 𝐶 𝑇 to test for statistical significance. In this paper, we focus on tests where the original criti-cal region is a one- or two-sided continuous interval, although our approach can be extended more broadly. A key design choice is that our approach uses exactly the same test statistic 𝑆 calculation and the same critical region form as the original test. One may question the reasonableness of doing so, since Table 1 shows that adaptive experimentation can change the critical region significantly. In what follows, we discuss a scenario where our correction results in the most powerful test. 

Procedure 1 Algorithm-Induced Test Correction (AIT)  

> 1:

Input: Classical hypothesis 𝐻 0, 𝐻 1 with test statistic 𝑆 ; number of arms 𝐾 ; horizon 𝑇 ; (estimated) 𝐻 0 reward distribution 𝜈 𝐻 0 ;algorithm 𝜋 ; FPR constraint 𝛼 0; simulation repetitions 𝑀  

> 2:

procedure ALGO INDUCED CRIT (𝐾, 𝑇 , 𝜈 𝐻 0 , 𝑆, 𝜋, 𝛼 0, 𝑀 ) 

> 3:

for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑀 do  

> 4:

Run Bandit (𝐾, ®𝜈 = (𝜈 𝐻 0 , ..., 𝜈 𝐻 0 ),𝑇 , 𝜋 ) and obtain ℎ𝑛,𝑇  

> 5:

Record test statistic 𝑠 𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑆 (ℎ𝑛,𝑡 ) for 𝑡 = 1, 2, ...,𝑇  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Compute 𝑞 𝑡 as the (1 − 𝛼 0)-th quintile from {𝑠 𝑛,𝑡 }𝑀 𝑛 =1 for 

𝑡 = 1, 2, ...,𝑇  

> 8:

end procedure  

> 9:

Output: Adjusted critical region sequence (right tail) {𝐶 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1

with 𝐶 𝑡 = (𝑞 𝑡 , ∞) for 𝑡 = 1, 2, ...,𝑇 

Most powerful test for simple hypotheses. We extend the notion of simple hypotheses to the MAB setting, where both the null and alternative hypotheses fully specify the reward distributions across arms, denoted by ®𝜈 0 and ®𝜈 1, respectively. For example, in a two-armed Bernoulli setting one may consider 𝐻 0 : 𝜇 1 = 𝜇 2 = 0.5 versus 

𝐻 1 : 𝜇 1 = 0.6, 𝜇 2 = 0.4. Given data ℎ𝑇 collected over 𝑇 rounds, the classical likelihood ratio test (LRT) statistic is              

> Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 |𝑎 𝑡 ,®𝜈 1)
> Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 |𝑎 𝑡 ,®𝜈 0)

. Our main theorem shows that applying AIT to this statistic yields the most powerful test under an adaptive data collection process 𝜋 .

Theorem 4.1 (AIT-optimality of the LRT on simple hypotheses) 

Let 𝜋 be an arbitrary MAB algorithm. For testing simple hypotheses, 

®𝜈 0 against ®𝜈 1, using data collected under 𝜋 , the test with critical region constructed from classical LRT, 

C𝑘 = {ℎ𝑇 :

Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 1)

Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 0) > 𝑘 }

is the most powerful test at level 

𝛼 = P{ℎ𝑇 ∈ C 𝑘 | 𝜋, ®𝜈 0 }.

Proof sketch. Fix an adaptive algorithm 𝜋 . By the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the most powerful level-𝛼 test for testing a simple null 

®𝜈 0 against a simple alternative ®𝜈 1 is based on the likelihood ratio 

𝑟 𝜋 (ℎ𝑇 ) = 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1,𝜋 )    

> 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0,𝜋 )

. Although this expression appears to depend on 

𝜋 , we can make use of the conditional independence structure of the MAB process and show that, whenever 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) > 0, it can be written as 𝑟 𝜋 (ℎ𝑇 ) =             

> Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 |𝑎 𝑡 ,®𝜈 1)
> Î𝑡 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 |𝑎 𝑡 ,®𝜈 0)

. That is, the likelihood ratio re-duces to the classical LRT statistic computed on the realized actions and rewards, and is invariant to the choice of 𝜋 . Consequently, the classical LRT remains the most powerful test under adaptive data collection. Nevertheless, recalibration is required to ensure valid Type I error control, since the sampling distribution of ℎ𝑇 generally depends on 𝜋 . A detailed proof is provided in Appendix A. While this does not show our AIT approach is most powerful in all settings, it does show our approach of using the same form of critical region and test statistic is the most powerful approach for simple hypotheses. 

Evaluation on t-tests. Practitioners are often interested in more complex hypotheses - here we empirically evaluate the power of AIT in this setting. We consider a two-sample 𝑡 -test with a composite hypothesis 𝐻 0 : 𝜇 1 = 𝜇 2 against 𝐻 1 : 𝜇 1 ≠ 𝜇 2, with total samples 

𝑇 = 200 . The two arms have Bernoulli reward with mean being 0.6

and 0.4, respectively. As we show in Table 2, our critical region construction yields better power than ART when applied to popular adaptive algorithms such as TS, 𝜖 -greedy, and UCB. Moreover, we note that ART exhibits degenerate power for fully deterministic al-gorithms such as UCB [ 1 ]. This is because it fixes the reward history while re-simulating arm selection; however, for a deterministic al-gorithm this is ineffective as it always results in identical histories for deterministic algorithms. In Appendix Table 6, we evaluated it on more algorithms, and our AIT achieves consistently better power. Besides, even though we need to estimate the null, which can intro-duce estimation error, we find that AIT can control FPR reasonably well. As shown in Table 1, when conducting the test at the 95% 

confidence level, the FPR is empirically controlled at 0.05 ± 0.002 

for 𝐻 0 : 𝜇 1 = 𝜇 2 across null reward means ranging from 0.1 to 0.9.A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

Table 2: Power comparison between ART and AIT for data collected using different algorithms. All tests are calibrated to have empirical FPR around 0.05 .Power FPR Algorithm ART AIT ART AIT 

TS 0.434 0.520 0.052 0.053 

𝜖 -greedy (0.1) 0.443 0.490 0.057 0.057 UCB 0.050 0.781 0.050 0.054 

## 5 Problem 2: Trading Off Reward and Statistical Power 

The approach discussed in Section 4 provides experimenters with a way to conduct valid hypothesis testing for data collected under any given policy 𝜋 . We now turn to power analysis in the MAB setting, and to the problem of balancing reward maximization against the sample size required to achieve a desired level of statistical power. To begin, we give a concrete definition of power analysis for MAB algorithms. In contrast to classical power analysis, which typ-ically evaluates power under a fixed alternative (e.g., a specified effect size), we adopt a distributional specification over reward pa-rameters. Specifically, we allow the experimenter to specify a prior distribution 𝐷 ®𝜈 over ®𝜈 . This choice serves two purposes. First, such specifications are common in bandit modeling and are required to simulate rewards and evaluate average reward performance. Second, the distribution of test statistics—and hence power—can be highly sensitive to the underlying reward parameters, making an explicit specification necessary for power evaluation in adaptive experiments. We acknowledge this reliance on distributional assumptions as a limitation and an open challenge in MAB experimentation. Power is then defined as 

P(ℎ𝑇 ∈ 𝐶 | 𝐷 ®𝜈 , 𝜋,𝑇 ).

However, in many scientific, medical, and business applications, practitioners not only desire to adjust experiment length to the min-imum necessary to achieve statistical power, but they also desire to allocate samples to inventions in a way that maximizes benefit and minimizes undesirable outcomes. A key difficulty is that these two goals are in some sense opposed to teach other: adaptive al-gorithms which are better at maximizing reward take much longer to reach the same level of statistical confidence. For example, in a two-armed binary-reward case with an arm difference of 0.2, UR requires roughly 200 samples to achieve 0.8 power (fixing the Type I error at 0.05 ), whereas TS can require around 2000 samples, despite getting much better average reward than UR (even in the first 200 samples). This highlight the need for a unified objective function to help practitioners navigate the trade-off between reward and horizon, and determine which algorithm best fits their setting. 

Developing an objective function. For a given algorithm with 𝑇 

samples required in the power analysis and cumulative reward 𝑅 , we seek to construct an objective function 𝐹 (𝑇 , 𝑅, 𝑤 ) that takes as input 

𝑇 , 𝑅 , and a single interpretable parameter 𝑤 . We refer to 𝑤 as the 

experiment extension cost , which captures the cost of involving an extra step or participant in the experiment in units of cumulative reward. 2 Higher values of 𝑤 mean extending the experiment is costly, and the user would prefer a shorter experiment, whereas lower values of 𝑤 mean extending an experiment is inexpensive, and improving reward is more important. The chief challenge of specifying 𝑤 is in the conversion between reward units and cost to extend the experiment - in some business domains these may be in the same unit, but in scientific settings, this is often not the case. Thus, we provide tools and visualizations to help with this problem (Section 7.1). Given a user-specified 𝑤 , we want this to represent the minimum 

improvement in cumulative reward needed to trade off against the cost of an additional experimental step. 3 However, if an experiment is extended by one step without improving the mean reward ( = 𝑅 /𝑇 ), then its cumulative reward would normally increase from 𝑅 to 𝑅 · 𝑇 +1 

> 𝑇

.We argue that this amount should not be viewed as an improvement 

in reward, but rather as a no-improvement increase in horizon, and should therefore not improve the value 𝐹 . Otherwise, extending the horizon to achieve the same average reward would favor long, rather than short, experiments. Given this, we derive the partial derivative equations of the characteristic function that removes such effect. Assume we have two algorithms 𝜋 and 𝜋 ′, with horizons 𝑇 and 𝑇 + 1

and cumulative reward 𝑅 and 𝑅 ′, respectively. Then, restating the desired property of 𝐹 formally states that: when 𝑅 ′ − 𝑇 +1 

> 𝑇

𝑅 = 𝑤 , then 𝐹 (𝑇 + 1, 𝑅 ′, 𝑤 ) ≈ 𝐹 (𝑇 , 𝑅, 𝑤 ). We can rewrite the former equation as 𝑅 ′ − 𝑅 − (𝑇 +1) − 𝑇 𝑇 𝑅 = (( 𝑇 + 1) − 𝑇 )𝑤 .If we let Δ𝑅 = 𝑅 ′ − 𝑅 and Δ𝑇 = (𝑇 + 1) − 𝑇 , we can rewrite this as follows: We require 𝐹 (𝑇 , 𝑅, 𝑤 ) ≈ 𝐹 (𝑇 + Δ𝑇 , 𝑅 + Δ𝑅, 𝑤 ) when 

Δ𝑅 − 𝑅 𝑇 Δ𝑇 = 𝑤 Δ𝑇 (2) Now we take a continuous and unbounded relaxation of 𝑇 and 𝑅 ,and convert the above analysis into a partial differential equation, By the property of the total differential of a multivariable function, we rewrite 𝐹 (𝑇 + Δ𝑇 , 𝑅 + Δ𝑅, 𝑤 ) in a continuous form as: 

𝑑𝐹 𝑤 =𝑤 0 = 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑇 𝑑𝑇 + 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑅 𝑑𝑅. And equation (2) now becomes: 

𝑑𝑅 − 𝑅 𝑇 𝑑𝑇 = 𝑤 0 𝑑𝑇 . That is, we expect 𝑑𝐹 = 0 when 

𝑑𝑅 = (𝑅 /𝑇 + 𝑤 0) 𝑑𝑇 . Substituting 𝑑𝑅 into 𝑑𝐹 , we have: 

𝑑𝐹 𝑤 =𝑤 0 = 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑇 𝑑𝑇 + 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑅 (𝑅 /𝑇 + 𝑤 0) 𝑑𝑇 = 0.

Factoring out the 𝑑𝑇 term and observing that the remaining factor must be zero gives our main condition (equation (3) below). 1. (Main principle) Iso-value trade-off condition For any fixed 

𝑤 0, we expect 𝐹 (𝑇 , 𝑅, 𝑤 0) to encode the empirical tradeoff between 

𝑇 and 𝑅 such that the following partial differential equation (PDE) is satisfied: 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑇 + 𝜕𝐹 𝜕𝑅 (𝑅 /𝑇 + 𝑤 0) = 0. (3) 

Our proposed objective function. To this end, we propose the use of the following objective function to measure and compare the reward–inference tradeoff for different choices of algorithm 𝜋 .

𝐹 (𝑇 , 𝑅, 𝑤 ) = 𝑅 /𝑇 − 𝑤 · log (𝑇 ). (4)     

> 2This is similar to “cost of experimentation” proposed in past work [ 3], albeit in a different setting without statistical constraints.
> 3For any particular problem, at some point it may not be possible for a bandit algorithm to achieve a 𝑤 increase in cumulative reward—at which point the horizon will dominate the objective. This is desirable, as it matches the intuition that we want a short experiment with maximal cumulative reward. Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams

It can be easily verified that our proposed function satisfies the partial equation mentioned earlier. Indeed, 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑇 = −𝑅 /𝑇 2 − 𝑤 /𝑇 

and 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑅 = 1/𝑇 , so 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑇 + ( 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑅 )( 𝑅 /𝑇 + 𝑤 ) = 0. We call our proposed objective function experiment-cost-penalized reward 

(ECP-reward), as it contains the commonly used average reward metric in the bandit literature and penalizes it with log -scaled exper-iment step costs. Before giving an in-depth analysis of the proposed function, we try to give a quick interpretation of it. The behavior of 𝐹 is fairly intuitive: When 𝑤 = 0, the objective reduces to maximizing experiment mean reward, and when 𝑤 is very large, the objective reduces to minimizing experiment steps. Other than the main principle, our proposed formula also satisfies the following useful properties: 2. Monotonicity. Fix 𝑅 and assume 𝑤 > 0. Then the objective score decreases monotonically as horizon increases: 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑇 < 0.Similarly, fixing 𝑇 and 𝑤 , we have 𝜕𝐹 /𝜕𝑅 > 0.3. Consistency under reward location and scale shifting. The relative ordering of two experiment scores remains unchanged if we shift the reward unit/basis by a constant or scale it by a positive factor. Formally, if 𝐹 (𝑇 1, 𝑅 1, 𝑤 ) > 𝐹 (𝑇 2, 𝑅 2, 𝑤 ), then for any intercept 

𝑏 ∈ R and any multiplier 𝑎 > 0, we have 𝐹 (𝑇 1, 𝑅 1 + 𝑏 𝑇 1, 𝑤 ) >

𝐹 (𝑇 2, 𝑅 2 + 𝑏 𝑇 2, 𝑤 ), and 𝐹 (𝑇 1, 𝑎𝑅 1, 𝑎𝑤 ) > 𝐹 (𝑇 2, 𝑎𝑅 2, 𝑎𝑤 ).

Lastly, one might wonder why we do not consider simpler objec-tives such as 𝑅 − 𝑤𝑇 or 𝑅 /𝑇 − 𝑤𝑇 . Essentially, these objectives do not follow our main principle and can lead to unituitive evaluations. For further discussion, see Appendix C. Now that we have defined an objective, we can optimize for it, finding the best bandit algorithm (and parameters, if any) for the user’s chosen 𝑤 . An optimization procedure based on this objective is provided in Procedure 5 in the Appendix. 

## 6 Simulation Method 

In our simulation study, we show how our testing correction method and objective function can optimize the experimental design while retaining statistical validity. We focus on simple, widely used algo-rithms and tests to ensure interpretability and practical relevance. 

Computational cost reduction. Unlike a bandit simulation where computation is not a primary concern, power analysis for bandit algorithms can be computationally costly. It involves nested simula-tions, with an additional Monte Carlo loop to calibrate the test for each simulated experimental run (i.e., Procedure 1 is required within each simulation replication). We note that a similar issue exists for the ART correction proposed by Ham et al. [14]. To improve simulation efficiency, we employ several techniques, including vectorization, batched algorithm updates with a geometri-cally increasing batch size, result aggregation within each batch, and binning similar estimated null hypotheses for shared calibration. Em-pirically, this greatly reduces time - while a naive implementation of a single configuration with 𝑁 = 1000 (assuming additional 𝑀 = 500 

without approximation) and horizon 𝑇 = 200 can take an hour to run and require roughly 20 GB of memory, whereas our approach completes it in under one second with negligible memory usage. See Appendix F for more details. 

Algorithms. We select Thompson Sampling (TS) and Uniform Randomization as baselines. TS follows the classical Bayesian for-mulation: for Bernoulli rewards we use a Beta–Bernoulli model with a Beta (1, 1) prior, and for Gaussian rewards we adopt the conjugate Normal–Inverse-Gamma update [ 12 , 27 ] with a non-informative prior. We also include 𝜖 -Thompson Sampling ( 𝜖 -TS), which aug-ments TS with fixed uniform exploration by following TS with probability 1 − 𝜖 and selecting an arm uniformly at random with probability 𝜖 , where 𝜖 ∈ [ 0, 1] controls the exploration rate. 

Empirical study inspired simulation. To illustrate our framework in a scientific setting, we first consider a six-armed bandit environ-ment derived from a large-scale online educational experiment [ 20 ]in which psychologists investigated how brief, digitally delivered stress-reappraisal activities influence students’ learning and exam performance. The experiment showed different types of messages which varied the amount of explanatory text, modality (text/video), and the presence of reflection prompts. When simulating how bandit algorithms perform in this setting, we use two phases: we first perform a pre-experiment optimization based on the objective function to determine the optimal algorithm parameter and horizon, similar to power analysis. We then use the realized arm means from the empirical data in a post-experiment simulation to validate the practical performance of the recommended parameter choice. In the pre-experiment phase, we scale exam scores to [0, 1] and as-sume the prior mean reward for each arm follows N(0.81 , 0.015 2). In each simulation for parameter optimization, the arm-level mean 𝜇 𝑖 is drawn from this prior, and rewards follow N(𝜇 𝑖 , 0.12). Those values are estimated and rounded from the arm mean rewards, their average standard deviations and their prediction residuals, respectively from the original data used by Reza et al. [20] . For the hypothesis-testing framework, we conduct independent pairwise comparisons between each arm and a fixed control using two-sided 𝑡 -tests, treating the first arm (corresponding to the pure text summary intervention) as the control. We target a Type I error rate of 0.05 , a Type II error rate of 0.2, and a minimum detectable effect size of 0.025 . We assume the experimenter specifies 𝑤 = 0.01 , which can be interpreted as valuing one additional experimental step as costing roughly 1 exam point out of 100. This choice reflects the empirical finding from the original study that large treatment effects are unlikely, while even small improvements remain practically meaningful. In the second phase, we examine a possible scenario if the chosen algorithm was deployed with the chosen horizon. Instead of defining a prior distribution and sampling arm means, for this phase we use the actual arm means suggested by the data, ®𝜇 =[0.810, 0.806, 0.819, 0.778, 0.827, 0.813], and maintain reward distribution as N(𝜇 𝑖 , 0.12).We fix the experimental horizon using the pre-experiment analysis and assess performance by recomputing the achieved average reward and ECP-reward. We highlight that this second simulation is illustra-tive, reflecting what may occur when the realized environment lies within the range specified by the prior. We compare the resulting performance against baseline designs using TS and UR. 

Additional simulation across tests. We next apply our optimiza-tion procedure to a broader set of hypothesis tests in a three-armed binary-reward setting. Specifically, we consider ANOVA to assess A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

whether mean rewards differ across arms in aggregate, pairwise t-tests (t-constant and t-control) to compare individual arms either against a fixed baseline or a designated control arm, and multiple-comparison procedures based on Tukey’s test to determine whether a single arm is distinctly superior. Detailed definitions of these tests are provided in Appendix D. In this setting, each arm’s true mean reward 𝑝 𝑖 is drawn indepen-dently from a Beta (5, 5) prior, and rewards follow 𝑟 𝑖 ∼ Bernoulli (𝑝 𝑖 ).For each combination of bandit algorithm and parameter choice, re-sults are averaged over 10 ,000 replications. 

## 7 Result 7.1 Empirical example inspired simulation 

Figure 1: Screenshot of our optimization framework web appli-cation, showing the relative ECP-reward performance for the empirical study inspired simulation. Note the best setting for 

𝜖 -TS outperforms TS and UR near the 𝑤 = 0.01 .

In this section, we present simulation results based on the empiri-cal setting described in Section 6 and illustrate how experimenters can use our framework to guide their design of adaptive experimen-tation. Figure 1 illustrated the analysis visualizations displayed in our GUI output page. It allows the experimenter to identify the best algorithm and parameter (among what they considered), and com-pare its ECP-reward performance against UR and TS benchmark across various values of 𝑤 . See Appendix E for an illustration of the user input page of our GUI. We now explain the improvement an experiment design can achieve after using our procedures. 

Test correction. We first demonstrate that power analysis for MAB algorithms must account for test correction. In our empir-ically inspired simulation, using an uncorrected two-sided 𝑡 -test for each arm–control comparisons suggests that Thompson Sampling requires roughly 2,800 participants to achieve power 0.8, but results 

Table 3: Comparison of experiment designs in an empirically inspired simulation with the experiment extension cost 𝑤 =

0.01 . Prior columns show expected performance under the prior specification at design time, while post columns report realized performance using empirical arm means. Underlined entries indicate values that can be corrected or optimized. Standard errors for all reward and ECP-reward values are below 0.0003 .                               

> Prior (design-time) Post (realized) Algorithm/Design FPR Steps Reward ECP Reward ECP
> UR (naive) 0.050 906 0.8100 0.7419 0.8053 0.7372 TS (naive) 0.072 2,767 ////TS (AIT) 0.050 4,186 0.8251 0.7417 0.8255 0.7421
> 𝜀 -TS (AIT + Opt.) 0.050 1,338 0.8185 0.7465 0.8162 0.7443

in an inflated false positive rate of 0.072 . As shown in Table 3, cor-recting for algorithm-induced Type I error using our AIT procedure increases the required sample size to over 4,000 participants for the same target power, potentially altering experimenters’ design choices. 

Optimization on experiment design. Next, we compare naive ex-perimental designs (e.g., using the traditional TS or UR algorithms) with designs produced using our optimization procedure. Figure 1 visualizes the relative ECP-reward of algorithms within the 𝜀 -TS family. For each value of the experiment extension cost 𝑤 , we define the relative ECP-reward of an algorithm 𝜋 as 𝐹 (𝑇 𝜋 , 𝑟 𝜋 , 𝑤 ) − 

𝐹 (𝑇 𝜋 ∗ , 𝑟 𝜋 ∗ , 𝑤 ), where 𝜋 ∗ denotes the best-performing algorithm among the candidates under consideration. In our setting, this corresponds to the optimal choice of 𝜖 within the 𝜀 -TS family, and a relative ECP-reward of 0 indicates the optimal design. The interface allows experimenters to specify 𝑤 via a slider, high-lights the corresponding optimal 𝜀 -TS variant, and displays its rela-tive ECP-reward across other values of 𝑤 , together with the UR and TS benchmarks for comparison. 

How experimenters can use our GUI to inform design. The TS and UR benchmarks help experimenters make core design decisions by clarifying how the relative importance of experimental cost affects algorithm choice. Figure 1 shows that TS (corresponding to 𝜀 = 0)is optimal only when 𝑤 is very small, indicating a regime in which experimental cost is effectively negligible and the objective reduces to near–pure reward maximization. As 𝑤 increases, the relative ECP-reward of TS drops rapidly, signaling diminishing suitability when experimental cost becomes non-negligible. For larger values of 𝑤 , minimizing the total number of experi-mental steps becomes the dominant consideration. In this region, UR performs comparatively well, although it is not always strictly optimal. In our setting, for example, 𝜀 -TS with 𝜀 = 0.8 achieves a slightly lower total sample size, while the ECP-reward of UR remains high, indicating that modest deviations from uniform sam-pling toward better-performing arms can sometimes yield hypothesis testing efficiency gains. In this intermediate regime, hybrid 𝜀 -TS algorithms that balance reward maximization and exploration achieve better trade-offs. The visualization allows experimenters to identify the optimal 𝜀 for a Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams 

given 𝑤 and to assess the robustness of that choice across nearby values. For example, at 𝑤 = 0.01 , the optimal variant is 𝜀 -TS (0.3),which outperforms both TS and UR over a neighborhood of 𝑤 =

0.01 . As shown in Table 3, 𝜀 -TS (0.3) achieves an ECP-reward of 

0.7465 , approximately 0.4 higher than either TS or UR, at the cost of roughly 400 additional participants compared to UR while yielding an average reward increase of about 0.8 points. Overall, the visualization guides algorithm selection by showing when each design is preferable and how much value it provides. 

Post-Experiment Evaluation. We next evaluate the optimized design using the realized experimental data. Based on the pre-experiment analysis, we select 𝜀 = 0.3 for the 𝜀 -TS family when 

𝑤 = 0.01 , with the total number of experimental steps fixed from the pre-analysis stage. Using bootstrap resampling of the empirical data, we update the achieved average reward and recompute the corresponding ECP-reward, comparing performance against TS and UR. As shown in Table 3, the optimized 𝜀 -TS (0.3) design maintains a higher ECP-reward than both TS and UR. Our optimized choice took 2,848 fewer steps to reach the desired Type II error than TS, while achieving 0.0109 more average reward than UR, choosing an algorithm that better optimized the desired tradeoff. We note that, as is common in power analysis, the realized performance depends on how closely the true environment matches the prior assumptions, and the recommended parameter is not guaranteed to be optimal in every instance. 

## 7.2 Additional Evaluation Across Tests 

In this section, we present simulation studies across a range of hypothesis tests and bandit algorithms. We show that Procedure 5 can improve upon naive experiment designs and that it performs robustly across a wide variety of tests. Throughout, we fix the Type I error rate at 0.05 and the power constraint at 0.8 for all tests, and assume a experiment extension cost 𝑤 of 0.1. According to our definition to 𝑤 in Section 5, this choice reflects the interpretation that one additional step of the experiment costs 0.1 in additional cumulative reward, which is a realistic choice. As illustrated in Table 4, compared to traditional fixed designs such as TS, UR, or 𝜀 -TS with 𝜀 = 0.5, applying our optimization procedure can improve the achievable ECP-reward. In particular, we observe relatively large improvements over TS and UR, exceeding 

0.06 on average. More importantly, each fixed choice of algorithm can exhibit substantial suboptimality in certain scenarios. For example, UR and 

𝜀 -TS (0.5) perform poorly under the Tukey or T-Constant test, while TS shows particularly low ECP-reward for the (two-sided) T-control test. These results highlight the importance of explicitly specify-ing the reward–inference tradeoff and systematically performing algorithm and parameter selection. 

## 7.3 Prior mis-specification sensitivity check 

When the location and/or scale of the prior distribution over arm mean rewards is inaccurately specified, the optimization outcome may degrade. To assess the robustness of our experiment design framework to prior mis-specification, we evaluate how the objective score changes under alternative prior specifications. 

Table 4: ECP-reward comparison (higher is better) across fixed experiment designs (TS, UR, and 𝜀 -TS with 𝜀 = 0.5) versus our optimized design over the 𝜀 -TS family using Procedure 5.                           

> ANOVA T-Constant T-Control Tukey Naive UR -0.052 -0.012 -0.077 -0.112 Naive TS -0.079 0.075 -0.163 -0.016 Naive 𝜀 -TS(0.5) -0.012 0.042 -0.046 -0.021 Optimized 𝜀 -TS -0.009 0.075 -0.042 0.012 (Best 𝜖 )(0.4) (0) (0.4) (0.2)

Table 5: ECP-reward loss relative to the true optimal per set-ting. Mis-Opt.: loss from optimizing under a mis-specified prior; Rand. Baseline: loss averaged over random picks on 𝜖 for 𝜖 -TS.                                           

> Prior location mis-specification (fixed scale = 0.15)
> True location 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 Mis-Opt. 0.047 0.024 0.001 0.000 0.002 0.000 0.001 Rand. Baseline 0.083 0.050 0.018 0.017 0.019 0.018 0.019
> Prior scale mis-specification (fixed location = 0.35)
> True scale 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21 Mis-Opt. 0.010 0.004 0.000 0.000 0.003 0.005 0.005 Rand. Baseline 0.019 0.017 0.016 0.017 0.021 0.025 0.037

We study both location and scale mis-specification for the 𝜖 -TS design under an ANOVA test with Type I error bounded by 0.05 

and power constraint 0.8. Throughout, the algorithm is optimized assuming a 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 (3.2, 5.9) prior on each arm mean reward 𝜇 𝑖 (mean 

0.35 , standard deviation 0.15 ), with the experiment extension cost 

𝑤 = 0.1. For location mis-specification, the true prior mean varies while the scale is fixed; for scale mis-specification, the true prior standard deviation varies from 0.09 to 0.21 with the mean fixed. Table 5 reports ECP-reward loss relative to the true optimal at each setting. We include a random-𝜖 baseline to provide a reference scale. Relative to this baseline, the loss induced by prior mis-specification is small across a wide range of mean and scale deviations. The loss is largest when the true prior deviates most from the reference specification, such as at true location 0.2 or true scale 0.09 , where the relative mismatch (ratio) is the most extreme. Overall, it indicates that the proposed optimization framework yields 𝜖 values that are robust to moderate prior uncertainty. 

## 8 Discussion and Conclusion 

In this work, we provide practical and justifiable approaches to help practitioners design statistically reliable and cost-effective adaptive experiments, balancing the trade-off between cumulative reward and experimental deployment cost. Our approach consists of two main components. First, we introduce a valid hypothesis-testing correction method for adaptively collected data that can be easily generalized to commonly used tests such as ANOVA, Tukey, and the 𝑡 -test. Compared to existing general-purpose adaptations, our approach has theoretically justifiable power efficiency and is empiri-cally superior. Second, we propose a principled objective-function A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

design that allows practitioners to evaluate two seemingly incompati-ble metrics—reward and hypothesis-testing efficiency—on a unified and at least somewhat interpretable scale. As we showed in Tables 3, this can result in choosing an algorithm that achieves much better reward than UR while reducing the number of steps compared to TS significantly, therefore better optimizing the user’s intended tradeoff. Finally, we implement these methods into a unified software toolkit, offering practitioners a practical, one-stop solution for setting up and evaluating adaptive experimental designs, with the access to their familiar tests and algorithms. 

## 8.1 Limitation and future directions 

We discuss limitations and future directions below. 

Usability. While we presented interfaces and tools that allow users to explore parameter choices, we acknowledge that these re-quire training to use effectively. One important direction of future work is to study which methods of training and interface design make these interfaces the most accessible to practitioners, which would likely involve user studies. Nevertheless, designing the ob-jective scores, framework, and toolkit is an important first step to making statistically-sound adaptive experimentation more accessible to a broader community of scientists and experimenters. 

Theoretical analysis. While our framework produces recommended parameter choices that are approximately optimal, one limitation is that we did not show formal regret bounds (with respect to the ECP score) on the performance of these algorithms. One challenge in doing this is that a traditional worst-case analysis is not wholly ap-propriate, as performance is expected to be related to the prior distri-bution specified by the user. As such, as Bayesian regret bound [ 19 ]may be more appropriate. One benefit of such analysis is that it would require a tight characterization of the estimation error intro-duced by our approximations. 

Bayesian hypothesis testing. In this paper, we have assumed clas-sical statistical tests and classical power analysis. It would be valu-able to extend our extend our analysis to the realm of Bayesian statistics. 

## References 

[1] Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine Learning , 47(2-3):235–256, 2002. doi: 10.1023/A:1013689704352. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013689704352. [2] Jonathan Austrian, Felicia Mendoza, Adam Szerencsy, Lucille Fenelon, Leora I. Horwitz, Simon Jones, Masha Kuznetsova, and Devin M. Mann. Applying a/b testing to clinical decision support: Rapid randomized controlled trials. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 23(4):e16651, 2021. doi: 10.2196/16651. [3] Loc Bui, Ramesh Johari, and Shie Mannor. Committing bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2011 , 2011. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/ d56b9fc4b0f1be8871f5e1c40c0067e7-Paper.pdf. [4] George Casella and Roger L Berger. Statistical Inference . Duxbury Press, 2 edition, 2002. [5] Olivier Chapelle and Lihong Li. An empirical evaluation of thompson sam-pling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 2011 , pages 2249–2257, 2011. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2011/file/ 9e082b752ed5630062c1b4b877e5f38b-Paper.pdf. [6] Jacob Cohen. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences . 2 edition, 1988. [7] Nina Deliu, Joseph J. Williams, and Sofía S. Villar. Efficient inference without trading-off regret in bandits: An allocation probability test for thompson sampling. 

arXiv preprint , arXiv:2111.00137, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.00137. [8] Yash Deshpande, Lester Mackey, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Matt Taddy. Accurate inference for adaptive linear models. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2018 , pages 1194–1203. PMLR, 2018. [9] Akram Erraqabi, Alessandro Lazaric, Michal Valko, Emma Brunskill, and Yun-En Liu. Trading off rewards and errors in multi-armed bandits. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2017 , pages 709–717. PMLR, 2017. [10] Franz Faul, Edgar Erdfelder, Axel Buchner, and Albert-Georg Lang. Statistical power analyses using g*power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. 

Behavior Research Methods , 41(4):1149–1160, 2009. [11] Ronald A. Fisher. Statistical Methods for Research Workers . Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, UK, 1st edition, 1925. Introduced the analysis of variance (ANOVA) framework. [12] Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, David B Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian Data Analysis . CRC Press, 2013. [13] Vitor Hadad, David A. Hirshberg, Ruohan Zhan, Stefan Wager, and Susan Athey. Confidence intervals for policy evaluation in adaptive experiments. In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , volume 118, page e2014602118, 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2014602118. [14] Jang-Hyun Ham, Yuhong Qiu, Yixin Zhang, Yifei Wang, and Emmanuel J Candes. Hypothesis testing in adaptively sampled data: Art to maximize power beyond iid sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02430 , 2022. [15] Kellen Kanarios, Qining Zhang, and Lei Ying. Cost aware best arm identification. 

arXiv preprint , arXiv:2402.16710, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16710. [16] Fang Kong, Penglei Zhao, Shichao Han, Yong Wang, and Shuai Li. Sequential op-timum test with multi-armed bandits for online experimentation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-agement (CIKM) , pages 4645–4652. ACM, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3627673.3680040. [17] Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2020. [18] Yun-En Liu, Travis Mandel, Emma Brunskill, and Zoran Popovi´ c. Trading off scientific knowledge and user learning with multi-armed bandits. In Proceedings of the Educational Data Mining Conference (EDM) 2014 , pages 161–168, 2014. [19] Ian Osband, Daniel Russo, and Benjamin Van Roy. (more) efficient reinforcement learning via posterior sampling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 26, 2013. [20] Mohi Reza, Angela Zavaleta Bernuy, Emmy Liu, Tong Li, Zhongyuan Liang, Calista K. Barber, and Joseph Jay Williams. Exam eustress: Designing brief online interventions for helping students identify positive aspects of stress. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,pages 1–13, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3544548.3581368. [21] William F. Rosenberger and John M. Lachin. Randomization in Clinical Trials: Theory and Practice . Wiley, 2016. [22] Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, and Zheng Wen. A tutorial on thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 11(1):1–96, 2018. [23] Adam C. Sales, Ethan B. Prihar, Johann A. Gagnon-Bartsch, and Neil T. Heffernan. Using auxiliary data to boost precision in the analysis of a/b tests on an online educational platform: New data and new results. Journal of Educational Data Mining , 15(2):53–85, 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.8016854. [24] David Simchi-Levi and Chonghuan Wang. Multi-armed bandit experimental design: Online decision-making and adaptive inference. In AISTATS 2023 , 2023. [25] Alex L Smith and Sofia S Villar. Bayesian adaptive bandit-based designs using the gittins index for multi-armed trials with normally distributed endpoints. Journal of Applied Statistics , 45(6):1052–1076, 2018. [26] Student. The probable error of a mean. Biometrika , 6(1):1–25, 1908. doi: 10.1093/biomet/6.1.1. Original paper introducing the Student’s t-test. [27] William R. Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika , 25(3/4):285–294, 1933. [28] John W. Tukey. Comparing individual means in the analysis of variance. Biomet-rics , 5(2):99–114, 1949. doi: 10.2307/3001913. Original paper introducing the Tukey Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test. [29] Sofía S. Villar, Jack Bowden, and James Wason. Multi-armed bandit models for the optimal design of clinical trials: Benefits and challenges. Statistical Science ,30(2):199–215, 2015. doi: 10.1214/14-STS494. [30] Joseph J. Williams, Jacob Nogas, Nina Deliu, Hammad Shaikh, Sofia S. Villar, Audrey Durand, and Anna N. Rafferty. Challenges in statistical analysis of data collected by a bandit algorithm: An empirical exploration in applications to adaptively randomized experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12198 , 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2103.12198. [31] Yingce Xia, Qin Tao, and Tie-Yan Li. Thompson sampling for budgeted multi-armed bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.00146 , 2015. [32] Ding Xiang, Rebecca West, Jiaqi Wang, Xiquan Cui, and Jinzhou Huang. Multi-armed bandit vs. a/b tests in e-commerce: Confidence interval and hypothesis test power perspectives. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2022) , pages 3783–3792. ACM, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3534678.3539143. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/ 3534678.3539143. Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams         

> [33] Zhuang Xu, Yandi Wang, and Aaditya Ramdas. A unified framework for ban-dit multiple testing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 34, pages 25750–25762, 2021. [34] Jiayu Yao, Emma Brunskill, Weiwei Pan, Susan A. Murphy, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Power-constrained bandits. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2004.06230, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06230. [35] Jerrold H Zar. Biostatistical Analysis . Pearson, 5 edition, 2010. [36] Zixin Zhong, Wang Chi Cheung, and Vincent Y. F. Tan. Achieving the pareto frontier of regret minimization and best-arm identification in multi-armed bandits.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08627 , 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.08627.

## A Proof of Theorem 4.1 

The proof proceeds by first identifying key structural properties of the multi-armed bandit (MAB) data-generating process, and then applying the Neyman–Pearson lemma to the induced distribution over experiment histories. 

Properties of the MAB Data-Generating Process. We assume the standard MAB process: at each time 𝑡 , the algorithm 𝜋 selects an arm 𝑎 𝑡 based on the observed history ℎ𝑡 −1, after which a reward 𝑟 𝑡 is drawn from the distribution associated with arm 𝑎 𝑡 under ®𝜈 . Under this model, the following properties hold. 

Property 1 (Conditional Independence of Rewards) 

Given the selected arm 𝑎 𝑡 and the reward distribution specification ®𝜈 ,the reward 𝑟 𝑡 is conditionally independent of the past history ℎ𝑡 −1

and the data-collection algorithm 𝜋 . That is, 

𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ℎ 𝑡 −1, ®𝜈, 𝜋 ) = 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 ).

Property 2 (Conditional Independence of Actions) 

Given the past history ℎ𝑡 −1 and the data-collection algorithm 𝜋 , the action 𝑎 𝑡 is conditionally independent of the reward distribution specification ®𝜈 . That is, 

𝑝 (𝑎 𝑡 | ℎ𝑡 −1, ®𝜈, 𝜋 ) = 𝑝 (𝑎 𝑡 | ℎ𝑡 −1, 𝜋 ).

The next lemma combines these two properties to show that, for simple hypotheses, the likelihood ratio over complete histories ℎ𝑇 

has a particularly simple form. In particular, it is invariant to the choice of data-collection algorithm 𝜋 , as long as the likelihood ratio is well defined (i.e., 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 𝑖 , 𝜋 ) > 0 for 𝑖 ∈ { 0, 1}). 

Lemma A.1 (Algorithm Invariance of the Likelihood Ratio) 

Let 𝜋 be any data-collection algorithm such that 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) > 0

and 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1, 𝜋 ) > 0. Let 

ℎ𝑇 = (𝑎 1, 𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑎 𝑇 , 𝑟 𝑇 )

denote an ordered experiment history. Then the likelihood ratio satisfies 

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1, 𝜋 )

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) =

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 1)

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 0) ,

and therefore does not depend on the data-collection algorithm 𝜋 .Moreover, the statistic depends on ℎ𝑇 only through the collection of rewards observed under each arm and is invariant to permutations of the time indices. Proof. By the chain rule of probability, 

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈, 𝜋 ) =

> 𝑇

Ö 

> 𝑡 =1

𝑝 (𝑎 𝑡 | ℎ𝑡 −1, ®𝜈, 𝜋 ) 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ℎ 𝑡 −1, ®𝜈, 𝜋 ).

By Property 1 and Property 2, this expression simplifies to 

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈, 𝜋 ) =

> 𝑇

Ö 

> 𝑡 =1

𝑝 (𝑎 𝑡 | ℎ𝑡 −1, 𝜋 ) 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 ).

Taking the likelihood ratio under ®𝜈 1 and ®𝜈 0, the action-selection terms cancel, yielding 

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1, 𝜋 )

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) =

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 1)

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 0) .

□A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

We now complete the proof of Theorem 4.1. For any fixed algorithm 

𝜋 , the simple hypotheses ®𝜈 0 and ®𝜈 1 induce two fully specified distri-butions on the sample space H𝑇 , namely 𝑝 (· | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) and 𝑝 (· | ® 𝜈 1, 𝜋 ).By the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the most powerful level-𝛼 test for discriminating between these two distributions rejects for large values of the likelihood ratio 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1,𝜋 )    

> 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0,𝜋 )

.Concretely, define the (classical) LRT rejection region formed from the conditional reward distributions, 

𝐶 𝑘 :=

(

ℎ𝑇 :

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 1)

Î𝑇 𝑡 =1 𝑝 (𝑟 𝑡 | 𝑎 𝑡 , ®𝜈 0) > 𝑘 

)

.

Applying AIT amounts to calibrating the threshold 𝑘 = 𝑘 (𝛼, 𝜋 ) so that 

Pr  ℎ𝑇 ∈ 𝐶 𝑘 (𝛼,𝜋 ) | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋  ≤ 𝛼, 

with equality when attainable. By Lemma A.1, this is equivalent to using the rejection region 

𝐶 =



ℎ𝑇 : 𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 1, 𝜋 )

𝑝 (ℎ𝑇 | ® 𝜈 0, 𝜋 ) > 𝑘 (𝛼, 𝜋 )



.

Therefore, by the Neyman–Pearson lemma, 𝐶 is the most power-ful level-𝛼 test for testing the simple null hypothesis ®𝜈 0 against the simple alternative ®𝜈 1 under data collection by 𝜋 .4 This proves Theorem 4.1. □

## B More empirical evaluation 

We consider the simulation setting with two-armed binary rewards, and the ground truth of the two arm means are 0.6 and 0.4, with horizon 𝑇 = 200 . We try to evaluate the power performance of our AIT correction method, and compare it with ART by [ 14 ]. We evaluate it on the 𝜖 -TS family with 𝜖 changing from 0 to 0.8. We consider 𝑇 = 200 total samples. Our proposed AIT achieves consistently higher power than ART. ART AIT 

𝜖 -TS(0.0) 0.434 0.520 

𝜖 -TS(0.1) 0.607 0.675 

𝜖 -TS(0.2) 0.704 0.750 

𝜖 -TS(0.4) 0.810 0.827 

𝜖 -TS(0.8) 0.871 0.878 

Table 6: Test power comparison under adaptive data collection. AIT consistently achieves higher power than ART across all algorithms. 

## C Why naive formulations fail 

One might wonder why we do not use simpler objectives such as 𝑅 −

𝑤𝑇 or 𝑅 /𝑇 −𝑤𝑇 . Besides the fact that they do not satisfy Constraint 1 and distort the meaning of ’ 𝑤 ’, we discuss their practical problems in more detail. 

For the objective 𝑅 − 𝑤𝑇 : Failing Constraint 1 means it can assign a higher score to an experiment that is actually worse. For example, consider option A with (𝑇 = 100 , 𝑅 = 50 ) and choose         

> 4Although we express the test in terms of the experiment history ℎ𝑇 , this does not affect the application of the Neyman–Pearson lemma. For a fixed algorithm 𝜋 , the induced distribution over ℎ𝑇 is fully specified under both ®𝜈 0and ®𝜈 1, and the likelihood ratio is well defined.

𝑤 = 0.2. Now consider another experiment with (𝑇 = 101 , 𝑅 = 50 .3).The second option has both a lower mean reward and a higher cost, yet 𝑅 −𝑤𝑇 assigns it a better score (recall that 𝑅 is the cumulative, not average, reward). In addition, 𝑅 − 𝑤𝑇 does not satisfy the intercept-shift property in Constraint 3. This makes the choice of 𝑤 depend heavily on prior knowledge about the average baseline of reward. For instance, if 𝑤 is mistakenly chosen smaller than the average reward across arms, then the objective can instantly explode: one can increase 𝑇 indefinitely, let the cumulative reward grow, and obtain arbitrarily large scores. 

For the objective 𝑅 /𝑇 − 𝑤𝑇 : This formulation under-represents reward and places excessive emphasis on experiment length. Because the average reward 𝑅 /𝑇 exhibits sharp diminishing returns as 𝑇 

increases, any reward improvements quickly become negligible. As a consequence, this objective overwhelmingly favors algorithms that use near-minimal experiment horizons, regardless of reward performance. 

## D Detailed simulation setting for hypothesis tests 

We set the type I error (or family-wise error rate) to 𝛼 = 0.05 and the target power to 1 − 𝛽 = 0.8. For power analysis, we assume that each arm has a Bernoulli reward distribution, with arm means 

𝑝 ∼ 𝐷 𝑝 = Beta (5, 5). Moreover, for power analysis of all tests except ANOVA, we consider a minimum effect size of 𝑑 0 = 0.1, and we only compute power when the difference between a tested pair exceeds 

𝑑 0. We consider the following test setup: 

ANOVA test. We use the standard one-way ANOVA test [ 11 ] to compare the mean rewards across arms. In our simulation, we apply the test directly on the observed sample means of the three arms. 

t-tests. A t-test [ 26 ] assesses whether the means of two groups differ significantly. We consider two variants of the t-test, named 

t-constant and t-control .

t-constant: compares each arm’s mean reward to a fixed baseline of 0.5. We conduct a one-sided test, counting only cases where an arm’s mean exceeds 0.5. For each arm 𝑘 , the null hypothesis is 

𝐻 0 : 𝑝 𝑘 = 0.5, and the alternative hypothesis is 𝐻 1 : 𝑝 𝑘 > 0.5. We control the family-wise error rate, while power is averaged across arms. The family-wise error rate can be expressed as 

Pr (reject 𝐻 0 for all arms | 𝑝 1 = 𝑝 2 = 𝑝 3 = 0.5),

and the one-sided power (by symmetry across arms) can be written as 

Pr (reject 𝐻 0 for arm 1 | 𝑝 1 − 0.5 > 𝑑 0, 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, 𝑝 3 ∼ 𝐷 𝑝 ).

t-control: treats the first arm as a control and compares each remain-ing arm to it. For each arm 𝑘 ≠ 1, the null hypothesis is 𝐻 0 : 𝑝 𝑘 = 𝑝 1.We conduct a two-sided test with alternative hypothesis 𝐻 1 : 𝑝 𝑘 ≠ 𝑝 1.Unlike t-constant, the null hypothesis location is unrestricted. Ac-cordingly, the family-wise error rate is 

Pr (reject 𝐻 0 for all arms | 𝑝 1 = 𝑝 2 = 𝑝 3),

and the two-sided power can be expressed as 

Pr (reject 𝐻 0 for arm 1 vs. arm 2 | | 𝑝 1 − 𝑝 2 | > 𝑑 0, 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, 𝑝 3 ∼ 𝐷 𝑝 ).Tong Li, Travis Mandel, Goldie Phillips, Anna Rafferty, Eric M. Schwartz, Dehan Kong, and Joseph J. Williams 

We use a two-sided test for t-control to distinguish it from t-constant and to provide a more inclusive evaluation when the direction of effects is not specified in advance. 

Tukey tests. A Tukey test [ 28 ] is a multiple-comparison procedure used to determine which pairs of group means differ significantly while controlling the family-wise error rate across all comparisons. Here, we consider testing whether the best arm performs significantly better than each of the other arms. Assume that arm 𝑘 is the best arm. We want to test 𝐻 0 : ∃𝑖 ≠ 𝑘, 𝑝 𝑘 ≤ 𝑝 𝑖 and 𝐻 1 : ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑘, 𝑝 𝑘 > 𝑝 𝑖 .We do so by testing each other arm against the best-performing arm, and the result is successful if we identify the best arm and reject the null for each pair. The type I error is: 

Pr (reject 𝐻 0 for all arms | 𝑝 1 = 𝑝 2 = 𝑝 3) .

The power is then defined as 

Pr  reject 𝐻 0 for arm 𝑘 𝑝 𝑘 − 𝑝 𝑖 > 𝑑 0, ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑘, 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, 𝑝 3 ∼ 𝐷 𝑝 

 .

## E Optimization Interface 

Figure 2: Screenshot of our optimization framework web appli-cation user input page. 

## F Challenges and efficient methods for MAB experiment simulation 

Our main hypothesis testing correction approach (Procedure 1) is simple to implement in a real experimental setting. However, it becomes computationally costly when conducting power analysis simulations for an MAB algorithm. More specifically, for each replication out of the total 𝑁 replica-tions in a power analysis simulation, our test correction (Procedure 1) requires simulating a null-hypothesis scenario and estimating the corresponding critical region threshold. Estimation variance in this threshold not only increases the variance of power estimates, but also introduces systematic bias, dragging estimated power toward 

0.5. To see this, note that power is computed as 𝑃 (𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 ) > ˆ𝑠 ), where 

𝑆 (ℎ𝑇 ) is the test statistic computed from experimental outcome ℎ𝑇 ,and ˆ𝑠 is the estimated critical region threshold. If the variance of ˆ𝑠 

becomes large, the rejection probability converges to 0.5, regardless of the true alternative. Empirically, we find that at least 𝑀 = 500 

null-hypothesis replications are typically required to reduce power estimation bias to within 1% . This leads to a total computational cost of 𝑀 × 𝑁 bandit runs, which is substantially larger than a standard MAB simulation that requires only 𝑁 replications. To address this challenge, we combine three complementary tech-niques that substantially reduce both runtime and memory usage. First, we fully vectorize the implementation and execute simula-tion replications jointly. Second, we reduce the total number of null-distribution simulations by binning similar estimated null hy-potheses and simulating only a constant number of representative grid points. Critical region thresholds for intermediate null specifica-tions are then obtained via interpolation (see Procedure 3). Lastly, we accelerate each bandit replication and reduce memory usage by updating the bandit algorithm in batches rather than at every step, and by aggregating results within each batch. The resulting batched adaptive experiment process is shown in Procedure 4, which serves as an approximation to the standard adaptive experiment pro-cess in Procedure 2. Below we provide additional explanation for Procedure 4.. Concretely, at time 𝑡 , the total batch size grows geometrically, while the number of distinct actions sampled within that batch scales at a cube-root rate, i.e., proportional to 𝑡 1/3. Each selected action is then evaluated using multiple independent reward draws. Under this design, the effective influence of newly arriving data remains controlled at a fixed proportion relative to the existing data, while the allocation distribution across arms remains sufficiently granular. Empirically, for a two-arm Thompson Sampling experiment with horizon 𝑇 = 200 , Bernoulli rewards, and means (𝜇 1, 𝜇 2) = (0.6, 0.4),the approximation error in average reward is below 0.001 .Meanwhile, for each batched action, we store both the aggregated reward sum 𝑅 = Í𝑗 𝑟 𝑗 and the aggregated squared reward sum 𝑅 2 =

Í𝑗 𝑟 2 

> 𝑗

. In standard MAB settings with Bernoulli rewards, storing 

𝑅 alone is sufficient, since 𝑟 2 = 𝑟 . However, our power analysis framework is designed to support more general reward models. For example, when updating a Bayesian model with Gaussian rewards, both the sample mean and variance are required. If rewards were stored only via aggregated sums 𝑅 , the sample variance could not be recovered. Storing 𝑅 2 preserves second-moment information while maintaining a compact, batch-level representation of the data. Combining these three techniques, our simulations achieve orders-of-magnitude speedups compared to the naïve implementation. For example, under the naïve design, a single configuration with 𝑁 =

10 ,000 replications (assuming an additional 𝑀 = 500 null simulations without approximation) and horizon 𝑇 = 200 can take over an hour to run and require roughly 20 GB of memory, whereas our proposed approach completes in under a few seconds with negligible memory usage. A Statistically Reliable Optimization Framework for Bandit Experiments in Scientific Discovery 

## G Procedures 

Procedure 2 Regular Adaptive Experiment Process  

> 1:

Input: Number of arms 𝐾 ; arm reward distributions ®𝜈 ; experi-ment horizon 𝑇 ; algorithm 𝜋  

> 2:

procedure BANDIT (𝐾, ®𝜈, 𝑇 , 𝜋 ) 

> 3:

Initialize empty history 𝐻 0 = ()  

> 4:

for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do  

> 5:

Select arm 𝑎 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 (ℎ𝑡 −1) 

> 6:

Observe reward 𝑟 𝑡 ∼ 𝜈 𝑎 𝑡  

> 7:

Update history ℎ𝑡 = (𝑎 1, 𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 ) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

end procedure  

> 10:

Output: Experiment history ℎ𝑇 = (𝑎 1, 𝑟 1, . . . , 𝑎 𝑇 , 𝑟 𝑇 )

Procedure 3 Approximation Procedure for Adaptive Experimenta-tion Power Analysis  

> 1:

Input: Number of arms 𝐾 ; power analysis prior 𝐷 ®𝜈 ; experiment horizon 𝑇 ; algorithm 𝜋 ; test statistic 𝑆 , type I error constraint 𝛼 0;number of simulation repetitions 𝑀 , number of approximation grid points 𝐵 . 

> 2:

procedure POWER ANALYSIS (𝐾, 𝐷 ®𝜈 , 𝑇 , 𝜋, 𝑆, 𝛼 0, 𝑀, 𝐵 ) 

> 3:

for 𝑚 = 1 to 𝑀 do  

> 4:

Sample ®𝜈 ∼ 𝐷 ®𝜈  

> 5:

Obtain ℎ𝑚,𝑇 by running Bandit (𝐾, ®𝜈,𝑇 , 𝜋 ) 

> 6:

Record cumulative mean reward ¯𝑟 𝑚,𝑡 from ℎ𝑚,𝑡 for 𝑡 =

1, ...,𝑇  

> 7:

Get MLE of the 𝐻 0 parameter ˆ𝜃 𝐻 0,𝑚 using ℎ𝑚,𝑇  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Select 𝐵 equally spaced grid points between min ( ˆ𝜃 𝐻 0,𝑚 ) and 

max ( ˆ𝜃 𝐻 0,𝑚 ): ˆ𝜃 ′

> 𝐻 0,1

, . . . , ˆ𝜃 ′ 

> 𝐻 0,𝐵
> 10:

for 𝑏 = 1 to 𝐵 do  

> 11:

Set 𝜈 0,𝑏 to be the distribution under parameterization 

ˆ𝜃 ′ 

> 𝐻 0,𝑏
> 12:

Perform AlgoInducedCrit (𝐾,𝑇 , 𝜈 0,𝑏 , 𝑆, 𝜋, 𝛼 0, 𝑀 /𝐵 ) to obtain adjusted critical region sequence {𝐶 ′ 

> 𝑏,𝑡

}𝑇 𝑡 =1 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

for 𝑚 = 1 to 𝑀 do  

> 15:

for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do  

> 16:

Get interpolated 𝐶 𝑚,𝑡 from {𝐶 ′ 

> 𝑏,𝑡

}𝐵 𝑏 =1 based on ˆ𝜃 𝐻 0,𝑚  

> 17:

Compute 𝑆 (ℎ𝑚,𝑡 ) and perform hypothesis testing  

> 18:

Record test result 𝑥 𝑚,𝑡 = ⊮𝑆 (ℎ𝑚,𝑡 ) ∈ 𝐶 𝑚,𝑡  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

end procedure  

> 22:

Output: Type II error vector ®𝛽 = ( ˆ𝛽 1, ..., ˆ𝛽 𝑇 ) where ˆ𝛽 𝑡 = 1 −

> 1
> 𝑀

Í𝑀 𝑚 =1 𝑥 𝑚,𝑡 ; cumulative mean reward vector ®𝑟 = (¯𝑟 1, ..., ¯𝑟 𝑇 )

where ¯𝑟 𝑡 = 1

> 𝑀

Í𝑀 𝑚 =1 ¯𝑟 𝑚,𝑡 

Procedure 4 Batched Adaptive Experiment Process  

> 1:

Input: Number of arms 𝐾 ; arm reward distributions ®𝜈 ; experi-ment horizon 𝑇 ; algorithm 𝜋  

> 2:

Initialize compressed history ℎ0 = ()  

> 3:

𝑡 ← 0 

> 4:

while 𝑡 < 𝑇 do  

> 5:

𝑠 𝑡 ← round (1 + 0.05 𝑡 ) ⊲ step size  

> 6:

𝑛 𝑡 ← round (𝑠 1/3 

> 𝑡

) ⊲ number of batched actions  

> 7:

𝑚 ← 𝑠 𝑡 /𝑛 𝑡 ⊲ repetitions per action  

> 8:

for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑛 𝑡 do  

> 9:

Sample action 𝑎 𝑡,𝑖 ∼ 𝜋 (ℎ𝑡 ) 

> 10:

Observe 𝑚 rewards 𝑟 𝑡,𝑖, 1: 𝑚 ∼ 𝜈 𝑎 𝑡,𝑖  

> 11:

Compute compressed entry: 

𝑅 𝑡,𝑖 =

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑟 𝑡,𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑅 2 

> 𝑡,𝑖

=

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑟 2 

> 𝑡,𝑖,𝑗
> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Append history: 

ℎ𝑡 ← ℎ𝑡 ∪  𝑎 𝑡, 1, 𝑅 𝑡, 1, 𝑅 2

> 𝑡, 1

, . . . , 𝑎 𝑡,𝑛 𝑡 , 𝑅 𝑡,𝑛 𝑡 , 𝑅 2

> 𝑡,𝑛 𝑡

 

> 14:

𝑡 ← 𝑡 + 𝑠 𝑡 · 𝑛 𝑡  

> 15:

end while  

> 16:

Output: Compressed history ℎ𝑇 

Procedure 5 Objective Function Optimization Procedure  

> 1:

Input: Number of arms 𝐾 ; power analysis prior 𝐷 ®𝜈 ; maximum acceptable experiment horizon 𝑇 max ; algorithm 𝜋 ; list of 𝑛 al-gorithm parameters ®𝜙 = (𝜙 1, . . . , 𝜙 𝑛 ) to be optimized from; test statistic 𝑆 ; type I and type II error constraints 𝛼 0, 𝛽 0; objective score function 𝐹 with weight 𝑤 ; number of simulation repeti-tions 𝑀 ; number of approximation grid points 𝐵 . 

> 2:

procedure OBJ OPT (𝐾, 𝐷 ®𝜈 , 𝑇 max , 𝜋, ®𝜙, 𝑆, 𝛼 0, 𝛽 0, 𝐹, 𝑤, 𝑀, 𝐵 ) 

> 3:

Initialize admissible parameter set Φ = {}  

> 4:

for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛 do  

> 5:

Run PowerAnalysis (𝐾, 𝐷 ®𝜈 ,𝑇 max , 𝜋 𝜙 𝑖 , 𝑆, 𝛼 0, 𝑀, 𝐵 ) and obtain ®𝛽 𝑖 and ®𝑟 𝑖  

> 6:

if ∃ 𝑡 ∈ [ 𝑇 max ] such that ˆ𝛽 𝑖,𝑡 ≤ 𝛽 0 then  

> 7:

Record 𝑇 𝜙 𝑖 = min { 𝑡 : ˆ𝛽 𝑖,𝑡 ≤ 𝛽 0 } 

> 8:

Record 𝑟 𝜙 𝑖 = 𝑟 𝑖,𝑇 𝜙 𝑖 from ®𝑟 𝑖  

> 9:

Add 𝜙 𝑖 to Φ 

> 10:

else  

> 11:

break  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

𝜙 ∗ ← arg min 𝜙 𝑖 ∈Φ 𝐹 (𝑇 𝜙 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝜙 𝑖 , 𝑤 ) 

> 15:

end procedure  

> 16:

Output: suggested parameter 𝜙 ∗