Title: StepPO: Step-Aligned Policy Optimization for Agentic Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18401v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:42:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
StepPO: Step-Aligned Policy Optimization for Agentic Reinforcement Learning 

## Daoyu Wang 1, Qingchuan Li 1, Mingyue Cheng 1§, Jie Ouyang 1, Shuo Yu 1,Qi Liu 1, Enhong Chen 1

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China 

## Abstract 

General agents have given rise to phenomenal applications such as OpenClaw and Claude Code. As these agent systems (a.k.a. Harnesses) strive for bolder goals, they demand increasingly stronger agentic capabilities from foundation Large Language Models (LLMs). Agentic Reinforcement Learning (RL) is emerging as a central post-training paradigm for empowering LLMs with these capabilities and is playing an increasingly pivotal role in agent training. Unlike single-turn token-level alignment or reasoning enhancement, as in RLHF and RLVR, Agentic RL targets multi-turn interactive settings, where the goal is to optimize core agentic capabilities such as decision making and tool use while addressing new challenges including delayed and sparse rewards, as well as long and variable context. As a result, the token-centric modeling and optimization paradigm inherited from traditional LLM RL is becoming increasingly inadequate for capturing real LLM agent behavior. In this paper, we present StepPO as a position on step-level Agentic RL. We argue that the conventional token-level Markov Decision Process (MDP) should be advanced to a step-level MDP formulation, and that the step, rather than the token, should be regarded as the proper action representation for LLM agents. We then propose step-level credit assignment as the natural optimization counterpart of this formulation, thereby aligning policy optimization and reward propagation with the granularity of agent decisions. Finally, we discuss the key systems designs required to realize step-level Agentic RL in practice and preliminary experiments provide initial evidence for the effectiveness of this perspective. We hope that the step-aligned, step-level paradigm embodied in StepPO offers the Agentic RL community a useful lens for understanding agent behavior and helps advance LLMs toward stronger general-agent capabilities.     

> Date: April 20, 2026
> Correspondence: mycheng@ustc.edu.cn
> Agent-R1: https://github.com/AgentR1/Agent-R1
> Claw-R1: https://github.com/AgentR1/Claw-R1

## 1 Introduction 

General agents built on Large Language Models (LLMs) [ 1, 6] have already given rise to phenomenal applications [ 8 ] such as OpenClaw and Claude Code [ 5, 19 ]. As these agent systems strive for bolder goals, they place increasing demands on the underlying models to support agentic capabilities such as decision making, planning, tool use [ 23 , 37 ], environment interaction [ 29 , 36 ], and long-horizon task execution [ 8, 16 , 31 , 38 ]. 1               

> arXiv:2604.18401v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026 Table 1 Representative methods differ in how they place the MDP formulation and credit-assignment units, revealing a granularity mismatch in Agentic RL. StepPO reduces this mismatch by aligning both with the interaction step. Method MDP formulation granularity Credit assignment granularity PPO [20] Token-level Token-level Reinforce++ [11] Token-level Token-level GRPO [26] Token-level Trajectory-level RLOO [4] Token-level Trajectory-level LightningRL [17] Step-level Trajectory-level
> StepPO Step-level Step-level

Once optimization targets this regime, the problem is no longer only how to score a final answer, but also how to model the decision process that produces sustained behavior across many interaction rounds. This is why Agentic Reinforcement Learning (RL) is becoming a central post-training paradigm for LLM agents [ 7, 34 , 38 ]. Earlier recipes such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [ 20 ] and Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) [ 26 ] were largely developed around single responses or short reasoning traces. By contrast, Agentic RL targets multi-turn interaction with tools and environments, where the training objective must directly shape decision making, action selection, and adaptation under feedback. In this setting, delayed and sparse rewards, long-horizon interaction, and long, variable context all become first-class challenges, and the token-centric paradigm inherited from conventional LLM RL becomes increasingly inadequate for capturing real agent behavior. In this paper, we present StepPO , as a perspective on Agentic RL built around step-level agent behavior. Our central claim begins with the formal abstraction of the decision process. The conventional token-level Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation remains natural for autoregressive language modeling [ 20 ], but individual tokens are too fine-grained to serve as the right abstraction for multi-turn decision making, tool coordination, and environment-mediated state transitions. We therefore argue that Agentic RL should move from token-level MDP to step-level MDP, where each complete interaction round, rather than each token, forms the proper transition unit and the step becomes the right action representation for LLM agents. This shift in MDP formulation also requires a corresponding shift in trajectory representation and optimization. Multi-turn agents have often been recorded as growing messages and later reconstructed as text for training [ 14 ]. That representation is convenient, but it hides a serious inconsistency: rollout happens in token space [ 15 , 25 ], whereas training may depend on a second tokenization pass over reconstructed text [ 28 , 39 ]. Because the mapping from tokens to text and back to tokens is not reversible in general, such pipelines can suffer from retokenization drift, breaking rollout-training consistency and destabilizing step-aligned learning [ 7, 13 ]. Once the interaction step becomes the basic unit of behavior, the natural optimization counterpart should also align with that unit. In conventional Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 24 ], credit is typically propagated at token granularity, whereas in Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) style training [ 26 , 40 ], the signal is more naturally attached at trajectory granularity. Token-level credit is often too local and noisy, while trajectory-level credit is often too coarse to identify the contribution of intermediate decisions [ 21 , 32 ]. StepPO emphasizes step-aligned policy optimization through step-level credit assignment, aligning reward propagation with the same interaction unit used for decision making. The same transition extends beyond modeling and optimization to the training system itself. Step-level Agentic RL must support heterogeneous agents, preserve step-native data, manage trajectories and rewards across a centralized data layer, reduce redundant computation in long contexts, and coordinate asynchronous generation and training [ 10 , 17 ]. This systems perspective also motivates our research path from Agent-R1 to Claw-R1, where the former foregrounds training abstraction and token-space consistency [ 2, 7], while the latter foregrounds gateway-centered data management and heterogeneous-agent support [ 3 , 18 ]. To complement this position with concrete evidence, we provide HotpotQA [ 35 ] experiments showing that StepPO consistently outperforms token-level PPO in a multi-step agent setting. Table 1 summarizes the perspective advanced in this paper. Our position is that Agentic RL is undergoing a 2coordinated shift from token-level to step-level formulation across MDP design, trajectory representation, credit assignment, and systems support, and that StepPO offers a step-aligned optimization lens for this shift. The rest of the paper develops this view in order: Section 2 situates StepPO in prior work, Section 3 argues for step-level MDP, Section 4 revisits trajectory representation, Section 5 discusses step-level credit assignment, Section 6 turns to training systems, Section 7 traces the path from Agent-R1 to Claw-R1, Section 8 presents preliminary empirical evidence, and Section 9 concludes with broader implications for step-level Agentic RL. 

## 2 Related Work 

This section situates StepPO in the broader evolution of the field. We first review reinforcement learning for LLMs, then trace how Agentic RL algorithms and training frameworks gradually moved from token-level generation toward interaction-aware optimization and systems design. This progression helps clarify both what StepPO inherits from prior work and where it departs from earlier formulations. 

2.1 Reinforcement Learning for Large Language Model 

Modern reinforcement learning for LLMs begins with single-turn post-training recipes such as RLHF [ 20 ], PPO [ 24 ], and RLVR or group-based variants such as GRPO [ 26 ]. In these settings, token-level optimization is a natural abstraction because the policy is trained to produce one response conditioned on one prompt, with little or no intermediate environment structure. What these approaches share is not a single optimizer but a common assumption: the semantically meaningful action remains closely aligned with token generation. That assumption becomes increasingly strained once the target changes from single-turn response generation to long-horizon agent interaction. In multi-turn settings, the policy no longer merely continues a sequence; it completes one interaction round, triggers environment changes, and conditions on new observations. This shift is what makes step-level Agentic RL a distinct problem rather than a straightforward extension of conventional LLM post-training. 

2.2 Agentic RL Algorithms 

The algorithmic evolution of Agentic RL has moved progressively from adapting RL to agent settings toward redefining the interaction unit itself. Early forward-looking work such as Search-R1 [ 14 ] and RAGEN [ 34 ] already exposed the difficulty of training multi-turn agents under sparse reward, long horizons, and environment feedback. More recent methods made this shift explicit in the optimizer: Tree Search for LLM Agent Reinforcement Learning proposes Tree-GRPO, which combines tree search with grouped relative policy optimization so that branching agent trajectories can receive more informative training signals [ 12 ]; PaperScout defines Proximal Sequence Policy Optimization over complete interaction responses rather than isolated tokens [ 21 ]; GiGPO introduces a finer-grained group-based mechanism for agent credit assignment [ 9]; Agent Lightning formulates arbitrary agent execution traces as MDP transitions and emphasizes transition-level decomposition [ 17 ]; and the broader ecosystem represented by Let It Flow likewise shifts attention from raw token streams to semantically meaningful interaction chunks [ 33 ]. Taken together, these works show a clear industry trend: once the optimization target becomes real agent behavior, the learning problem must be organized around interaction-aware decisions rather than token-level continuation alone. 

2.3 Agentic RL Training Frameworks 

In parallel with algorithmic work, Agentic RL training frameworks have become a research topic in their own right. A useful starting point is veRL, whose underlying HybridFlow system frames RLHF as a flexible dataflow problem and provides an efficient general-purpose RL foundation for LLM post-training [ 27 ]. As agent workloads became more complex, the community moved beyond generic RLHF infrastructure toward agent-oriented frameworks: slime emphasizes high-performance RL scaling with flexible generation workflows [30 ], rLLM pushes low-intrusion integration across existing agent frameworks [ 22 ], Agent Lightning argues for a clean decoupling between agent execution and RL training [ 17 ], and AReaL develops a fully asynchronous RL system that explicitly manages generation-training decoupling and data staleness [ 10 ]. Industrial systems such as MiniMax Forge further elevate middleware abstraction, asynchronous scheduling, and prefix-aware efficiency to first-class design principles [ 18 ]. Along this trajectory, our own work occupies two complementary 3(a) Token -level MDP   

> Policy Model
> Prompts 𝐴 1𝐴 2
> 𝑆 1
> 𝑆 2
> 𝑆 𝑛 +1
> Reward

(b) Step -level MDP      

> Policy Model
> Action 1 Observation 1 State 1 Reward 1
> State 2 Action 2 Observation 2 Reward 2
> 𝐴 𝑛

…   

> State n Action n Observation n Reward n

…

> Step 1
> Step 2
> Step n
> Token 1
> Token 2
> Token n
> …

…Figure 1 Comparison between token-level MDP formulation and step-level MDP formulation. The key shift is that the atomic action changes from a single token to a complete agent-environment interaction step. 

positions: Agent-R1 advances the training abstraction through token-space consistency and step-level MDP foundations [ 2, 7], while Claw-R1 advances the data and systems abstraction through gateway-centered ingestion, datapool management, and heterogeneous-agent support [3]. 

## 3 From Token-Level MDP to Step-Level MDP 

This section focuses on the modeling layer of the problem. We begin with the standard token-level MDP formulation, explain why it is natural for autoregressive language modeling, and then show why long-horizon agents require a step-level MDP instead. This reformulation provides the conceptual basis for the trajectory representation and credit-assignment discussions that follow. 

3.1 Token-Level Formulation 

Token-level MDP formulation is a natural extension of autoregressive language modeling. Given prompt x

and response y = ( y1, . . . , y L), the policy factorizes as: 

πθ (y | x) = 

> L

Y

> i=1

πθ (yi | x, y <i ).

This factorization induces a token-level decision process almost for free: at token position i, the state and action can be written as: 

stok  

> i

= ( x, y <i ), atok  

> i

= yi,

and the transition is simply: 

stok  

> i+1

= ( x, y ≤i).

Such a formulation aligns cleanly with policy-gradient training and remains effective for single-turn alignment or reasoning tasks in which the environment is static or weakly coupled to generations. 

3.2 Step-Level Reformulation 

The difficulty is that multi-turn agents do not interact with the world only through token append operations. They call tools, receive observations, update working memory, revise context, branch on execution outcomes, and sometimes perform explicit context management between rounds. In such settings, the semantically meaningful transition is no longer “emit one more token,” but rather “complete one interaction step and receive new environment feedback.” When optimization continues to operate only at token granularity, the resulting state definition becomes unnecessarily fragile: high-level decisions are fragmented across many low-level actions, and environment-mediated transitions are obscured by a long flat token trace. 4This motivates step-level MDP formulation. Let st denote the observation available at interaction step t,let at denote the complete interaction action chosen at that step, and let the environment return reward rt

together with the next observation st+1 . A trajectory is then written as: 

τ = {(st, a t, r t, s t+1 )}T −1 

> t=0

,

with objective: 

J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

"T −1X

> t=0

γtrt

#

.

Here at is not a single token. It may internally contain a token sequence, a structured tool call, or a mixed response that combines reasoning and external actions. What changes is the unit at which the MDP is defined: the RL transition is now one interaction step rather than one appended token. The move to step-level MDP does not imply that token information is discarded. On the contrary, token-space consistency remains important for stable optimization inside each action. What changes is the unit at which the decision process is defined. Step-level formulation better reflects the causal structure of agent behavior: a step begins with an observation, produces an action, triggers an external transition, and only then exposes the next observation. This is closer to how agents actually operate in search, coding, and tool-use settings. Step-level MDP also clarifies which parts of the loop belong to the policy and which belong to the environment. The policy is responsible for choosing at conditioned on st. The environment is responsible for turning that interaction action into st+1 , possibly through tool execution, response parsing, external feedback, or context rewriting. This separation is difficult to maintain in a pure token-append abstraction, but it becomes explicit once the interaction round is treated as the transition unit. PaperScout reaches a closely related conclusion in its sequence-level formulation for paper-search agents [ 21 ]; our claim is that the same structural shift applies more broadly across Agentic RL. However, establishing this step-level MDP formulation mathematically is only half the battle. To actually optimize a policy over these (st, a t, r t, s t+1 ) transitions, the underlying training system must record and replay the interaction history in a way that strictly honors these step boundaries. This presents a non-trivial data-structure challenge. If the empirical trajectory representation misaligns with this theoretical MDP, the optimization will collapse. We address this misalignment next by examining trajectory representation. 

## 4 Trajectory Representation 

Having established the necessity of a step-level MDP, we now turn to the data layer that supports it. This section asks how the interaction history should be stored and replayed so that the empirical training signal remains faithful to the theoretical transition structure. We therefore analyze the evolution of trajectory representation from text-space messages to flat token-space storage and finally to structured step-level transitions. 

4.1 Text-Space Representation 

In multi-turn agent systems, one common approach is a Text-Space Representation , where the interaction history is stored as a sequence of messages . This representation is simple and interoperable with chat APIs, but it is not faithful to the actual training signal when rollouts are generated token by token. If a trajectory is first decoded into text and then tokenized again for optimization, the resulting token sequence may differ from the one that originally produced the rollout. This retokenization drift is especially harmful when masks, log-probabilities, or reward annotations are tied to exact token boundaries. In practice, such drift breaks the equivalence between inference-time behavior and training-time replay. Let z denote the original rollout token sequence, let Detok (z) be its decoded text form, and let Tok (·) denote the tokenizer used during replay. In general: 

Tok(Detok( z)) ̸ = z, 

5(a) Text -Space Representation                            

> (b) Flat Token -Space Representation
> (c) Structured Step -level Representation
> T1T2T𝑛 …
> User 2 Assistant 2 Tool 2 …
> Tool 1 Result
> LLM response tokens
> Assistant 1
> Text
> T1’T2’T𝑛 ’…
> Retokenized tokens
> Detokenize Tokenize
> Prompt
> Tokens
> Response
> Tokens
> Tool Call
> Tokens
> Tool Result
> Tokens
> Response
> Tokens
> Tool Call
> Tokens
> …
> Tool Parsing
> Retokenization Drift !
> Mask Mask Train Train Train Train
> User 1 Assistant 1 Tool 1 Action 1 Reward 1 Step 1 State 1
> Action 2 Reward 2 State 2
> Action n Reward n State n
> Step 2
> Step n
> …
> …
> …
> …
> State i
> Where is environment observation?
> Action iObservation i
> State i+ 1 Concatenation, Compression or Expansion

Figure 2 The evolution of trajectory representation from message-based traces to token-space-consistent records and step-based sequences. This figure provides background and concept setup rather than the main technical claim. 

because the map from tokens to text and back to tokens is not reversible under common subword tokenizers. Once this mismatch occurs, masks and log-probabilities that were attached to the original rollout can no longer be aligned reliably with replay-time tokens. 

4.2 Flat Token-Space Representation 

To resolve the drift issue, frameworks adopt a Flat Token-Space Representation , where prompts and responses are stored directly as integer token IDs. By bypassing the text-decoding step during training, this method ensures mathematical equivalence between the rollout and replay. However, this approach treats a multi-turn trajectory as a monolithic, flat sequence . This “append-only” view leads to rigidity in context management, as the structure does not natively support operations like reconstruction or truncation, which would break the integrity of the original token stream. Furthermore, it introduces a training-deployment mismatch: while training enforces strict token-level consistency, most production environments rely on standard Chat APIs. This dependence on text-based protocols makes the fine-grained token control used during training difficult to sustain during inference, creating a risk of misalignment. 

4.3 Structured Step-Level Representation 

The most robust representation for modern Agentic RL is the Structured Step-Level Representation . This approach moves beyond the monolithic view by decomposing a trajectory into multiple discrete transitions. In this formulation, each interaction step t is stored as a self-contained unit: 

• State ( st): The specific prompt or observation context presented to the policy at that step. 

• Action ( at): The complete token sequence generated by the policy as a response or tool call. 

• Reward ( rt): The scalar feedback or verifiable score associated with that specific action. Crucially, this representation assumes that any environment feedback is absorbed into the construction of the subsequent state st+1 , rather than being stored as an unstructured artifact within the current step. By treating a trajectory as a collection of independent, structured (st, a t, r t) units, the system can manage context with surgical precision—truncating, summarizing, or rewriting specific states without affecting the token-level consistency of other steps. This structured approach directly supports the decoupled, asynchronous systems we discuss in Section 6, enabling efficient prefix caching and turn-by-turn parallelization. 6x0 y01  y02  y0m                                    

> …
> y11 y12 y1n
> …
> …o01 o0a yn1 yn2 ynt
> ……
> o11 o1b
> …
> rn
> Vnt
> Ant
> 0
> Vn2
> An2
> 0
> Vn1
> An1
> r1r1
> V1n
> A1n
> 0
> V12
> A12
> 0
> V11
> A11
> on1 onc
> …
> r0r0
> V0m
> A0m
> 0
> V02
> A02
> 0
> V01
> A01
> 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾 𝛾
> x0y01 y02 y0m
> …y11 y12 y1n …o01 o0a yn1 yn2 ynt
> …
> …
> o11 o1b
> …on1 onc
> …
> r0
> V0
> A0
> 𝛾 𝛾
> r1
> V1
> A1
> rn
> Vn
> An
> …
> (a) Token -level
> Credit Assignment
> (b) Step -level
> Credit Assignment
> rn
> r0r1rn
> x: prompt tokens
> y: response tokens
> o: observation tokens
> Step 1 Step 2 Step n
> Rewards
> Values
> Advantages
> Rewards
> Values
> Advantages

Figure 3 Comparison of token-level, trajectory-level, and step-level credit assignment. The main change is not how actions are tokenized, but where delayed rewards are attributed and propagated. 

## 5 From Token/Trajectory-Level to Step-Level Credit Assignment 

This section moves from modeling and data representation to optimization. Once the decision process is defined at the step level and the trajectory is stored in a step-native form, reward propagation must also align with the same interaction unit. We therefore first examine the mismatch created by token-level or trajectory-level credit assignment, and then derive the step-level objective used by StepPO. 

5.1 Granularity Mismatch 

Once the MDP is defined at the step level, credit assignment must follow the same granularity. Otherwise, the optimization problem remains mismatched even if the trajectory is represented and modeled more faithfully. This is where many existing approaches still encounter difficulty. In the conventional PPO setting [ 24 ], credit is typically propagated at token granularity. In GRPO-style training [ 26 ], the signal is more naturally attached at trajectory granularity through rollout-level comparison. Against that background, token-level credit assignment propagates reward through individual generated tokens; trajectory-level credit assignment attaches one scalar signal to an entire rollout or group of rollouts; and step-level credit assignment attributes return to the interaction unit that actually mediates the agent’s decisions. Trajectory-level credit assignment is the coarsest extreme. A typical form is 

Atraj (τ ) = R(τ ) − b, 

where the whole trajectory receives one scalar advantage against some baseline b. This is stable and simple, but once a rollout contains many interaction rounds, it becomes too coarse to separate productive intermediate decisions from harmful ones. Token-level credit assignment lies at the other extreme. It is appealing because it reuses the standard machinery of language-model RL, yet in long-horizon agents it is often too fine. The decisive event may be the choice to search, delegate, summarize context, or call a tool, while the resulting reward arrives only after later steps unfold. In practice, the step action itself is still generated token by token. If we write 

at = ( yt, 1, . . . , y t,L t ),

7then the step-level importance ratio can be expressed as: 

wt(θ) = πθ (at | st)

πθold (at | st) =

> Lt

Y

> i=1

πθ (yt,i | st, y t,<i )

πθold (yt,i | st, y t,<i ) .

This equality is important. It shows that token factorization need not be abandoned. What must change is the unit that receives credit. If delayed reward is still attributed directly at the token level, the learning signal is diluted across many local decisions that are not themselves the true interaction unit. 

5.2 Step-Level Objective 

Step-level credit assignment offers a middle ground that matches the structure of step-level MDP. Let V (st)

be the value of step state st. The one-step temporal-difference residual can be defined as: 

δt = rt + γV (st+1 ) − V (st),

and the step-level Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) can be written as: 

At = 

> T−t−1

X

> l=0

(γλ )lδt+l.

This formulation preserves the familiar bias-variance trade-off of GAE while shifting the propagation unit from tokens to interaction steps. The advantage now measures whether a step-level decision improved the future course of the trajectory, rather than whether individual surface tokens happened to precede reward. We refer to PPO instantiated with this step-level credit design as StepPO .The corresponding actor objective should be defined at the same granularity. A clipped step-level surrogate can be written as: 

Lactor (θ) = E [min ( wt(θ)At, clip( wt(θ), 1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh )At)] .

The old and new paradigms differ precisely here. In the old paradigm, the policy ratio is decomposed over tokens and the reward signal is often attached either per token or per trajectory. In the new paradigm, the policy can still factor internally over tokens, but the credit propagation unit is the step. The mismatch is therefore not about whether tokenization exists inside the model. It is about whether the optimizer assigns responsibility at the same semantic level as the MDP transition. This distinction matters especially under delayed reward. In many agent tasks, the reward is concentrated near the end of an episode, but the decisive causes lie much earlier: a correct decomposition, a well-timed retrieval call, or a context-management action that prevents later distraction. Step-level GAE allows those earlier interaction choices to receive consistent credit without forcing all responsibility onto final tokens or distributing one undifferentiated signal across the entire episode. Recent work has begun to explore adjacent directions. PaperScout makes the sequence-level mismatch explicit and writes a clipped interaction-level objective whose importance ratio is computed over complete responses rather than isolated tokens [ 21 ]. Agent Lightning formulates agent execution as an MDP and introduces a decoupled training architecture, but its credit module is organized around transition decomposition rather than a fully step-native advantage view [ 17 ]. GiGPO introduces a group-based mechanism for finer-grained agent credit assignment while preserving critic-free optimization [ 9]. The broader ALE line represented by Let It Flow also emphasizes semantically meaningful interaction chunks over individual tokens [ 33 ]. Our position is that these efforts all point to the same structural lesson: once the decision process is step-level, the reward propagation mechanism should be step-level as well. 

## 6 Training Systems for Step-Level Agentic RL 

This section explains how StepPO is supported at the systems level. Once the learning unit becomes an interaction step, the training framework must be reorganized around step-native data, heterogeneous-agent ingestion, computational efficiency, and asynchronous execution. We discuss the problem in four parts: data representation, data management, efficiency optimization, and asynchronous training design. 8✓ Step -Native Data Representation  ✓ Data Management 

✓ Asynchronous Training  ✓ Computational Efficiency Optimization 

Step -Native Data 

prompt ids  response ids  reward 

metadata     

> Build -in Agent
> Customized Agent
> Online Service Gateway
> Data Pool
> Step 1
> Step 2

Training Engine  Rollout Engine 

Data Pool  Gateway               

> Weight Asynchronous
> rollout service
> push data
> fetch data
> Steps with public prefix
> seq 1
> seq 1
> seq 1
> seq 2
> seq 2
> seq 3
> seq 4
> seq 1
> seq 2
> seq 3
> seq 4
> Prefix tree merging Figure 4

A conceptual view of the systems substrate for step-level Agentic RL, including step-native data representation, data management through gateway and datapool abstractions, computational efficiency optimization through shared-prefix reuse, and asynchronous training design. 

6.1 Step-Native Data Representation 

The first requirement is a step-native data representation. In StepPO, training data cannot be stored as a monolithic text sample or as a flat token stream with post hoc annotations, because the optimizer needs the boundary of each interaction step. The natural record is therefore a step-native unit containing prompt ids, response ids, reward, and metadata, organized into a trajectory whose element matches the step-level MDP transition. This design preserves token-space consistency inside each action while making the step itself the stable unit for value estimation, advantage computation, and replay. In other words, the representation must preserve both the token realization of the action and the semantic boundary of agent interaction. 

6.2 Data Management 

The second requirement is data management for an open agent ecosystem. Once built-in agents, customized agents, and online services all become potential rollout sources, the training system cannot depend on a single internal scaffold. A gateway-style interface provides the right abstraction: it translates heterogeneous agent interactions into a common stream of step-native traces, while a datapool organizes those traces together with reward, report, policy-version, and curation metadata. This makes both white-box and black-box agents valid data sources and turns data management into the central coordination layer between collection and optimization. Claw-R1 is a concrete example of this direction, where Gateway and DataPool are treated as first-class middleware rather than auxiliary engineering [3]. 

6.3 Computational Efficiency Optimization 

The third requirement is computational efficiency over long trajectories. Agent rollouts often contain large shared prefixes across steps, branches, or closely related contexts, so naively replaying every sequence independently wastes substantial compute. For StepPO, efficiency optimization is therefore not an afterthought but part of the training design itself. Once trajectories are stored in a step-native form, the system can reason about shared-prefix reuse and prefix-tree merging directly at the interaction level, reducing redundant forward passes while preserving the correct optimization unit. This is especially important for long-context, multi-turn agent training, where efficiency bottlenecks can otherwise dominate the entire RL loop. 

6.4 Asynchronous Training Design 

The final requirement is asynchronous training design. Because agent rollouts differ dramatically in latency, a strictly synchronous loop wastes resources by forcing training to wait for the slowest trajectories. StepPO 9instead benefits from a decoupled design in which rollout engines, training engines, gateways, and datapools interact asynchronously. The challenge is to keep utilization high without letting policy freshness degrade uncontrollably, so asynchronous collection must be paired with controlled weight refresh and provenance-aware data serving. This design allows the system to sustain throughput while keeping the effective optimization process close enough to on-policy training to remain stable. In this sense, asynchronous training is not merely a systems optimization; it is part of what makes step-level Agentic RL practically trainable. 

## 7 A Research Path: From Agent-R1 to Claw-R1 

This section turns from general arguments to our own research trajectory. Rather than restating the full theory, we use Agent-R1 and Claw-R1 to show how the training abstraction and the data-systems abstraction gradually converged toward the StepPO view. The first subsection focuses on the training-side evolution, and the second focuses on the data-management and infrastructure-side evolution. 

7.1 Agent-R1 from the Training Perspective 

The research path from Agent-R1 to Claw-R1 helps illustrate how the StepPO view emerged in practice. The first problem encountered was not yet step-level credit assignment, but rollout-training inconsistency. Early multi-turn pipelines often stored trajectories as messages , which made replay convenient but introduced retokenization drift once the same interaction had to be reconstructed in token space for optimization. Agent-R1 addressed this failure mode by emphasizing token-space consistency and end-to-end RL for agent trajectories [ 2, 7]. From the training perspective, this was crucial: if rollout tokens cannot be faithfully replayed at training time, advantage estimation and policy updates are built on a corrupted view of actual behavior. As the framework evolved, the next bottleneck became clearer. Token-level consistency by itself did not fully solve the optimization problem for long-horizon agents. The new Agent-R1 architecture explicitly highlights step-level MDP as its foundation and treats each interaction step as a proper RL transition [ 2]. From a training standpoint, this shift matters because the decisive unit for optimization is no longer one token but one interaction round. StepPO grows naturally from this observation: once the interaction step becomes the MDP transition, PPO itself should be reformulated so that value estimation, advantage propagation, and policy optimization are also aligned with that step. 

7.2 Claw-R1 from the Data-Management Perspective 

Claw-R1 emerges from a complementary pressure: the need to manage data from open and diverse agents [ 3]. Its emphasis is not primarily on proposing another training algorithm, but on providing the data foundation for Agentic RL. The core abstraction is a middleware layer built from a gateway and a datapool. The gateway standardizes how requests and responses flow between agents and models. The datapool asynchronously collects steps, rewards, reports, policy-version metadata, and curation signals. In this view, both white-box and black-box agents are valid data sources. What matters is not whether the agent exposes its internals, but whether the interaction can be captured, evaluated, and served to downstream optimization. This data-centric view is what allows StepPO to move from a modeling idea to a scalable training pipeline. This distinction also clarifies the division of labor between the two systems. Agent-R1 is most naturally discussed from the training side: it focuses on trajectory replay consistency, agent-environment loops, and the gradual transition from token-level training abstractions toward step-level reinforcement learning (RL). Claw-R1 is most naturally discussed from the data-management side: it focuses on collection, evaluation, curation, backend conversion, and scalable serving across heterogeneous agents. The two projects therefore do not merely form a sequence of versions. Together they expose a broader lesson that the algorithmic transition embodied by StepPO must be accompanied by a systems transition toward decoupled data and training infrastructure, a conclusion that is also echoed by industrial systems such as MiniMax Forge [18]. 10 0.64         

> 0.57
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200

## Step  

> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> Score
> StepPO
> PPO Figure 5 Training curves on HotpotQA comparing StepPO with token-level PPO in a multi-step Agentic RL setting. StepPO stays above the token-level baseline across most of training, supporting the claim that step-level optimization is better aligned with long-horizon agent behavior.

## 8 Experiments 

This section provides empirical evidence for the central claim of the paper. We compare StepPO with token-level PPO on HotpotQA to test whether step-level optimization is better aligned with multi-step agent behavior. The first subsection describes the experimental setup, and the second reports the main results. 

8.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate StepPO on HotpotQA in a multi-step Agentic RL setting and compare it directly against token-level PPO in a controlled setup where both methods share the same model, data, rollout pipeline, and optimization configuration and differ only in the algorithm. StepPO operates at the interaction-step level, whereas the baseline applies token-level PPO. All experiments use Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct as the base model. To better reflect the step-wise interaction structure, we adopt a per-step generation scheme rather than flattening multi-turn trajectories into a single sequence: each interaction step reconstructs the prompt and produces one response. We use sufficiently large budgets, 10,240 for the prompt and 1,024 for the response, to reduce truncation of structured outputs such as tool calls and to stay consistent with the step-level MDP formulation. We report training curves under γ = 0 .99 and λ = 1 .0. For fair evaluation, we adopt a shared-step view of the trajectories using an inner-join protocol, so that both methods are evaluated on aligned interaction steps rather than mismatched rollout fragments. 

8.2 Experimental Results 

The result is clear: StepPO consistently outperforms token-level PPO throughout training. Although both methods improve over time, the step-level curve remains above the token-level baseline for most of the run, reaches a noticeably higher peak, and maintains a stronger plateau during the middle and later stages of training. This trend suggests that when the task requires multi-step evidence collection and reasoning, aligning PPO with the interaction step provides a more effective learning signal than distributing credit only at token granularity. In other words, the HotpotQA experiment offers empirical support for the central claim of this 11 paper: in Agentic RL, step-level optimization is better matched to the structure of long-horizon agent behavior than token-level PPO. 

## 9 Discussion and Conclusion 

StepPO is motivated by a simple but consequential claim: once Agentic RL is organized around multi-step interaction, the optimization unit, the data representation, and the training system should all be aligned with that same interaction structure. This is why the paper moves in the order of MDP, trajectory representation, credit assignment, and systems. Step-level MDP without step-native replay still suffers from retokenization and context-construction mismatch; step-level MDP without step-level credit assignment still pushes reward through the wrong unit; and step-level optimization without data management, efficiency optimization, and asynchronous training remains difficult to scale in realistic agent settings. At the same time, StepPO does not solve every open problem in Agentic RL. Reward design, off-policy drift under asynchronous execution, and the treatment of increasingly heterogeneous agents remain important challenges. This paper presents StepPO as a concrete step-level PPO framework for Agentic RL. Our central argument is that long-horizon agent optimization requires a coordinated transition from token-level MDP to step-level MDP, from token-/trajectory-level to step-level credit assignment, and from tightly coupled synchronous pipelines to decoupled, asynchronous, and scalable systems. Through the progression from Agent-R1 to Claw-R1 and the HotpotQA experiment comparing StepPO against token-level PPO, we show that step-level optimization is not only a preference but also a practical direction for training modern LLM agents. 

## References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. [2] AgentR1. Agent-r1 github repository. https://github.com/AgentR1/Agent-R1 , 2026. [3] AgentR1. Claw-r1 github repository. https://github.com/AgentR1/Claw-R1 , 2026. [4] Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier Pietquin, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce-style optimization for learning from human feedback in llms. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12248–12267, 2024. [5] Anthropic. Claude code: Build, debug, and ship from your terminal. https://claude.ai/product/claude-code ,2025. [6] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023. [7] Mingyue Cheng, Jie Ouyang, Shuo Yu, Ruiran Yan, Yucong Luo, Zirui Liu, Daoyu Wang, Qi Liu, and Enhong Chen. Agent-r1: Training powerful LLM agents with end-to-end reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14460, 2025. [8] Mingyue Cheng, Daoyu Wang, Shuo Yu, Qingchuan Li, Jie Ouyang, Yucong Luo, Yiju Zhang, Qi Liu, and Enhong Chen. A comprehensive survey of the llm-based agent: The contextual cognition perspective. 2026. [9] Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. Group-in-group policy optimization for LLM agent training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10978, 2025. [10] Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Xujie Shen, Chen Zhu, Zhiyu Mei, Chuyi He, Shusheng Xu, Guo Wei, Jun Mei, Jiashu Wang, et al. AReaL: A large-scale asynchronous reinforcement learning system for language reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24298, 2025. [11] Jian Hu. Reinforce++: A simple and efficient approach for aligning large language models. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2501, 2025. [12] Yuxiang Ji, Ziyu Ma, Yong Wang, Guanhua Chen, Xiangxiang Chu, and Liaoni Wu. Tree search for LLM agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21240, 2025. 

12 [13] Dongfu Jiang, Yi Lu, Zhuofeng Li, Zhiheng Lyu, Ping Nie, Haozhe Wang, Alex Su, Hui Chen, Kai Zou, Chao Du, et al. VerlTool: Towards holistic agentic reinforcement learning with tool use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01055, 2025. [14] Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. Search-R1: Training LLMs to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025. [15] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2023. [16] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688, 2023. [17] Xufang Luo, Yuge Zhang, Zhiyuan He, Zilong Wang, Siyun Zhao, Dongsheng Li, Luna K. Qiu, and Yuqing Yang. Agent lightning: Train ANY AI agents with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03680, 2025. [18] MiniMax. Forge: Scalable agent rl framework and algorithm. https://www.minimax.io/news/ forge-scalable-agent-rl-framework-and-algorithm , 2026. [19] openclaw. openclaw: Your own personal ai assistant. any os. any platform. the lobster way. https://github. com/openclaw/openclaw , 2024. [20] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. [21] Tingyue Pan, Jie Ouyang, Mingyue Cheng, Qingchuan Li, Zirui Liu, Daoyu Wang, Mingfan Pan, Shuo Yu, and Qi Liu. Paperscout: An autonomous agent for academic paper search with process-aware sequence-level policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10029, 2026. [22] rLLM. rllm documentation. https://docs.rllm-project.com/ , 2026. [23] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:68539–68551, 2023. [24] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. [25] SGLang Team. Sglang: Efficient structured generation for large language models. https://github.com/ sgl-project/sglang , 2024. [26] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y.K. Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024. [27] Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient RLHF framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3689031.3696075. [28] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053, 2019. [29] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020. [30] The slime Team. slime: An SGLang-native post-training framework for RL scaling. https://lmsys.org/blog/ 2025-07-09-slime/ , 2025. [31] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anand-kumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023. 

13 [32] Tianyi Wang, Yixia Li, Long Li, Yibiao Chen, Shaohan Huang, Yun Chen, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Guanhua Chen. Sppo: Sequence-level ppo for long-horizon reasoning tasks, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.08865 .[33] Weixun Wang, XiaoXiao Xu, Wanhe An, Fangwen Dai, Wei Gao, Yancheng He, Ju Huang, Qiang Ji, Hanqi Jin, Xiaoyang Li, et al. Let it flow: Agentic crafting on rock and roll, building the rome model within an open agentic learning ecosystem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24873, 2025. [34] Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin, Kefan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, et al. RAGEN: Understanding self-evolution in LLM agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20073, 2025. [35] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 2369–2380, 2018. [36] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022. [37] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations, 2022. [38] Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, et al. The landscape of agentic reinforcement learning for LLMs: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02547, 2025. [39] Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, et al. Pytorch fsdp: experiences on scaling fully sharded data parallel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11277, 2023. [40] Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Kai Dang, Yuqiong Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, et al. Group sequence policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18071, 2025. 

14