Title: Nemobot Games: Crafting Strategic AI Gaming Agents for Interactive Learning with Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21896v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 01:12:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Nemobot Games: Crafting Strategic AI Gaming Agents for Interactive Learning with Large Language Models 

Chee Wei Tan, Yuchen Wang, Shangxin Guo 

Abstract —This paper introduces a new paradigm for AI game programming, leveraging large language models (LLMs) to extend and operationalize Claude Shannon’s taxonomy of game-playing machines. Central to this paradigm is Nemobot , an interactive agentic engineering environment that enables users to create, customize, and deploy LLM-powered game agents while actively engaging with AI-driven strategies. The LLM-based chatbot, integrated within Nemobot, demonstrates its capabilities across four distinct classes of games. For dictionary-based games ,it compresses state-action mappings into efficient, generalized models for rapid adaptability. In rigorously solvable games , it employs mathematical reasoning to compute optimal strategies and generates human-readable explanations for its decisions. For heuristic-based games , it synthesizes strategies by combining insights from classical minimax algorithms (see, e.g., [1]) with crowd-sourced data. Finally, in learning-based games , it utilizes reinforcement learning with human feedback and self-critique to iteratively refine strategies through trial-and-error and imitation learning. Nemobot amplifies this framework by offering a pro-grammable environment where users can experiment with tool-augmented generation and fine-tuning of strategic game agents. From strategic games to role-playing games, Nemobot demon-strates how AI agents can achieve a form of self-programming by integrating crowdsourced learning and human creativity to iteratively refine their own logic. This represents a step toward the long-term goal of self-programming AI. 

Index Terms —Game learning machines, Large language model, AI games, Self-programming AI, Reinforcement learning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# CLAUDE Shannon, a pioneer in artificial intelligence, posed a thought-provoking question in his seminal work [2]: “Can we program a digital computer so that (eventually) 99 percent of the orders it follows are written by the computer itself, rather than the few percent in current programs?” This question encapsulates the vision of self-programming systems, a concept that remains a core challenge in AI research. Similarly, Marvin Minsky argued in [3] that programming’s structured rules are not limitations but tools for refining and clarifying poorly understood ideas, akin to how artists and composers use formal constraints to express creativity. Shannon’s vision of computers autonomously generating their own instructions has become increasingly relevant in agentic engineering, where large language models (LLMs) now pro-duce vast amounts of code, driving self-evolving AI systems and interactive applications such as games. 

C. W. Tan and Y. Wang are with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Nanyang Ave., Singapore (e-mail: cheewei.tan@ntu.edu.sg). S. Guo is with Nautilus Software Technologies Limited, Hong Kong. LLMs  game-playing 

> machine
> human
> players
> Strategic Games
> optimized strategies,
> predicted moves
> crowdsourced data of game states,
> players' moves, and results

Fig. 1: Crowdsourcing and strategy optimization in game-playing AI. The LLM generates optimized strategies for game-playing agents, while game states and results from interactions with human players are fed back to train the LLM, creating a self-reinforcing cycle of improvement through crowdsourcing. Recent surveys, such as [4], [5], explore advances in strate-gic AI game agents to enhance adaptability and reasoning using LLMs. Research into specific applications such as combining language models with strategic reasoning in the game of Diplomacy [6] and using LLMs as testers to measure game difficulty [7] demonstrates the versatility of LLMs in imperfect-information games. Approaches like ChessGPT [8] and AlphaStar [9] bridge policy learning with language model-ing, emphasizing the importance of synergizing reinforcement learning and natural language processing. The development of systems such as Suspicion-Agent [10], which integrates theory-of-mind-aware reasoning with OpenAI’s GPT-4, further extends the horizon of multi-agent interactions in imperfect information settings. Game boards serve as microworlds: discrete, observable world states that provide a structured, controllable testbed for studying representation learning of world models in LLMs. When trained on game transcripts and rules, LLMs can learn implicit representations that encode not only legal moves but also temporal dependencies, hidden states, and probabilistic opponent strategies. For instance, [11] demonstrate that chess gameplay enables LLMs to track board states and predict moves, providing evidence that strategic environments can induce meaningful internal representations of game dynamics. This aligns with findings by [12], who show that transformers trained on synthetic sequential prediction tasks spontaneously 

> arXiv:2604.21896v1 [cs.AI] 23 Apr 2026 2Type 1. Dictionary-
> type machines
> Type 2. Machines
> using formulas
> e.g. tic-tac-toe
> e.g. Nim
> e.g. Mini
> Mancala
> more complex
> games
> Type 3. Machines
> applying principles
> Type 4. Learning machines

Fig. 2: Shannon’s four types of game-playing machines and their typical examples of applications. form internal world models capturing latent environmental dynamics without explicit supervision. To rigorously evaluate the fidelity of these learned representations, [13] propose systematic methods for probing whether generative models maintain consistent beliefs about unobserved variables and ad-here to transition rules. Collectively, these studies suggest that gameplay can drive representational learning of world models in LLMs though these models often remain approximate and lack explicit grounding. To refine and leverage these representations, AI game programming provides a powerful paradigm for structured world-model learning. By designing game simulators and programmed interfaces, we can create environments where an LLM agent must learn explicit, verifiable representations to succeed. For example, an agentic engineering framework can be designed to interact with a game engine through a structured API, forcing the LLM to explicitly represent board states, action spaces, and opponent models to generate valid function calls. This approach uses programmable feedback loops to ground abstract internal representations: the LLM’s predictions are immediately validated or corrected by the game engine, enabling error-driven refinement of its world model. Through repeated interaction with these programmed interfaces, an AI agent can learn more consistent, accurate, and generalizable representations, effectively turning gameplay into a form of 

self-supervised representation learning .These programmable approaches result in world models that are not only more interpretable but also more actionable for downstream strategic reasoning, thereby narrowing the gap between emergent internal representations and externally verifiable game semantics. This downstream strategic rea-soning can be further enhanced through established methods for improving language model reasoning: self-consistency [14] refines decision quality via structured reasoning chains, while frameworks like ReAct [15] and Graph of Thoughts [16] provide formal mechanisms for reasoning and plan-ning in complex environments. Moreover, work on retrieval-augmented strategic play [17] demonstrates how language models can dynamically incorporate external knowledge to guide exploration and improve gameplay by using LLM-based agents. Recent advances in AI-assisted programming are trans-forming the development of sophisticated game AI agents. Foundation models like OpenAI’s GPT harness advanced NLP and LLM capabilities to interpret human instructions and generate functional code [18]. This has enabled tools such as GitHub Copilot [19], Copilot for Xcode [20], [21], OpenAI Codex [22], and Claude Code [23] to support programmers in rapidly prototyping, debugging, and optimizing agent logic, thus accelerating the design of reasoning loops, tool integration and strategic modules for game AI. The evolving multi-modal capabilities of publicly-available LLM systems like OpenAI’s GPT [24] and Google’s Gemini [25] further extend this potential, reinforcing the synergy between AI-assisted programming, strategic reasoning, and interactive gameplay. Recent frameworks like CAMP [26], [21] with context-based RAG methods demonstrate how local-cloud architectures and retrieval mechanisms can further enhance the reliability and context-awareness of AI-assisted programming and software testing. These developments allow us to revisit Shannon’s question through a new programming paradigm of agentic en-gineering, where learned representations are programmatically leveraged–rather than relying on a full world model–to create hybrid, human-AI solutions. A natural question arises: if modern LLMs can already play games such as tic-tac-toe or Nim when prompted directly, what is the value of a dedicated programming framework? The distinction lies in the difference between intelligence and 

programming . Prompting an LLM to play a game yields non-deterministic, often non-reproducible behavior that is opaque to the user and difficult to debug or improve systemati-cally. Shannon’s taxonomy [2], [27] was developed when game-playing intelligence was largely deterministic and algo-rithmically grounded; however, current LLM-based systems are inherently non-deterministic. What is lacking is a struc-tured programming paradigm that harnesses LLM capabilities within a reproducible, educational, and extensible framework. 

Nemobot addresses this gap by providing a programmable environment where LLM functions are treated as modu-lar, inspectable components—analogous to subroutines—that users can design, test, refine, and share. Rather than merely orchestrating LLM API calls, Nemobot operationalizes Shan-non’s taxonomy through programmable prompt engineering, 3

crowdsourced strategy refinement, and a tiered curriculum that scaffolds learning from simple dictionary-based games to advanced reinforcement-learning agents. This positions the contribution not as a wrapper around LLM services, but as a research framework that investigates how classical game-playing paradigms can be systematically extended with LLMs for both AI research and education. Recent work in IEEE Transactions on Games further motivates this direction: Phillips et al. [28] demonstrated goal-oriented NPC interac-tions using LLMs, while Bassanelli et al. [29] highlighted the importance of principled gamification design for effective learning outcomes. This paper revisits Shannon’s taxonomy of game-playing machines [2], [27] and extends it using modern LLM capabil-ities to introduce a programming paradigm for strategic game development. Shannon’s four categories, illustrated in Figure 2: dictionary-based machines with pre-stored solutions, mathe-matically rigorous systems for solvable games, heuristic-driven machines for complex scenarios and learning machines that adapt through experience remain the foundational elements of intelligent systems. LLMs enhance these categories by com-pressing state-action mappings for dictionary-based games ,applying symbolic reasoning for rigorously solvable games ,integrating minimax algorithms and crowd-sourced data for 

heuristic-based games , and employing reinforcement learning with human feedback for learning-based games . Central to this exploration is Nemobot , a game-playing chatbot and interactive programming environment that embodies these principles. Nemobot empowers users to design and deploy game-playing agents, extending Shannon’s taxonomy with LLMs. Through games like tic-tac-toe, Nim, and Mancala, it showcases LLM-driven advancements in AI game programming, integrating natural language understanding and generation. In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows:  

> •

An AI game programming framework called Nemobot 

Games is proposed, integrating language models with Shannon’s foundational concepts of game-playing ma-chines. This framework uses LLM-based programming to enable AI game bots that interact with humans and adapt strategies. Through LLM functions like reasoning, decision generation, and neuralized memoization, the bots efficiently store and refine strategies, enabling trial-and-error learning with human feedback.  

> •

A systematic approach to collaborative prompt engineer-ing through crowdsourcing is designed to enable pro-grammable gameplay strategies and fostering creativity in AI game development with human feedback.  

> •

The Nemobot framework is evaluated in remote learning environments, highlighting its effectiveness in gamified AI education. By enabling collaborative prompt engineer-ing through crowdsourcing, Nemobot fosters interactive learning and helps students grasp foundational AI con-cepts. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II proposes the integration of LLM within Shannon’s taxonomy and how to structure AI game programming with collaborative prompt engineering using LLMs. Section III describes our 

Nemobot programming framework for programmable prompt engineering for AI games. Section IV discusses collaborative prompt engineering, using real-world examples to align crowd-sourced human feedback with strategic games and presents trial results in a practical setting. Finally, Section V explores open issues and future work, while Section VI summarizes the key insights and contributions of this paper. II. G AME PLAYING WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS 

A. Shannon’s Taxonomy of AI Games with LLMs 

For dictionary-based machines , Shannon described systems that predefine every possible game situation and store cor-responding moves in a “dictionary” or function table [2]. Traditional implementations require large memory resources, limiting their practicality to simple games like tic-tac-toe. Building on this foundational concept, we propose that lan-guage models can be utilized to augment this approach by learning patterns from game data. We hypothesize that this effectively compresses the dictionary into a smaller, general-ized model, allowing the system to infer moves for previously unseen positions without exhaustive storage. This approach provides new programmers a practical way to learn AI game programming by editing predefined moves in real time, gaining hands-on experience with LLM functions, deciding when to use the LLM or local memory, and understanding strategic decision-making in interactive environments. In the category of machines using rigorous mathemati-cal formulas , Shannon outlined systems capable of perfect gameplay in mathematically solvable games like Nim [27]. In the proposed framework, LLMs act as interactive copilots designed to explain the reasoning behind optimal moves in natural language. This design intends to make these systems valuable to the programmer, who benefits from the model’s ability to articulate the logic behind optimal moves in games like Nim. By integrating LLMs, these games can do more than just provide solutions; they can offer real-time programming assistance by breaking down complex calculations into step-by-step insights [30]. This bridges the gap between algorithmic execution and strategy formulation, making mathematically-proven strategies in AI games more accessible. Additionally, the concept of AI-assisted programming [31], [32] and existing LLM code generation capabilities can be utilized to create code for the mathematical strategies behind these games. To illustrate, in the 1969 The Game of Euclid [33], players take turns removing multiples of the smaller pile from the larger, aiming to reduce one pile to zero. The game has an optimal play strategy tied to the computation of the Greatest Common Divisor (GCD) . We demonstrate that LLMs can go beyond analyzing the game by generating code to implement the most efficient GCD algorithms, such as the classic Eu-clidean algorithm or optimized variants. For example, given two piles of a and b stones a > b ), an LLM can generate code to iteratively compute a mod b, identify the optimal m

for reducing a by m × b, and ensure efficient computation while avoiding losing configurations. The code generation capability of LLMs enables programmers to explore both the 4

strategic elements of the game and the efficient implemen-tation of mathematical algorithms, optimizing computational performance through context-aware code generation. The third category, machines employing general princi-ples of play , addresses games like chess, poker, and bridge, where no exact solutions exist but heuristic strategies guide decision-making [1]. Language models can synthesize exten-sive game-related knowledge, human strategies, and expert insights, enabling the generation of context-aware strategies for various scenarios. By incorporating techniques like Monte Carlo tree search and leveraging self-play, as demonstrated by AlphaGo [34], [35], LLMs refine strategies through training on both human and AI-generated games. Their chain-of-thought reasoning [36], [14] allows them to break down complex problems into step-by-step solutions, suggesting heuristics for optimal paths and recommending efficient search algorithms, thereby outsourcing computations like pathfinding and strate-gic exploration. This streamlines decision-making to enhance game performance with efficient algorithms, and fosters inter-action between LLMs and human players who can test-drive strategies [32]. In programming these strategy games, LLMs can simulate skill levels and explain decisions through self-play, enhancing efficiency in probabilistic reasoning [35]. Finally, learning machines, the pinnacle of Shannon’s taxon-omy, closely align with modern data-driven approaches. Shan-non envisioned machines that enhance their strategies through trial-and-error learning, continuously refining their approaches based on extensive experience [1]. Similarly, LLMs can be integrated as adaptive tools to assist in the programming and refinement of learning through trial and error [37]. LLMs can guide the development of self-improving AI opponents by explaining feedback loops and training data’s role in learning. They accelerate reinforcement learning, particularly Michie’s Boxes algorithm in [38], [39], which is a stochastic, trial-and-error system that learns to avoid failures in unknown environments and is a direct intellectual ancestor of modern reinforcement learning [37]. By generating moves, evaluating outcomes, and refining strategies, LLMs act as AI coaches that simulate skilled opponents, provide gameplay feedback, and emulate reward models, while their natural language insights foster explainable strategic game play. 

B. Programmable Prompts via LLM Functions 

Large language models have the ability to synthesize knowl-edge from massive (raw and unlabelled) datasets, making them powerful tools for autonomous learning and decision-making [18]. We can design LLM agents that do not merely follow pre-programmed rules but can generate strategies, responses, and solutions based on the context they encounter. This approach aligns with Shannon’s vision of a machine that gradually writes more of its own orders. For example, in game-playing systems, instead of being limited to predefined strategies or rigid algorithms, a query can be made to different LLMs to generate feasible strategies to improve game learning perfor-mance iteratively with minimal human input. Programmable prompt engineering further enhances this capacity by allowing developers to implement logical response behavior using LLM functions . Rather than writing exhaustive code to cover every possible situation, prompt engineering allows the program to dynamically understand and respond to varied situations through contextually relevant instructions in real-time. This allows for a flexible, scalable approach to problem-solving where the machine “writes” its own orders through prompt-based guidance. LLM functions thus serve to generate strategic decisions in games, adapt its behavior based on previous outcomes, and refine its strategies through feedback loops. Hence, instead of relying solely on pre-programmed strate-gies, an AI game engine can autonomously generate new strategies by interpreting prompts and adjusting its play based on real-time feedback. This shift toward greater autonomy via machine learning for conversational data (see, e.g., [40]) is not only a recent technical achievement but also reflects a deeper philosophical transition in how we interact with machines, thus moving from instructing them directly to guiding them in a way that allows them to “write” their own programs via natural language generation and understanding. Michie’s contemporaneous “memo functions” or memoization in [41], [42], [37] are now understood as a form of speedup learning that stores and reuses previously-computed results, reducing redundancy and enhancing efficiency. Hence, LLM functions can be seen as a form of neuralized memoization , offering more dynamic, context-aware responses. Indeed, Michie’s memo functions [41], [42] find a direct modern instantiation in the KV caching used by large language models, which stores previously computed attention keys and values to reduce generation complexity from quadratic to linear. Beyond this performance optimization, the concept can be expanded in three directions. First, semantic memoization would cache by embedding similarity rather than exact input match, allowing LLMs to retrieve responses for semantically equivalent queries without recomputation. Second, procedu-ral memoization would cache not just results but successful strategies or tool-use sequences across agentic workflows, enabling agents to reuse effective plans. Third, distributed memoization would share cached knowledge across multiple agents, allowing collective speedup learning. Thus, treating computation as a learnable resource scales from symbolic caching to neuralized memoization and multi-agent learning, connecting to reinforcement learning by enabling adaptive learning where past interactions refine game strategies and improve collaborative problem-solving [37]. 

C. Collaborative Prompt Engineering 

Effective prompt engineering is key to leveraging LLMs for specialized tasks like game-playing but often requires experi-mentation and expertise [43], [18]. Crowd-sourcing can poten-tially offer a scalable solution to harness collective intelligence to create and refine optimized LLM prompts for strategic gaming tasks [44], [45]. Indeed, the 1999 chess match between Garry Kasparov and “The Rest of the World” exemplifies large-scale crowdsourcing, where global participants combined human intuition, computer engines, and expert advice [46]. Kasparov’s narrow victory after 62 moves highlighted both 5

the potential and limitations of collective decision-making in human-machine collaboration. Crowdsourcing offers a scal-able way to improve natural language understanding by lever-aging diverse participant perspectives to refine responses [40], [45]. Crowdsourcing will matter in agentic engineering by providing scalable human oversight and diverse training data that autonomous agents cannot generate on their own. In strategic game programming, crowdsourcing enhances LLM fine-tuning by improving reinforcement learning models and simplifying evaluation. It generates prompts for strat-egy, move explanations, opponent simulations, and diverse gameplay styles, boosting AI adaptability. This collaborative process aggregates comprehensive datasets, uncovers high-performing patterns, and fosters innovation. By integrating these insights into LLM agents (e.g., Nemobot in Section III), it scales human creativity, enhances human-AI augmentation, and drives new programming paradigms in strategic AI game development, as illustrated in Figure 1. The learning process in complex AI game playing will involve significant trial and error, but crowdsourcing can reduce the overhead by aggregating diverse feedback and hu-man insights. Programmable prompts amplify crowdsourcing by providing a structured framework to encode, refine, and evaluate collective human expertise. Through LLM functions, these prompts enable agents to dynamically simulate strategic decision-making and problem-solving. Crowdsourcing from a diverse community exposes LLM agents to a wide range of reasoning styles and creative strategies, aligning with Michie’s 

neuralized memoization . This approach allows for iterative im-provement, combining learned strategies with programmable modules to enhance performance over time. 

D. AI Game Programming Agent 

To leverage the full potential of LLM capabilities, a tool must be developed with the following characteristics:  

> •

Optimize both computational efficiency and strategic ef-fectiveness by incorporating chain-of-thought reasoning, allowing developers to explore the inner workings and decision-making processes of AI agents. This fosters a deeper understanding of how strategies are generated and refined, as LLMs can explain the logic behind optimal moves and provide insights into trial-and-error learning.  

> •

Facilitates collaborative and scalable development by utilizing LLM functions to generate code and assist in debugging, enabling developers to collaborate on strategy formulation and game design while supporting various approaches. This scalability also encourages team-based improvements and iterative strategy refinement.  

> •

Provides accessibility for developers with varying ex-pertise by offering an adaptable framework for hands-on exploration, with LLM-powered tools that simplify experimentation. The tool’s tiered classification, based on Shannon’s taxonomy, coupled with LLM-driven code generation, caters to both novice and advanced pro-grammers. By facilitating dynamic collaboration with LLMs, the system enables efficient real-time generation, optimization, and adaptation of strategies. Ultimately, Chat  

> Playground
> Coding Pad
> LLM functions LLM
> servers
> leverage
> LLMs
> define
> functions
> define heuristic H
> (H k)
> (H k+1 )
> Dk
> heuristic
> updates
> generate
> training data
> data-driven
> learning
> function calls
> play with H
> define
> games
> execute games
> Analysis Portal
> Rk
> ...
> Collaborative Learning
> play freely

Fig. 3: System Flow of Nemobot. Students program strategic games, build AI with given heuristics and conduct data-driven AI training. the goal is to achieve scalable neuralized memoization, enhancing algorithmic efficiency and empowering devel-opers to innovate and refine solutions seamlessly. III. N EMOBOT GAME PROGRAMMING 

We present Nemobot, a programming framework for cre-ating, training, and testing AI game agents on platforms like Facebook Messenger and Telegram. In this section, we provide an architectural overview of the system, detail the interactive training workflow, and describe the tiered curriculum designed to support developers of varying expertise. 

A. Overview of Nemobot 

Nemobot provides a dynamic and intuitive environment where developers can design and train AI agents for strategic games, gaining insights into the underlying mechanisms of AI. As illustrated in Figure 3, the platform comprises a coding pad 

for programming both the game logic and the AI’s reasoning heuristics, a chat playground for interacting with the AI to generate and test data, and an analysis portal for evaluating AI performance and refining heuristics. The process begins with users designing a two-player strate-gic game in which players alternate turns, taking actions and accruing rewards until the game concludes. A NodeJS-based template is provided to streamline this process, featuring cus-tomizable functions to define the initial state S0, the transition function f (Si+1 |Si, a i)—where ai represents the player action at state Si—and the termination state Se. Users then program their AI agent by defining a heuristic H0(ai|Si), which dictates the agent’s decision-making in various scenarios. Nemobot also empowers users to incorporate advanced algorithm design by leveraging LLM functions. Users can bypass complex programming challenges by specifying high-level logic in natural language such as descriptions and exam-ples within the platform. These LLM functions, as shown in Figure 4 part (c), are seamlessly integrated into the main game flow, leveraging LLMs’ natural language understanding and code generation capabilities. This feature ensures accessibility for developers with diverse programming backgrounds while maintaining a robust programming paradigm for AI game development. 6(a) Coding Pad  (b) Chat Playground  (c)-1 LLM functions  (c)-2 Function Definition 

Fig. 4: UI of Nemobot. (a)&(b) Programs written on the coding pad are synchronously executed and rendered on the chat playground. (c) LLM functions are defined and called by the main gaming flow. The coding pad enables users to execute their programs as chatbot-driven games, instantly deployable in the chat playground. This integration facilitates real-time experimenta-tion without switching platforms. Game data is subsequently analyzed and visualized in the analysis portal, offering insights into the AI agent’s performance and identifying areas for heuristic refinement. This iterative cycle of programming, testing, and analyzing establishes a robust foundation for data-driven AI training. Additionally, both the programs and train-ing data are shareable, fostering a collaborative development environment at scale. To address potential concerns associated with Generative AI tools, Nemobot employs a gated interface between users and LLMs. Instead of direct interactions, users define LLM logic within the platform, with Nemobot transmitting prompts using hyper-commands to ensure logical and appropriate re-sponses. This design mitigates over-reliance on Generative AI while maintaining a secure and structured environment for AI programming. 

B. System Architecture and Implementation 

The Nemobot system architecture is designed for modular-ity, low latency, and scalability. The system comprises three core layers:  

> •

Model-Agnostic AI Integration: The platform is archi-tected to be independent of any specific Large Language Model (LLM). It operates on a “Bring Your Own Key” (BYOK) principle, allowing users to connect via API to various models (e.g., GPT-4, GPT-3.5) depending on their performance requirements and budget. This ensures the framework remains adaptable as model capabilities evolve.  

> •

State Management and Latency: To ensure a responsive gameplay experience, the game logic and state manage-ment are handled locally within the execution environ-ment. During active gameplay, game states are stored in-memory to minimize latency. The LLM is queried only when the user explicitly triggers an “LLM function” for strategy construction or reasoning, ensuring that the core game loop remains fast and is not bottlenecked by inference latency.  

> •

Data Persistence and Crowdsourcing: While indi-vidual game states are transient, performance metrics and training outcomes are batched and asynchronously synchronized with a cloud-based database. This allows for the aggregation of crowdsourced data (e.g., win/loss ratios, successful heuristics) across the user base without disrupting real-time interactions, facilitating the collabo-rative learning described in Section II. 

C. Interactive AI Training 

The core workflow of an AI agent involves perception, processing, and decision-making based on a defined strategy. This strategy can either be pre-programmed with deterministic rules or learned iteratively through methods like reinforcement learning. To support the development of game-playing AI agents, Nemobot provides an interactive framework where users can build and train AI systems from scratch, as outlined in Alg. 1. 

Algorithm 1 Interactive AI Training with Nemobot  

> 1:

H0 ← initial heuristic , k ← 1, R ← ∅  

> 2:

while true do  

> 3:

for i in [1 , count (Dk)] do  

> 4:

R. add (Rki ← reward (Dki ))  

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

if loss (R) ≤ τ then  

> 7:

break  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

Hk ← update (Hk−1, R ) 

> 10:

k ← (k + 1)  

> 11:

record < H k, R >  

> 12:

R ← ∅  

> 13:

end while  

> 14:

return Hk

Alg. 1 illustrates an iterative process where the AI’s decision-making heuristic is refined to optimize its perfor-mance. During each iteration, the heuristic is evaluated against 7

a dataset D of test cases, yielding rewards Ri that guide adjust-ments to improve subsequent iterations. This loop continues until the AI meets a predefined performance threshold. This training paradigm is adaptable to a variety of use cases. For example, in automated machine learning workflows, 

update() might correspond to gradient-based optimization, while in rule-based AI systems, it could represent manual adjustments to the decision rules. In scenarios where the heuristic is static, the training loop is bypassed entirely. Nemobot supports the most general case, enabling end-to-end training for learning-based AI agents while allowing flexibility for specialized implementations. Users begin by defining an initial heuristic H0, which specifies the AI’s actions in a given state and the corresponding rewards. For instance, in the Nim game, H0 might define the AI’s move as nAI = max( r, 3 − nuser ), where r is the remaining count of items and nuser is the opponent’s last action. Nemobot simplifies this process by leveraging LLM-powered code generation, allowing users to describe heuristics in pseudo-code or natural language rather than executable code. This abstraction lowers the barrier to entry, enabling users to focus on logical reasoning rather than syntax. Once the heuristic is defined, users can test it in the Chat Playground, where dynamic gameplay and data generation oc-cur simultaneously. The AI is deployed in a chatbot interface, starting from an initial state s0, where users interact with the agent, observing its actions ai in response to states si. Final rewards Rk are recorded for analysis. To accelerate testing, Nemobot supports automated gameplay, either through random action generation, e.g., simulating “training by crowdsourcing” or through heuristic-based responses, akin to “training by another AI.” Heuristic updates are guided by performance analysis. Users refine H iteratively, leveraging LLM functionality to adjust strategies or define new actions. Heuristics can range from precise formulas for deterministic actions to abstract rules representing high-level strategies. Additionally, Nemobot sup-ports the incorporation of past training data into the AI’s state representation, enabling more sophisticated decision-making and aligning with modern self-learning methodologies. 

D. Tiered Curriculum 

Nemobot supports developers with varying expertise by offering structured pathways for crafting AI agents, inspired by Claude E. Shannon’s classifications of game-playing machines [2]: dictionary-type machines, complete analysis machines, approximate principle machines, and learning machines. These pathways guide developers from fundamental heuristic design to advanced learning-based AI implementations:  

> •

Foundational Development: Developers begin by con-structing dictionary-type AI agents for predefined games, defining actions ai for each state si. This provides insight into how decision-making heuristics influence gameplay outcomes.  

> •

Intermediate Rule-Based Systems: Using NodeJS tem-plates, developers create custom games and build rule-based AI that follows decision algorithms f (ai|si).Heuristics are iteratively refined based on testing data, introducing the principles of optimization.  

> •

Advanced Data-Driven AI: Developers employ LLM functions to design complex, adaptive AI systems. By leveraging automated testing methods and crowdsourced training data, they transition to building learning-based AI capable of self-improvement. This structured progression focuses on heuristic-driven decision-making as the foundation and gradually incorporates data-driven methodologies. By simplifying initial development and emphasizing iterative enhancement, Nemobot ensures a smooth transition to advanced AI training techniques. Through agentic engineering where autonomous LLM agents plan, execute, and refine learning strategies, the system can dy-namically adapt to individual learner trajectories, selecting appropriate tasks and feedback mechanisms without constant human oversight. IV. E VALUATION OF NEMOBOT GAMES 

Nemobot uses programmable prompts as a modular, adap-tive game-playing agent that adjusts strategies or modes based on user input, game context, or learning goals. For example, in a learning game, Nemobot may explain its decision-making process, while in a heuristic game, it synthe-sizes crowd-sourced strategies for optimal gameplay. Crowd-sourced prompts are categorized by use case (e.g., decision-making, strategy explanation, error correction) and integrated into Nemobot as modular components for easy execution and testing. Users can experiment, refine, and contribute to the prompt repository, creating an evolving library that enhances Nemobot’s effectiveness and versatility. The web-based pro-gramming platform is available for demonstration at: https: //nemobot-neue-experiment.vercel.app .Nemobot Games was evaluated in undergraduate courses at City University of Hong Kong (2020–2021) with 251 students, Nanyang Technological University (2022–2023) with over 80 students, and a remote internship program with around 30 un-dergraduates from Princeton University (2021–2022). Students initially utilized the OpenAI Playground [44] and Codex [18] for prompt engineering, transitioning to ChatGPT [47] and the OpenAI API in late 2022. Over ten weeks, students learned to program strategic games in Nemobot, which can be deployed on platforms like Facebook Messenger and Telegram. Details of some student projects are provided in Table I. Below, we describe the programming of the strategic games listed in the first three rows of Table I. 

A. Dictionary-Based Game: Tic Tac Toe 

Tic Tac Toe is an ideal example of Shannon’s first category of game-playing machines, using dictionary-based systems that store precomputed solutions for all possible game states. With a manageable state space of 19,683 configurations, each state is paired with an optimal move. This deterministic approach ensures a well-defined optimal response for every game state, such as maximizing the chances of winning or forcing a draw. While effective, this method can be memory-intensive and complex to implement in rule-based AI games. 8

TABLE I: Nemobot games, powered by OpenAI Codex and Application Programming Interface (API) between 2021 and 2023, categorized according to Shannon’s game taxonomy. These games demonstrate a versatile range of game programs. The commands can be accessed on Facebook Messenger.                 

> Game Description LLM Agent Enhancement Category Link
> To run the Tic Tac Toe game, type the command:
> tic_tac_toe hkalexling .LLM function to query moves 1Nemobot Game To run the classic Nim game, type the command:
> lollipops hkalexling .LLM function to query moves and optimal strategy algorithm by code generation 2Nemobot Game To run the Mancala game, type the command: temp awari_server .LLM function to query moves and collect human-AI gameplay data in a leaderboard 3Nemobot Game Physics learning quiz game challenges players on Newton’s three laws. Offers contextual explanations, personalized feedback, hints, and motivational dialogue. 1Newton’s Laws Single-player RPG where players master math topics by selecting challenges. Using crowdsourcing via LLM functions, it offers personalized explanations and answers questions. 3Math Video Recommender Audio recommendation system game leveraging crowdsourced audio data. LLM functions enhance the game by interpreting user feedback and suggesting improvements. 4Audio Tagging Players solve coding challenges in an IDE and provide peer feedback. It provides hints, analyzes solutions, and simulates expert coaching. 4Code Mentor Role-playing game with dynamic dialogue trees. LLM functions analyze player inputs and generate adaptive dialogue trees. 4Role Playing Game

To address the limitations, we employ the LLM gaming agent, which replicates the behavior of a dictionary-based system without the need to explicitly store an extensive collec-tion of state-action pairs or create complex nested conditional loops. The user interacts with Nemobot by making moves, and the LLM responds as the opposing player, maintaining the deterministic characteristics of a dictionary-based system. To facilitate interaction, the 3 × 3 game board is represented with cells labeled numerically from 0 to 8, corresponding to the positions on the board. Users input their moves by specifying the cell where they want to place their mark (e.g., “ 0” for the top-left corner or “ 4” for the center). To communicate with the LLM agent, the game state is serialized into a structured textual format that captures the positions of X, O, and empty cells. This structured input effectively describes the current state of the game in a manner that the agent can process and respond to. For instance, assuming the LLM agent is already aware of its role and the rules embedded within the configuration of Nemobot, the prompt for a given state could be written as below. 

Example Prompt: Tic Tac Toe Strategy 

Current Configuration: Cell 0 (Top-Left) is occupied by ’X’. Cell 4 (Center) is occupied by ’O’. All remaining cells are empty. 

Objective: Analyze the board state and execute the op-timal move for Player ’O’ to prevent a loss or secure a win. Instead of precomputing all possible moves and storing them in a dictionary, the LLM gaming agent uses its pre-trained knowledge and contextual understanding to generate optimal moves dynamically. The backend sends this query to the LLM through an API, and the LLM responds with the most strategic move based on the current configuration. This dynamic querying process eliminates the need for exhaustive storage, effectively compressing the “dictionary” into the in-ference capabilities of the LLM gaming agent. For any given game state, Nemobot ensures that the responses of the agent are consistent and deterministic, adhering to the foundational principles of traditional dictionary-based machines. Although the LLM gaming agent dynamically generates responses, these responses align with established optimal strategies for Tic Tac Toe, with its decision-making grounded in its pretrained knowledge. This design ensures that the foundational knowl-edge required for selecting optimal moves is embedded into the LLM once, allowing it to infer the best moves even for previously unseen positions. This approach significantly reduces memory usage and computational overhead compared to traditional methods that rely on exhaustive searches or evaluating nested conditional loops for each decision. By leveraging the ability of the LLM gaming agent to generalize and interpret game rules, Nemobot could achieve enhanced scalability and adaptability, delivering efficient and accurate gameplay without the need for repeated rule-based evaluations. 

1) Machines using Rigorous Mathematical Formulas in Nim Game: Nim is a classic combinatorial game and an example of Shannon’s second category of game-playing machines, which use mathematical formulas. Its optimal strategies are based on the Nim-sum, determining winning or losing positions. In Nemobot, the player forced to take the last object loses. The AI calculates the Nim-sum at each turn, using the formula to determine the best move: a nonzero Nim-sum indicates a winning position, while a zero Nim-sum signals a losing position. The LLM translates the Nim-sum calculations into natural language, offering insights into the optimal moves and making the game more educational and accessible to users. The game logic serializes the current state of the board into a structured text format, detailing the number of stones remaining and whose turn it is. The serialized state is then 9

passed to the LLM, which leverages its pretrained knowledge of mathematical solutions for the Nim game to determine the optimal move and contextualize the mathematical strategy. This approach provides the user with a clear explanation of the move, enhancing transparency and ensuring that the reasoning behind the actions took by Nemobot is understandable, even in complex scenarios. For example, given a scenario where 8 stones remain, the LLM might receive the following prompt: 

Example Prompt: Nim Game Logic 

Game Status: A single pile remains containing 8 stones. 

Constraints: You are permitted to remove 1, 2, or 3 stones. Taking the final stone results in a loss. 

Task: Apply the winning mathematical strategy (Nim-sum analysis) to calculate the precise number of stones to remove this turn. Provide a brief rationale for your decision. 

2) Machines employing General Principles of Play: Man-cala Game: Mancala, a two-player strategy game, exemplifies Shannon’s third category of game-playing machines, which rely on general principles of play. Its complex decision space makes precomputing optimal moves impractical, requiring heuristic strategies and game trees to guide decisions. How-ever, this approach is resource-intensive due to the expanding decision space. Nemobot addresses these challenges by using LLM functions to dynamically query advice, enhancing game tree strategies without replacing them. The LLM analyzes the current game state to retrieve relevant strategies, reducing computational and memory demands while retaining the game tree as the decision-making foundation. The game logic begins by converting the current board state into structured text, detailing the number of seeds in each pit, the store values, and the active player. The Mancala board is labeled numerically: pits 0 to 5 for the bottom row (left to right) and 7 to 12 for the top row (right to left), with stores at 6 (bottom row) and 13 (top row). Users select their moves by specifying a pit (e.g., “ 0” for the leftmost pit in the bottom row). For instance, if the bottom-row player has 4 seeds in pit 0, 1 seed in pit 1, and 3 seeds in pit 2, while the top-row player has 2 seeds in pit 7, 0 seeds in pit 8, and 4 seeds in pit 9, with the user’s store holding 8 seeds and the AI’s store holding 6, the serialized prompt provided to the LLM would describe this configuration to generate the next move recommendation. 

Example Prompt: Mancala Game Tree Analysis 

State Representation: 

Opponent (Bottom Row): Pit 0: 4 seeds, Pit 1: 1 seed, Pit 2: 3 seeds. Store: 8. 

Agent (Top Row): Pit 7: 2 seeds, Pit 8: 0 seeds, Pit 9: 4 seeds. Store: 6. 

Instruction: Utilize game-tree analysis to determine the move that yields the highest strategic advantage from this position. 

Fig. 5: The chatbot interface of the Mancala game. Nemobot leverages LLM functions to query optimal paths in the precomputed game tree, retrieving strategies dynamically based on the current game state. For example, in Mancala, if the bottom-row player has 3 seeds in pit 0, 2 in pit 1, and 4 in pit 2, while the top-row player has 1 seed in pit 7, 0 in pit 8, and 5 in pit 9, the LLM identifies the best move, such as playing pit 2 to gain an extra turn. Programmers can obtain different choices of moves that LLM generalizes from similar scenarios, differing from the traditional approach of running the minimax algorithm with the game tree [1]. 

3) Learning Machines by Reinforcement Learning: Shan-non’s fourth category, learning machines, improves strategies through experience, using trial-and-error, reinforcement learn-ing, and self-improvement. In games like Nim and Mancala, these systems go beyond predefined rules, leveraging adap-tive algorithms and gameplay data. Effective simulations are crucial for gathering high-quality training data, with insights on the number of trials needed and ensuring data accuracy. Fine-tuning LLM functions with this data enhances decision-making, making the AI more efficient and adaptive. In the case of Nim, a web-based browser simulation is developed to generate extensive gameplay data. The simulation allows players to interact with various initial setups, such as different pile sizes and rules for the number of stones that can be removed per turn. Using this platform, the AI gathers data on optimal strategies and move sequences. The collected gameplay data is then used to fine-tune LLM functions through prompt engineering. For instance, the AI learns to recommend moves based on maximizing its chances of winning, dynam-ically adapting to game scenarios by referencing its fine-tuned understanding of strategies. The web-based simulation is available for demonstration at: Nim Simulation. LLM gaming agents enhance complex games like Mancala through a two-pronged approach: they employ trial-and-error 10 

Fig. 6: Training process illustrating the number of game trials required for our Nim game agent to master a skillful strategy through a single simulation run of Michie’s algorithm that can be used for LLM function programming.                            

> N5913 17 21 10 16 19 22 K333332456L513 21 29 37 839 62 90

TABLE II: The performance of the Nim Game simulation under various game configurations, where N represents the initial pile size, K is the maximum number of stones that can be taken per turn, and L is the number of rounds required for training. The data is used by the LLM to predict the learning rate of learning by trial-and-error. reinforcement learning inspired by Donald Michie’s Boxes al-gorithm [38] to learn optimal moves through experience, while also leveraging crowdsourced move data to refine strategies and accelerate decision-making. In the first prong, simulations employ Donald Michie’s Boxes algorithm through self-play. Moves are chosen proba-bilistically based on the current state’s “box”; winning moves increase the probability of reselection, while losing moves de-crease it. Over iterations, this trial-and-error process uncovers optimal strategies across diverse scenarios without requiring expert examples. The second prong involves crowdsourcing, where human players contribute diverse moves by playing against an agent using Shannon’s classical minimax algorithm [1]. This ex-poses the LLM agent to a broader range of tactics and strategies, improving its adaptability to different gameplay styles. Additionally, the LLM agent acts as an instructor, analyzing gameplay, offering real-time feedback on mistakes, and suggesting optimal strategies. This accelerates learning by highlighting suboptimal moves and guiding exploration toward better alternatives, fostering more strategic, long-term decision-making. To evaluate the performance of the aforementioned ap-proach, we implemented a crowdsourced leaderboard , where human players compete against Nemobot. The leaderboard is available at: Mancala Leaderboard. This leaderboard captures data from human-versus-AI matches, where the AI uses the classical minimax algorithm in [1] with three different tree depths corresponding to easy, medium, and hard difficulty levels. The collected data is then used by the LLM to refine its decision-making, either by determining optimal moves or generating self-play algorithms. The leaderboard records player scores and provides valuable insights into the strategies employed by human players. This diverse input ensures that the LLM has access to a wide range of prompts, which can be integrated into its play during the LLM function programming, ultimately enhancing its adaptability and performance. To facilitate adoption and reproducibility, the Nemobot source code, game implementations, and example prompts are publicly accessible through the project repository. In-platform tutorials and worked examples guide users through the Bring Your Own Key (BYOK) setup, game configuration, and prompt engineering workflows. A live demonstration of the platform is available at: Nemobot Demo. 

Example Prompt: Strategic Critique & Response 

State Analysis: 

Player (Bottom): Pits 0 and 1 each contain 2 seeds. Store: 0. 

AI (Top): Pits 2 and 3 each contain 2 seeds. Store: 0. 

Task: It is the AI’s turn. Identify the optimal move sequence. Additionally, critique a potential suboptimal move to illustrate strategic errors. Example Response: 

Recommendation: Initiate play from Pit 2. 

Strategy: This action distributes seeds to Pit 3 and Pit 0, landing in the store to trigger a “free turn” mechanic. On the subsequent turn, the AI should play from Pit 3, which results in capturing the opponent’s seeds in Pit 0. 

Critique: Starting with Pit 3 immediately is inferior as it forfeits the free turn and fails to capitalize on the capture opportunity. Prioritizing moves that extend the turn sequence is critical for maximizing the score. V. F URTHER DISCUSSIONS 

A. Implications and Positioning in the Literature 

To situate this work within the broader landscape of LLM-based game AI, it is instructive to compare Nemobot with several prominent systems. Voyager [48] is an open-ended embodied agent that uses GPT-4 to explore and acquire skills autonomously in Minecraft; however, it operates as a fully autonomous agent with no mechanism for human program-mers to inspect, modify, or share the strategies it discovers. ChessGPT [8] bridges policy learning and language modeling for chess, yet it is specialized to a single domain and does not expose a programmable interface for educational use. Generative Agents [49] simulate believable human behavior through LLM-driven memory and reflection, but their focus is on social simulation rather than strategic game programming. Suspicion-Agent [10] integrates theory-of-mind reasoning with GPT-4 for imperfect-information games, demonstrating so-phisticated multi-agent interactions but without an educational or programming-oriented framework. In contrast, Nemobot occupies a distinct niche: it is a 

programmable, educational framework that exposes LLM functions as transparent, modular components within Shan-non’s taxonomy. Users do not merely consume AI-generated 11 

gameplay; they actively design, test, and refine game-playing strategies through collaborative prompt engineering and crowdsourced feedback. This programmability distin-guishes Nemobot from systems that treat LLMs as black-box players and aligns with the broader vision of AI-assisted programming [31], [26], [21] where human oversight and iterative refinement are central to the development process. By grounding its design in Shannon’s classical framework and extending it with modern LLM capabilities, Nemobot bridges foundational AI theory with contemporary practice, offering both research value and educational utility. Finally, the algorithmic framework in this paper extends naturally beyond game playing to knowledge tracing and 

learning-to-learn in educational AI [50]. In knowledge tracing, a trial-and-error mechanism (e.g., Michie’s Boxes algorithm) can model a student’s evolving mastery of concepts: each knowledge component becomes a “box,” the student’s re-sponse (correct or incorrect) serves as reward or punish-ment, and the probability of selecting a particular strategy updates accordingly–enabling real-time prediction of future performance without requiring expert-labeled skill models. Crowdsourcing, meanwhile, aligns with learning-to-learn by aggregating solution strategies from diverse learners, allowing an intelligent tutoring system to meta-learn which pedagogical approaches work best for which student types. The trained AI agent acting as instructor within a classroom flipping model can become a meta-learning advisor that analyzes a student’s error patterns, generates personalized practice problems, and suggests alternative solution pathways [51]. This ensures that the complexity of tasks scales effectively with the learner’s proficiency. Together, these mechanisms can transform astrategic game-playing AI agent into an adaptive educational system that engages in learning-to-learn , continuously refining both its predictions and its strategic teaching approaches through interaction with an unknown environment, thereby acquiring meta-knowledge about how each individual learns over time. 

B. Open Issues and Future Directions 

Future research will expand Nemobot to diverse AI tasks like multimedia generation and programming, enriching AI education. Inspired by Michie’s ideas on discovery as collab-oration [42], future work could develop tools for real-time strategy refinement during gameplay, incorporating adaptive semi-supervised learning with fine-tuning to enable collabo-ration between three parties–a LLM-enabled copilot, human programmer and a Turing’s child machine in [42] (i.e., a local weaker LLM). Lastly, we list down several open issues remain in developing LLM-powered game-playing agents and collaborative programmable prompt engineering.  

> •

LLMs excel in short-term decision-making but face chal-lenges with long-term strategies required for complex games like chess and Mancala, necessitating memory mechanisms or external models. Future research could explore hierarchical systems inspired by Shannon’s hier-archy [2], where learning advances through abstraction. At the highest level, programming copilots could leverage predicate logic for advanced planning, using inductive logic programming to derive predicates from examples and background knowledge [52].  

> •

Another area of exploration involves balancing general-ization and specialization. While LLMs are trained on vast datasets to generalize effectively, applying them to specific game domains often requires extensive fine-tuning. Developing adaptive fine-tuning methods that allow for real-time adjustments based on gameplay feed-back could enable LLMs to transition seamlessly between different game types or environments.  

> •

Additionally, the reliance on human feedback for fine-tuning poses scalability challenges. Although crowd-sourced feedback can accelerate learning, ensuring the quality and consistency of this input remains a bottleneck. Future work could explore automated feedback systems or hybrid approaches combining human oversight with AI-generated evaluations.  

> •

Recent work on adversarial bots [53], [54] shows that, while capable of defeating top Go-playing AI (e.g., AlphaGo [9]), they are trained to exploit hidden vul-nerabilities rather than develop well-rounded strategies. A challenge is thus to balance competitive performance with ethical design. Developers must ensure bots engage fairly and transparently, avoid exploiting human weak-nesses, and foster challenging yet enjoyable gameplay. Achieving this balance with big data is crucial as AI systems advance, raising important ethical considerations for human-AI interactions in gaming [55].  

> •

Striking a balance between computational efficiency and reproducibility is a critical challenge, particularly for real-time interactive games that leverage big data. LLMs are highly resource-intensive, making their deployment at scale computationally expensive. To address this, research into lightweight, efficient LLM architectures and hybrid systems is crucial. These systems could offload less complex tasks to smaller, more efficient models while reserving the full capabilities of LLMs for tasks that demand greater sophistication. By achieving this balance, it becomes possible to not only enhance scalability and reduce costs but also ensure reproducibility by enabling consistent benchmarks for performance, resource utiliza-tion, and response accuracy across varied applications [55]. Addressing these challenges will not only improve AI game systems but also advance broader applications of LLMs in autonomous decision-making and interactive learning. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In conclusion, this paper introduces a new approach to strategic AI game programming, inspired by Shannon’s vi-sion of self-programming automation and Minsky’s view of programming as a tool for refining ideas. Central to this is 

Nemobot , an interactive platform that allows users to create and deploy game agents. By integrating LLMs, Nemobot goes beyond static instructions, enabling AI agents to dynamically adapt to complex gameplay through inherent world models, crowd-sourced insights and iterative learning strategies. 12 

This programming paradigm showcases how games in 

Nemobot surpass rigid algorithms, enabling flexibility and creativity in identifying patterns and evolving strategies in AI games. By autonomously refining their instructions and lever-aging crowdsourced data to curate effective prompts, Nemobot 

can explore complex gameplay challenges for competitive and strategic play. Our approach aligns with Shannon’s vision of self-programming machines, where AI refines strategies through learning. Nemobot bridges AI theory with LLMs, offering educational value and new possibilities for dynamic game design. REFERENCES [1] C. E. Shannon, “Programming a computer for playing chess,” Philo-sophical Magazine , vol. 41, pp. 256–275, March 1950. [2] ——, “Computers and automata,” Proceedings of the IRE , vol. 41, pp. 1234–1241, 1953. [3] M. Minsky, “Why programming is a good medium for expressing poorly understood and sloppily-formulated ideas,” in Design and Planning II: Computers in Design and Communication , M. Krampen and P. Seitz, Eds. New York: Hastings House Publishers, 1967, pp. 120–128. [4] S. Hu, T. Huang, F. Ilhan, S. Tekin, G. Liu, R. Kompella, and L. Liu, “A survey on large language model-based game agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02039 , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02039 [5] Q. Huang, N. Wake, B. Sarkar, Z. Durante, R. Gong, R. Taori, Y. Noda, D. Terzopoulos, N. Kuno, A. Famoti, A. J. Llorens, J. Langford, H. Vo, F.-F. Li, K. Ikeuchi, and J. Gao, “Agent ai towards aholistic intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00833 , 2024, accessed: 2024-12-15. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00833 [6] M. F. A. R. D. Team, A. Bakhtin, N. Brown, E. Dinan, G. Farina, C. Flaherty, D. Fried, A. Goff, J. Gray, H. Hu, A. P. Jacob, M. Komeili, K. Konath, M. Kwon, A. Lerer, and M. Lewis, “Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by combining language models with strategic reasoning,” Science , vol. 378, pp. 1067–1074, 2022. [7] C. Xiao and B. Z. Yang, “LLMs may not be human-level players, but they can be testers: Measuring game difficulty with LLM agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02829 , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02829 [8] X. Feng, Y. Luo, Z. Wang, H. Tang, M. Yang, K. Shao, D. Mguni, Y. Du, and J. Wang, “ChessGPT: Bridging policy learning and language modeling,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 36, 2023. [9] DeepMind, “Alphastar: Mastering the real-time strategy game starcraft ii,” 2019, https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/ alphastar-mastering-the-real-time-strategy-game-starcraft-ii. [10] J. Guo, B. Yang, P. Yoo, B. Y. Lin, Y. Iwasawa, and Y. Matsuo, “Suspicion-agent: Playing imperfect information games with theory of mind aware gpt-4,” in Conference on Logic and Machine Learning ,2024. [11] S. Toshniwal, S. Wiseman, K. Livescu, and K. Gimpel, “Chess as a testbed for language model state tracking,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 36, 2022, pp. 11 385–11 393. [12] K. Li, A. K. Hopkins, D. Bau, F. Vi´ egas, H. Pfister, and M. Wattenberg, “Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. [13] K. Vafa, J. Y. Chen, A. Rambachan, J. Kleinberg, and S. Mullainathan, “Evaluating the world model implicit in a generative model,” in Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, 2024, to appear in NeurIPS 2024. [14] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. V. Le, E. H. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdhery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [15] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [16] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, M. Podstawski, L. Gianinazzi, J. Gajda, T. Lehmann, H. Niewiadomski, P. Nyczyk, and T. Hoefler, “Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, no. 16, 2024, pp. 17 682–17 690. [17] Y. Wu, S. Prabhumoye, S. Y. Min, Y. Bisk, R. Salakhutdinov, A. Azaria, T. Mitchell, and Y. Li, “SPRING: Studying the paper and reasoning to play games,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 36, 2023. [18] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman et al. , “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 ,2021. [19] N. Friedman, “Introducing GitHub Copilot: Your AI pair programmer,” https://github.com/features/copilot, 2021, accessed: 2023-07-08. [20] C. W. Tan, S. Guo, M. F. Wong, and C. N. Hang, “Copilot for Xcode: Exploring AI-assisted programming by prompting cloud-based large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14349 , 2023. [21] Y. Wang, S. Guo, and C. W. Tan, “From code generation to software testing: AI copilot with context-based RAG,” IEEE Software , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 34–42, 2025. [22] OpenAI, “Codex: A coding agent that helps you build and ship with ai—powered by chatgpt,” https://openai.com/codex/, 2026, accessed: 2026-03-08. [23] Anthropic Claude, “Claude Code by Anthropic,” https://www.anthropic. com/product/claude-code, 2025, accessed: 2026-03-08. [24] OpenAI, J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman et al. , “GPT-4 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774 [25] Gemini Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, Y. Wu, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth et al. , “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 ,2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805 [26] Y. Wang, S. Guo, and C. W. Tan, “Contextual augmented multi-model programming (CAMP): A local-cloud copilot solution,” in 2025 IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence (CAI) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 675–681. [27] C. E. Shannon, “Game playing machines,” Journal of the Franklin Institute , vol. 260, no. 6, pp. 447–453, December 1955. [28] A. Phillips, J. Lang, and D. Mould, “Goal-oriented interactions in games using LLMs,” IEEE Transactions on Games , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 510–521, June 2025. [29] S. Bassanelli, A. Bucchiarone, and F. Gini, “GamiDOC: The importance of designing gamification in a proper way,” IEEE Transactions on Games , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 13–31, March 2025. [30] Y. Wang, S. Guo, L. Ling, and C. W. Tan, “Nemobot: Crafting strategic gaming LLM agents for k-12 AI education,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale , 2024, pp. 393–397. [31] M.-F. Wong, S. Guo, C.-N. Hang, S.-W. Ho, and C. W. Tan, “Natural language generation and understanding of big code for AI-assisted programming: A review,” Entropy , vol. 25, no. 6, p. 888, 2023. [32] M. F. Wong and C. W. Tan, “Aligning crowd-sourced human feedback for reinforcement learning on code generation by large language model,” in IEEE Transactions on Big Data, to appear , 2024. [33] A. J. Cole and A. J. T. Davie, “A game based on the euclidean algorithm and a winning strategy for it,” Mathematical Gazette , vol. 53, no. 386, pp. 354–357, 1969. [34] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. van den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanc-tot et al. , “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature , vol. 529, pp. 484–489, 2016. [35] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez, M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel, T. Lillicrap, K. Simonyan, and D. Hassabis, “A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play,” Science , vol. 362, no. 6419, pp. 1140–1144, 2018. [36] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. H. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 ,2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903 [37] A. G. Barto, “Reinforcement learning: Connections, surprises, chal-lenges,” AI Magazine , vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 3–15, 2019. [38] D. Michie and R. A. Chambers, “Boxes: An experiment in adaptive control,” Machine intelligence , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 137–152, 1968. [39] D. Michie, “Machines and the theory of intelligence,” Nature , vol. 241, no. 23.02, p. 1973, 1973. [40] S. Jafarpour and A. R. C. J. C. Burges, “Filter, rank, and transfer the knowledge: Learning to chat,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Workshop on Advances in Ranking , vol. 10, 2010. [41] D. Michie, “’Memo’ functions and machine learning,” Nature , vol. 218, pp. 19–22, 1968. 13 

[42] ——, “Discovery as collaboration: It takes two (at least) to tango,” 

Electronic Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 4, no. B, pp. 1–19, 2000. [43] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei, “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017. [44] R. Nakano, J. Hilton, S. Balaji, J. Wu, L. Ouyang, C. Kim, C. Hesse, S. Jain, V. Kosaraju, W. Saunders, X. Jiang, K. Cobbe, T. Eloundou, G. Krueger, K. Button, M. Knight, B. Chess, and J. Schulman, “WebGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,” CoRR , vol. abs/2112.09332, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.09332 [45] J. Li, C. W. Tan, C. Hang, and X. Qi, “A chatbot-server framework for scalable machine learning education through crowdsourced data,” in 

Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale (L@S ’22) . New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2022. [46] G. Kasparov and D. King, Kasparov Against the World: The Story of the Greatest Online Challenge . New York: KasparovChess Online, Inc., 2000. [47] OpenAI, “Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue,” Jan 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/ [48] G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, C. Xiao, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar, “Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. [49] J. S. Park, J. C. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior,” in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 2023, pp. 1–22. [50] Y. Wang, P.-D. Yu, and C. W. Tan, “Future-proofing programmers: Optimal knowledge tracing for ai-assisted personalized education,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 69–82, 2026. [51] C. W. Tan, “Large language model-driven classroom flipping: Empowering student-centric peer questioning with flipped interaction,” 

CoRR , vol. abs/2311.14708, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2311.14708 [52] D. Michie, “Knowledge, learning and machine intelligence,” in Intelli-gent Systems . Springer, Boston, MA, 1993, pp. 63–79. [53] T. Tseng, E. McLean, K. Pelrine, T. T. Wang, and A. Gleave, “Can go AIs be adversarially robust?” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 39, no. 26, 2025, p. 34980. [54] T. T. Wang, A. Gleave, T. Tseng, K. Pelrine, N. Belrose, J. Miller, M. D. Dennis, Y. Duan, V. Pogrebniak, S. Levine, and S. Russell, “Adversarial policies beat superhuman go AIs,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2023, p. 202. [55] D. Donoho, “Data science at the singularity,” Harvard Data Science Review , vol. 6, no. 1, 2024.