Title: Hierarchical Support Vector State Partitioning for Distilling Black Box Reinforcement Learning Policies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04254v1

Published Time: Thu, 07 May 2026 00:10:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
S. Deproost et al. / 

# Hierarchical Support Vector State Partitioning for Distilling Black Box Reinforcement Learning Policies 

Senne DEPROOST a,bMehrdad ASADI aand Ann NOW ´ E a,ba Vrije Universiteit Brussel 

b Flanders Make 

Abstract. We introduce State Vector Space Partitioning (SVSP), a novel method to mimic a black-box reinforcement learning policy using a set of human-interpretable sub-policies. By partitioning a distillation dataset of state–action pairs with linear support vector machine splits, SVSP constructs a compact and structured repre-sentation of the original policy. Our method improves mean return by +7.4% over previous critic-driven state partitioning attempts such as Voronoi State Partition-ing (VSP) and +2.8% over the original TD3 policy, while reducing the number of required sub-policies against VSP by 82.1%. Our results pave the path towards a more flexible form of distillation where both the decision boundary and surrogate models can be chosen within a margin of the original black box behavior. 

Keywords. Deep Reinforcement Learning, Interpretability, Distillation, State Partitioning 

1. Introduction 

State-of-the-art Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods built upon deep neural networks, making them hard to interpret, discouraging users from deploying the learned behavior into the production system. One way to address this issue is to produce locally inter-pretable models mimicking the original black-box decision function with more explain-able (e.g., linear) representation [1]. Global interpretability requires distilling policies into transparent surrogate decision trees via imitation learning [4,3]. Recent work has explored the use of RL-specific components, such as value networks and critics, to guide surrogate modeling [8]. In parallel, advances in tree-based methods suggest that com-plex policies can be approximated by decomposing the state space into regions governed by simple sub-policies [7]. Despite these advances, some partitioning strategies rely on simple distance-based metrics, such as nearest neighbor methods, to define state-space regions and specialized sub-policies [2]. While computationally efficient and convenient, such methods suffer from limited generalization and lack a strong theoretical guarantee on the quality of the induced decision boundaries. This limitation motivates the need for more robust and principled methods for state-space partitioning. In this work, we pro-pose to leverage theoretical insights from Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [5] to split the state space into regions where a specialized model performs comparable behavior to the original black-box policy. 

> arXiv:2605.04254v1 [cs.LG] 5 May 2026 April 2026

2. Method 

The main idea of Support Vector State Partitioning (SVSP) is the hierarchical splitting of the state space S into regions ri ∈ R where a subpolicy ˜ πr, represented by a human-interpretable class of model, can perform behavior that is close enough to the original RL policy π. The critic Qπ , which is a value estimator from the original policy that predicts the expected return of an action a ∈ A in a state s ∈ S, labels the subset in the region considered not sufficiently covered by the subpolicy. The state routing is learned by a binary SVM classifier, deciding whether or not to output an action with the current subpolicy or one deeper in the hierarchy. 

Algorithm 1 Support Vector State Partitioning                                                                              

> Require: State-action pairs ⟨Sπ,Aπ⟩, critic network Qπ
> 1: Initialize list of tree nodes with r0representing an arbitrary subpolicy 2: for n=0 to n iteration do
> 3: Fit subpolicy ˜ πron ⟨Sr,Ar⟩
> 4: A˜πr←˜π(Sr)
> 5: Evaluate ⟨Sr,A˜πr⟩using Qπ
> 6: Label states li=1 where Q(Sr,A˜πr)/V(Sr)>value threshold , 0 otherwise 7: Fit SVM classifier fr(s)→ { 0,1}on labeled states 8: Add child node cwith parent r
> 9: ⟨Sc,Ac⟩ ← { (⟨si,ai⟩,li)∈ ⟨ Sr,Ar⟩ | li=0}
> 10: for ciin r.children do
> 11: Repeat 12: end for
> 13: end for

As shown in Algorithm 1, we start by fitting the chosen class of model on the entire dataset. The model is trained until the marginal decrease in training loss is negligible. Afterwards, the critic evaluates for each state the behavior of the model by predicting the value of the predicted action for that state. Using a ratio Q(s, a)/V (s), with V being the state value, Q the action-value, we compute a relative advantage of the model choosing one action over all possible actions in that state. If this value is above a predetermined threshold 1, we consider the behavior produced good enough w.r.t. the learned return expectation of the critic (labeled as 1). Those below the threshold are considered too complex for the model to perform on (labeled 0). After this labeling, the Linear SVM is tasked with finding the decision boundary that best splits the data over those labels. The process is then repeated on the zero-labeled dataset until a predefined max-depth is reached. To encourage a breadth-first optimization, multiple traversals of the tree are taken. 

3. Validation 

To evaluate our method, we used the LunarLanderContinuous benchmark from Gymna-sium. This problem is an RL task, where an agent must land a spacecraft safely on a designated pad by controlling its thrusters. The challenge lies in achieving precision and 

> 1The threshold indicates how large the relative difference between predicted action value and state value should be. A threshold of 1 indicates average behavior, while thresholds above 1 enforces higher expectations from the critic to be considered for the subpolicy

April 2026 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 X position 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 Y position 

VSP X position Y position 

SVSP 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 

Figure 1. Comparison of the decision boundaries between VSP and SVSP for Lunar Lander. Both the parti-tioning on the X and Y positions is given with 0 for all other state variables. We notice that SVSP has decision boundaries that are significantly reduced in complexity. 

stability while accounting for gravity and avoiding crashes. An original TD3 agent from StableBaselines3 [6] is trained, and the state-actions of 1000 episodes are recorder. The dataset is comprised of a uniform selection of 30% of the pairs to reduce the computa-tion needed while having a diverse enough set of experiences for the model to train on. Validation is done on 20 independent experiments. The maximum tree depth for SVSP is kept at 3, whilst the amount of iterations of the algorithm is 3. We compare our re-sults to Voronoi State Partitioning (VSP) [2], which is a similar critic-driven partitioning algorithm that uses nearest neighbor lookups to perform the routing to a linear subpolicy. 

Table 1. Performance of the original TD3 agent, the VSP, and the proposed (SVSP) methods. SVSP both outperforms TD3 and VSP with a small set of 10 linear functions.                   

> Environment Return TD3 Return VSP Return SVSP # Sub-Policies VSP # Sub-Policies SVSP
> LunarLander 161 .8±8.28 154 .8±24 .91 166 .3±31 .07 55 .9±3.71 10

The results of both the VSP and SVSP method are given in Table 1. Our method outperforms VSP whilst using only a fifth of the linear subpolicies. Compared to VSP, a larger variance in returns was observed. Aside from this, we notice an improvement compared to the original TD3 policy. 

4. Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduce State Vector Space Partitioning (SVSP), a novel method to mimic a black box Reinforcement Learning policy with a set of human-interpretable subpolicies. By splitting a distillation dataset of state-actions from the original policy, we show that we partition the space using support vector machines with linear splits. Our validation on a well-known control benchmark demonstrates that SVSP achieves both higher returns and significantly lower policy complexity. With performance gains of 2.8–7.4% and an 82.1% reduction in sub-policies, it captures complex behaviors more efficiently than baseline approaches. These findings highlight SVSP as a practical and interpretable alternative for policy distillation. Further work would both look into improving the optimization of the decision tree as well as the exploitation of the margins provided by the support vector machines. The latter one could allow for improved rule mining when using non-linear SVM’s such as RBF-based kernels. April 2026 

Acknowledgment 

This research received funding from the Flanders Research Foundation via FWO S007723N (CTRLxAI) and FWO G062819N (Explainable Reinforcement Learning). M. A. and A. N. were supported by the Flemish AI Research Program and PEER project (EU Horizon Grant 101120406). 

References 

[1] Ribeiro, M., Singh, S. & Guestrin, C. ” Why should i trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier. Proceedings Of The 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference On Knowledge Discovery And Data Mining . pp. 1135-1144 (2016) [2] Deproost, S., Steckelmacher, D. & Now´ e, A. Explainable RL Policies by Distilling to Locally-Specialized Linear Policies with Voronoi State Partitioning. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2511.13322 . (2025) [3] Kohler, H., Delfosse, Q., Akrour, R., Kersting, K. & Preux, P. Interpretable and Editable Programmatic Tree Policies for Reinforcement Learning. (2024,10,28) [4] Coppens, Y., Efthymiadis, K., Lenaerts, T., Now´ e, A., Miller, T., Weber, R. & Magazzeni, D. Distilling deep reinforcement learning policies in soft decision trees. Proceedings Of The IJCAI 2019 Workshop On Explainable Artificial Intelligence . pp. 1-6 (2019) [5] Blanco, V., Jap´ on, A. & Puerto, J. Multiclass optimal classification trees with svm-splits. Machine Learning . 112 , 4905-4928 (2023) [6] Dhariwal, P., Hesse, C., Klimov, O., Nichol, A., Plappert, M., Radford, A., Schulman, J., Sidor, S., Wu, Y. & Zhokhov, P. OpenAI Baselines. GitHub Repository . (2017), https://github.com/openai/baselines [7] Bastani, O., Pu, Y. & Solar-Lezama, A. Verifiable reinforcement learning via policy extraction. Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems . 31 (2018) [8] Deproost, S., Steckelmacher, D. & Now´ e, A. Human-Readable Programs as Actors of Reinforcement Learning Agents Using Critic-Moderated Evolution. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2410.21940 . (2024)