Title: ReFineVLA: Multimodal Reasoning-Aware Generalist Robotic Policies via Teacher-Guided Fine-Tuning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17800v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:11:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# ReFineVLA : Multimodal Reasoning-Aware Generalist Robotic Policies via Teacher-Guided Fine-Tuning 

Tuan Van Vo 1,7,†, Tan Q. Nguyen 1,†, Khang Nguyen 2, Nhat Xuan Tran 1, Duy H. M. Nguyen 3,An T. Le 4, Ngo Anh Vien 1, and Minh Nhat Vu 5,6

> 1

VinRobotics, Hanoi. Vietnam 

> 2

University of Texas at Arlington, Texas, USA 

> 3

Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS), Stuttgart, Germany 

> 4

Intelligent Autonomous Systems Lab, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 

> 5

Automation & Control Institute, TU Wien, Austria 

> 6

Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT), Vienna, Austria. Email: minh.vu@ait.ac.at 

> 7

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), UAE. 

> †

Equal contribution 

## Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have gained much attention from the research com-munity thanks to their strength in translating multimodal observations with linguistic instructions into desired robotic actions. Despite their advancements, VLAs often overlook explicit reasoning and learn the functional input-action mappings, omitting crucial logical steps, which are especially pronounced in interpretability and generalization for complex, long-horizon manipulation tasks. In this work, we propose ReFineVLA , a multimodal reasoning-aware framework that fine-tunes VLAs with teacher-guided reasons. We first augment robotic datasets with reasoning rationales generated by an expert teacher model, guiding VLA models to learn to reason about their actions. Then, we fine-tune pre-trained VLAs with the reasoning-enriched datasets with ReFineVLA , while maintaining the underly-ing generalization abilities and boosting reasoning capabilities. We also conduct attention map visualization to analyze the alignment among visual observation, linguistic prompts, and to-be-executed actions of ReFineVLA , reflecting the model’s ability to focus on relevant tasks and actions. Through this additional step, we explore that ReFineVLA -trained models exhibit a meaningful agreement between vision-language and action domains, highlighting the enhanced multimodal understanding and generalization. Evaluated across a suite of simulated manipulation benchmarks on SimplerEnv with both WidowX and Google Robot tasks, ReFineVLA achieves state-of-the-art performance, with an average 5.0% improvement in success rate over the second-best method on the WidowX benchmark, reaching 47 .7% task success. In more visually and contextually diverse scenarios, ReFineVLA yields 3.5% and 

2.3% gains in variant aggregation ( 68 .8% ) and visual matching ( 76 .6% ) settings, respectively. Notably, it improves performance by 9.6% on the Move Near task and 8.2% on Open/Close Drawer in challenging settings. 

## 1 Introduction 

Robotic policies learned for task-specific applications often struggle to generalize beyond their training data, limiting their effectiveness when faced with novel objects, environments, instructions, and cross-embodiments. Recent progress in vision-language foundation models, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), LLaVA (Liu et al., 2024a), Phi-3-Vision (Abdin et al., 2024). Along with these foundational models, more powerful large language models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have showcased remarkable generalization across a broad spectrum of multimodality. In the same scope, vision-Language-Action (VLA) models (Brohan et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2024; Zhen et al., 2024a; Zheng et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2024) have also been proposed to aim for the fusion of broad generalization for foundation models with the specific expertise training on large-scale robotic datasets (Chen et al.; Ebert et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023b; O’Neill et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Khazatsky et al., 2024; Collaboration et al., 2023a). 1

> arXiv:2604.17800v1 [cs.RO] 20 Apr 2026

Although VLAs inherit the robustness of VLMs and are trained on large-scale datasets, these models often lack sophisticated and adaptive multimodal reasoning (Kim et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2025). They typically learn a direct functional mapping from multimodal observations to actions, without explicit step-by-step reasoning over the action horizon. This limitation becomes especially pronounced under out-of-distribution conditions, where robust performance requires a nuanced understanding of and adaptability to novel and diverse environmental variations. To address this problem, we propose ReFineVLA 

to inject explicit multimodal reasoning into pre-trained VLAs. Our approach leverages an expert teacher to generate detailed natural-language rationales that articulate the sequential logic as physical intelligence behind robotic actions in the context of language-based instructions. In particular, we hypothesize that this reasoning supervision improves the model’s understanding of observation–action relationships, thereby improving its performance on complex and compositional manipulation tasks (Lu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). Our ReFineVLA framework fine-tunes a VLA backbone and embeds it with reasoning-augmented trajectories using a multi-objective loss to predict actions and generate multimodal reasoning rationales. By doing this, the learning of policy and explicit reasoning adaptation is jointly optimized rather than mere input–output mappings, preserving the pre-trained generalization while enhancing reasoning capacity. Specifically, we instantiate ReFineVLA by fine-tuning a 3.5B-parameter VLA model on 125 , 000 annotated manipulation trajectories with multimodal reasoning annotation. To evaluate generalization ability, we test our models on diverse SimplerEnv scenarios for Google and WidowX robots, which closely replicate real-world conditions. While comparing ReFineVLA ’s performance against the state-of-the-art methods, our model consistently outperforms existing VLA baselines across all embodiments and environments, demonstrating exceptional robustness under environmental variation, reflecting its deeper multimodal understanding and reasoning. To sum up, our key contributions are summarized below: 

• Methodology: We propose a transfer-based fine-tuning framework that injects explicit multimodal reasoning into pre-trained VLAs via teacher-generated natural-language rationales, aligning policy learning with structured “chain-of-thought” supervision. 

• Dataset & Models: We curate a 125 , 000 -trajectory dataset by prompting an expert reasoning teacher to produce step-by-step multimodal reasoning rationales for each demonstration. We fine-tune 3.5B VLA backbones to learn this reasoning-enriched data, improving performance and inference efficiency through empirical validations and experiments. 

• Attention Visualization & Validation: We validate our method via extensive simulations on WidowX and Google robots across diverse embodiments. We also conduct attention-map visualizations that reveal that the model’s focus shifts from narrow action targets to semantically relevant objects and spatial anchors post–ReFineVLA fine-tuning. 

## 2 Related Work 

Vision-Language-Action Models: Building on the success of VLMs in understanding multimodal data (Karamcheti et al., 2023; Gadre et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023), recent work has extended these models to robotic control, giving rise to VLAs. These models aim to develop generalist robot policies by enabling pre-trained VLMs to output robot actions. Methods like RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023), RT-2-X (Collaboration et al., 2023a), OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024), and RoboPoint (Yuan et al., 2024) treat discretized actions as language tokens and fine-tune large VLMs on robot datasets. Grounding a domain-general vision–language backbone in domain-specific constraints through hybrid explicit–implicit representation learning and task-centric adaptation, as presented by Robotic-CLIP (Nguyen et al., 2024), enables robots to inherit broad visual generalization while accurately modeling action-specific dynamics. Other approaches, like MobilityVLA (Chiang et al., 2024), CogACT (Li et al., 2024a), TraceVLA (Zheng et al., 2024), and π0(Black et al., 2024), explore reasoning traces and continuous action spaces. Meanwhile, SpatialVLA(Qu et al., 2025) enhances spatial representations in VLA models. Despite their strong task performance and zero-shot generalization, these models typically require complex fine-tuning for new tasks or novel robot configurations. More importantly, their action-focused training objectives often bypass explicit, step-by-step multimodal reasoning, limiting robustness in tasks that demand deeper understanding and planning (Lu et al., 2024). 2Generalist Robot Policies: Recent advancements in robotic learning have witnessed a significant trend towards developing multi-task “ generalist ” robot policies capable of performing a wide array of tasks across diverse environments and embodiments, moving beyond task-specific controllers (Reed et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2022; Haldar & Pinto, 2023; Zhu et al., 2023a). Early efforts often focused on learning language-conditioned visual policies on a single embodiment using pre-trained visual and text encoders (Parisotto et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2015; Shridhar et al., 2023; Haldar et al., 2024), which limits their adaptability to new robot platforms. More recent research leverages large-scale, cross-embodiment robot datasets (O’Neill et al., 2024) for pre-training generalist policies, facilitating effective fine-tuning to new robot setups (Team et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024). Notable example, Octo (Team et al., 2024), utilizes a flexible transformer architecture to unify embodiments. Diffusion-based generalist models, such as RPT (Liu et al., 2024b) and HPT (Wang et al., 2024), propose modular architectures to align data from heterogeneous embodiments. In this research line, VLAs represent a prominent direction within generalist policies by directly adapting powerful VLMs for action generation. Nevertheless, they lack the step-by-step reasoning of more sophisticated generalist robot policies. Thus, we aim to solve this problem via an expert-based fine-tuning framework that can work along with and complement generating robot policies. 

Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for Robotics: Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning has gained prominence in LLMs and VLMs, enabling them to break down complex problems into intermediate steps and improve performance on challenging reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2023; Chia et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023). Methods like fine-tuning smaller models on rationales generated by larger “ teacher ”models have shown promise in transferring reasoning abilities efficiently (Wei et al., 2021). CoT has also been explored in the visual domain for tasks like visual question answering and reasoning about future states (Shao et al., 2024; Rose et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024; Harvey & Wood, 2023). More recently, CoT-inspired ideas have appeared in embodied AI, including generating textual plans (Mu et al., 2024; Michał et al., 2024), generating robotic trajectories (Wen et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Zawalski et al., 2024), or generating intermediate visual states (Ni et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). Nevertheless, the explicit application of multimodal reasoning to guide the policy learning process in VLA models for robotic manipulation, by training the VLA to jointly generate actions and explanatory multimodal reasoning rationales derived from a teacher, remains relatively underexplored. Our work, ReFineVLA , also bridges this gap by explicitly leveraging multimodal reasoning rationales generated by an expert LLM teacher to guide the fine-tuning of student VLA models, thereby instilling explicit reasoning capabilities directly into the learned robotic policies. 

## 3 A Closer Look at Vision-Language-Action with Multimodal Reasoning 

Background: Traditional approaches to robotic policy learning often rely on datasets of task-specific demonstrations D = {τ1, τ 2, ..., τ n}, where each trajectory τi = {(ot, s t, a t)}Tt=1 records expert observations, states, and actions. The introduced methods (Jain et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Tschannen et al., 2025) commonly employ a visual encoder Fϕ to extract features zi = Fϕ(oi) from image observations oi, which are then fed into a policy network πθ to output action distributions ˆa ∼ πθ (·| z, s ). Training typically involves minimizing the discrepancy between the predicted actions ˆa and the expert actions a (Zhang et al., 2024; Zhen et al., 2024b; Xiang et al., 2025). While effective for specific tasks, this paradigm often struggles with generalization to new tasks, environments, or robot embodiments. 

Limitations of VLAs with Multimodal Reasoning Understanding: Despite their great foundation in VLMs and training on large robot datasets, standard VLAs can exhibit limitations in deep multimodal understanding and reasoning, as the objective is defined to primarily optimize for accurate next-action prediction without any presence of reasoning-based CoT (Ni et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Mu et al., 2024; Michał et al., 2024). Given an observation o including both visual observation, liguistic instruction, and an expert action a, the VLA training process minimizes the negative log-likelihood of the action tokens to learn the conditional probability p(a | o), where the standard loss formulation denotes as Laction = − log p(a | o). In particular, current VLA models primarily learn a direct functional mapping from visual and linguistic inputs to the corresponding action outputs. While this direct mapping is sufficient for tasks where the required action is a simple, reactive response to the immediate observation and instruction, it often fails to infuse the step-by-step multimodal reasoning needed for more complex scenarios or tasks demanding compositional physical logic (Lu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). 3This restriction impacts their ability for robust multimodal understanding for reasoning tasks, such as observation-situation analysis ( i.e. , interpreting the current state based on visual cues), instructions, and spatial reasoning ( i.e. , understanding spatial relationships between objects), and task planning ( i.e. , breaking down a high-level goal into sequential steps). The action predictor, which focuses solely on the final action outcome, might implicitly encourage the model to find correlations sufficient for seen tasks aggressively, but without explicitly learning the underlying causal or sequential logic, leading to a deficit in robust multimodal understanding. Prompt : Pick the bottle . Prompt : Pick mushroom    

> into the pot .
> Prompt :Put small spoon
> from basket to tray .
> Prompt :Put the small
> spoon onto the towel .
> Figure 1: Visualization of Attention Tokens: Attention maps of action tokens in standard VLAs, illustrating the narrow focus on visual cues. Darker red shows higher attention scores, while light green means lesser attention.

To investigate this limitation , we conduct a closer look at the attention mechanisms within standard VLAs, specifically examining the attention heatmap of action tokens. Motivated by work in visual grounding (Kang et al., 2025), which shows that certain attention heads in VLMs can localize image regions corresponding to text, we analyze where the VLA model attends in the input image when predicting actions. Formally, given an input sequence of visual embeddings and textual prompts, the attention distribution for action tokens during autoregressive decoding is computed as follows: 

Attention (t) 

> h,l

(Q, K, V ) = softmax 

( Q(t)

> h,l

(Kh,l )T

√dk

)

Vh,l , (1) where Q(t) 

> h,l

denotes queries from the t-th action token at the h-th attention head and the l-th layer, Kh,l and 

Vh,l represent keys and values derived from the multimodal input sequence, and dk is the dimension of the key vectors. Subsequently, we aggregate attention scores across heads and layers using a top-k fusion strategy to emphasize the most significant responses based on the attention score in Equation 1: 

AttnMap (t) = top-k 

(

max 

> h∈H,l ∈L

{

Attention (t)

> h,l

})

(2) Via Equation 2, our attention map visualizations in Figure 1 further reveal that traditional VLAs focus narrowly on specific visual cues directly associated with the immediate action, often disregarding crucial broader multimodal context and spatial relationships necessary for deeper reasoning. This narrow focus supports our hypothesis that standard action-only training encourages a reactive, direct mapping rather than a comprehensive multimodal understanding grounded in explicit rationale. We hypothesize that introducing explicit reasoning supervision can mitigate this limitation by enriching the model’s understanding of obser-vation–action relationships, thereby enhancing performance on complex and compositional manipulation tasks (Lu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025). Further implementation details for attention extraction and visualization can be found in Supplementary Appendix A.6. 

## 4 ReFineVLA : Reasoning-Aware Teacher-Guided Transfer Fine-Tuning 

To enrich VLA models’ capability regarding interpretability and generalization, we incorporate ReFineVLA 

with an explicit multimodal reasoning. Specifically, we first present the generation of multimodal reasoning annotations in Section 4.1 from an expert reasoning teacher. Section 4.2 outlines the selective transfer fine-tuning strategy. Thus, the training objectives are formulated in Section 4.3 with the training algorithm (Algorithm 1) and the implementation details (Section 4.4). 4Input Prompt : You are a robot . Given the image and the instruction to put 

the spoon into the cup , scan the scene and reason step -by -step about what 

you see , what each object is , what are the planning steps for a robotic 

controller , and what actions might be possible ? Think carefully and describe 

the steps followed the key questions .

#1 <Observation >: What do you see in the images ?

#2 <Situation Analysis >: What is happening in the scene ?

#3 <Spatial Reasoning >: How are the objects arranged , and what spatial 

relationships matter for completing the task ?

#4 <Task Planning >: What are the logical steps to achieve the task , and 

what should be the robot 's sequential actions ?

#1 <Observation >: I observe a toy kitchen sink area . Inside the sink 

basin , there are several toy items : a yellow banana , a green cucumber ,

a purple eggplant , a light blue cup , and a light blue spoon with a fork 

attached . To the right of the sink , on what appears to be a stovetop ,

there is a metal pot and an orange object (possibly a carrot ). Above 

the sink , there is a robotic arm with a gripper extended downwards ,

positioned near the back of the sink . There are also other toy items 

visible on the counter surrounding the sink .

#2 <Situation Analysis >: The scene depicts a toy kitchen environment .

The robotic arm is positioned over the sink , which contains several toy 

items . The task is to put the spoon on the cup .

#3 <Spatial Reasoning >: The spoon and the cup are both located inside the sink basin . The cup is positioned upright and closer 

to the front right corner of the sink from the robot 's perspective . The spoon , which appears to be part of a spoon -fork utensil ,

is lying flat next to the cup , slightly to its left . The robotic arm 's gripper is currently positioned above the back of the sink , not 

directly over the spoon or cup . To complete the task , the robot needs to interact with both the spoon and the cup . The spoon 

is currently not on the cup .

#4 <Task Planning >: The robot has to move its arm to a position suitable for grasping the spoon .

logical _steps :

- Identify and locate the spoon : The spoon is identifiable and its position in the sink is known .

- Identify and locate the cup : The cup is identifiable and its position in the sink is known .

- Approach the spoon : The robot needs to move its gripper closer to the spoon .

- Grasp the spoon : The robot must successfully pick up the spoon with its gripper .

- Move the spoon towards the cup : Once grasped , the robot needs to lift the spoon and maneuver it over the cup .

- Place the spoon on the cup : The robot must lower the spoon onto the rim or opening of the cup .

- Release the spoon : The robot will then open its gripper to release the spoon onto the cup .

sub _action : Move its arm to a position suitable for grasping the spoon .

Visual Inputs & Linguistic Instructio n

Chain -of -Thought Reasoning 

[Δposition , Δrotation ,

gripper _control ]?Figure 2: Multimodal Robotic Instruction Understanding with Chain-of-Thought Reasoning : An illustrative example depicts a single annotated data sample from a robotic manipulator grounded task planning. The task is for a robot to place a spoon into a cup, given an observation of a cluttered scene and natural language instructions. The input prompt guides the robot to reason through a sequence of structured questions: (1) Observation 

– identifying objects in the image; (2) Situation Analysis – understanding the context; (3) Spatial Reasoning – analyzing object relationships; and (4) Task Planning – formulating an action plan in logical steps. The annotated response includes step-by-step reasoning under each category, leading to a detailed plan of robot actions involving position, rotation, and gripper control for low-level motor commands. 

4.1 Multimodal Reasoning Annotation Generation 

Standard robotic datasets, denoted as D = {(oi, a i)}Ni=1 , contain multimodal observations oi, including visual images Ii and language instructions li, paired with actions ai. These datasets aim to capture a variety of tasks and scenarios that robots may encounter, facilitating the training of models that map observations to appropriate actions. However, a critical limitation of these datasets is the lack of explicit reasoning annotations that explain why specific actions are suitable given the multimodal inputs. In other words, while these datasets provide examples of what a robot should do in a given situation, they do not offer insight into the underlying decision-making process or rationale that justifies each action. To explicitly incorporate multimodal reasoning, we utilize powerful reasoning-based teacher models ( i.e. ,Gemini (Team et al., 2023)). We generate reasoning annotations by prompting the teacher with the structured 5frozen params 

Put the spoon 

into the cup .

... 

... ... 

language encoder vision encoder 

trainable params                 

> ReFineVLA Model
> ...
> Observation :I observed several items :a
> yellow banana ,alight blue cup ,a light blue
> spoon -fork
> Situation Analysis :The scene depicts ... The
> task is put the spoon into the cup .
> Spatial Reasoning :The spoon ,which appears
> to be part of a spoon -fork utensil ,is lying flat
> next to the cup ...
> Task Planning :The robot needs to
> logical _steps :
> Mo ve its gripper closer to the spoon .
> Grasp the spoon .
> Move the spoon towards the cup .
> Place the spoon on the cup .
> Release the spoon .
> sub _action :Move its arm to a position
> suitable for grasping the spoon .

Reasoning Teacher  Downstream Manipulation with Instruction 

closed -loop control reasoning tokens  action tokens Figure 3: Overview of ReFineVLA ’s Training Flow: A fine-tuning framework that enhances VLA models with explicit multimodal reasoning, guided by rationales from a teacher model. These rationales cover visual cues, spatial reasoning, and task planning and are injected during training via action and reasoning losses. The learner integrates visual-linguistic inputs, infuses reasoning, and outputs interpretable actions for closed-loop control. 

multimodal reasoning prompt (Figure 2). For each observation-action pair (oi, a i), the teacher model generates a detailed multimodal reasoning annotation ri, explicitly elucidating the rationale behind the chosen action given the visual and linguistic context. The enriched dataset thus becomes D′ = {(oi, a i, r i)}Ni=1 with ri

denotes as the reasoning for ith pair in the original dataset D. These annotations act as structured multimodal reasoning signals, bridging perception and action. Explicit rationales enable models to understand and reason through complex task requirements, significantly enhancing their ability to generalize across tasks and interpret their decision-making processes. Extended examples similar to Figure 2 are provided in Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6 (Appendix A.1). 

4.2 Selective Transfer Fine-Tuning for Efficient Adaptation 

ReFineVLA builds upon robust features learned by large-scale VLA models pre-trained on extensive general robotic manipulation data. Rather than fully fine-tuning the model, which can be computationally expensive, 

ReFineVLA employs selective transfer fine-tuning, outlined as follows: 

• Preservation of General Features: Pre-trained VLA models encode diverse and generalizable features. Full fine-tuning on specialized reasoning-enriched datasets risks overfitting, thereby losing foundational generalization (Zhou et al., 2025). Therefore, selective fine-tuning preserves these foundational representations by freezing most parameters, particularly the lower layers involved in basic feature extraction (Del Corro et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2024). 

• Efficient Adaptation: Selectively tuning a subset of model parameters significantly reduces computational resource demands, such as time, memory, and FLOPs, making ReFineVLA practical and scalable for diverse robotic tasks and embodiments. 

• Targeted Knowledge Infusion: Explicit multimodal reasoning predominantly involves higher-level cognitive processing. We hypothesize that such abstract reasoning capabilities reside in the upper layers of the VLA model, typically associated with decision-making and complex feature integration. Selective fine-tuning targets these upper layers, enabling the model to effectively integrate explicit reasoning capabilities without compromising foundational low-level feature extraction. 6Empirically determined layers, such as later transformer blocks in vision and language encoders and the policy head, are selected to ensure targeted reasoning infusion, preserving general pre-trained features while efficiently adapting the model for explicit reasoning. 

4.3 Learning Objectives 

To successfully realize the shortcomings in robotic multimodal reasoning as outlined above, we define the training objective of ReFineVLA that jointly optimizes action prediction and reasoning generation as follows: 

LReFineVLA = Laction + λrLreasoning , (3) where Laction presents the behavioral cloning loss ensuring accurate action cloning/prediction, Lreasoning 

guides rationale generation, fostering structured multimodal reasoning, and λr serves as a hyperparameter controlling the penalty of ReFineVLA ’s reasoning performance. 

Action Prediction Loss ( Laction ): The model predicts ground-truth actions ai given multimodal inputs 

oi, optimizing the negative log-likelihood: 

Laction = − ∑

> t

log P(ai,t | oi, a i,<t ; θ). (4) 

Reasoning Generation Loss ( Lreasoning ): The model is also trained to produce rationales ri, governed through standard language modeling negative log-likelihood as follows: 

Lreasoning = − ∑

> j

log P(ri,j | oi, r i,<j ; θ). (5) In brief. Equation 4 ensures the model learns the primary task as an objective for actions; meanwhile, Equation 5 governs the model to learn thinking step-by-step, akin to a reasoning objective. 

Algorithm 1: ReFineVLA : Reasoning-Aware Fine-Tuning of VLA 

Input: Reasoning dataset D′ = {(xi, r i, a i)}Ni=1 ; pre-trained parameters θfull ; batch size B

Output: Fine-tuned subset of parameters θ 

> 1

Freeze θfull \ θ // only fine-tune upper layers  

> 2

repeat  

> 3

Sample mini-batch {(oj , a j , r j )}Bj=1 ∼ D ′ 

> 4

for j = 1 to B do  

> 5

ˆaj ← VLA θ (oj ) // action prediction  

> 6

ˆrj ← VLA θ (oj ) // auto-regressive rationale generation  

> 7

L(j) 

> action

← − log P(aj | xj ; θ) // action objective (Equation 4)  

> 8

L(j) 

> reasoning

← − log P(rj | xj ; θ) // reasoning objective (Equation 5)  

> 9

Lbatch ← 1

> B

∑Bb=1 

(

L(b) 

> action

+ λr L(b)

> reasoning

) 

> // model objective (Equation 3)
> 10

θ ← θ − η∇θ Lbatch // parameters update  

> 11

until convergence (e.g., validation performance plateaus or training epochs reached) 

4.4 Implementation Details 

The training of ReFineVLA in Algorithm 1 follows a supervised learning paradigm, iteratively updating the selected learnable parameters, θ, of the pre-trained VLA model. Through this, we are able to refine any VLAs to jointly predict actions and generate rationales, leveraging pre-trained knowledge while efficiently adapting to the reasoning-augmented data, as illustrated in Figure 3. For more about data generation and implementation details, please refer to Appendix A. We apply our multimodal reasoning annotation generation pipeline to the BridgeData-v2 (Walke et al., 2023) and Google RT1 Robot datasets (Brohan et al., 2022) to create our datasets with reasoning annotations. 7Specifically, we gathered approximately 125 , 000 robot trajectories annotated with multimodal reasoning annotation, forming our fine-tuning dataset for ReFineVLA . For VLA models, we started with SpatialVLA (Qu et al., 2025), a 3.5B VLA model based on the PaliGemma 2 VLM backbone (Steiner et al., 2024), trained on the Open X-Embodiment (O’Neill et al., 2024) and RHT20 datasets (Fang et al., 2024). SpatialVLA is also pre-trained on a large dataset, exploring effective spatial representations through techniques like Ego3D Position Encoding and Adaptive Action Grids, which enhance 3D scene understanding and transferability. These models provide robust starting points with established capabilities in generalist policies and spatial awareness, respectively, making them suitable backbones for learning enhanced reasoning. 

## 5 Experiments & Ablation Studies 

5.1 Baselines 

To evaluate our method’s performance, we conduct experiments on diverse environments of 137 configurations across Google Robot tasks and WidowX Robot tasks in SimplerEnv that closely mimic real-world settings and conditions. We compare against state-of-the-art open-source generalist VLA-based policies with varying model sizes and training paradigms. 

OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024): A VLA model built upon Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023) combined with a visual encoder integrating pre-trained features from DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) and SigLIP (Zhai et al., 2023). OpenVLA is pre-trained on the Open-X-Embodiment dataset (Collaboration et al., 2023b). 

Octo-Base (Team et al., 2024): A-93M parameter transformer-based policy trained on 800 , 000 trajectories from Open-X-Embodiment. 

RT-1 (O’Neill et al., 2024): A scalable Robotics Transformer model to transfer knowledge from large task-agnostic datasets. Trained on diverse robotic datasets, RT-1 attains a high level of generalization and task-specific performance across a variety of robotic tasks, demonstrating the value of open-ended task-agnostic training of high-capacity models. 

RoboVLM (Dorka et al., 2024): A unified, flexible framework for converting pre-trained VLM-based models into VLA-based policies by systematically exploring three key design dimensions with VLM backbone selection, policy architecture formulation, such as action-space and history integration, and timing of cross-embodiment. 

TraceVLA (Zheng et al., 2024): An enhanced spatial-temporal VLA model for reasoning via visual trace prompting. Built by fine-tuning OpenVLA on robot manipulation trajectories, TraceVLA is able to encode state-action history as visual prompts to improve manipulation performance in interactive tasks. 

SpatialVLA (Qu et al., 2025): The most recent state-of-the-art model focused on spatial understanding for robot manipulation, incorporating 3D information such as spatial movement. SpatialVLA learns a generalist policy for spatial manipulation across diverse robotic tasks and predicts four actions at a time. 

5.2 Simulation Evaluation 

SimplerEnv: Our simulation evaluation utilizes SimplerEnv Google Robot tasks, which follow two distinct settings: visual matching and variant aggregation . The visual matching setting aims to minimize the visual appearance gap between real environments and raw simulation, significantly enhancing the correlation between policy performance in simulation and real-world scenarios. Complementing this, variant aggregation covers a wide range of environmental variations, including backgrounds of different rooms, lighter and darker lighting conditions, varying numbers of distractors, solid color and complex table textures, and camera poses. We also evaluate across different manipulation policies on the SimplerEnv WidowX Robot tasks setup with tasks: 

Put Spoon on Towel , Put Carrot on Plate , Stack Green Block on Yellow Block , and Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket , measuring both grasp correction success and full task completion rates. These variations allow us to assess the robustness and adaptability of ReFineVLA in handling diverse manipulation scenarios, particularly in evaluating the spatial and temporal awareness brought by multimodal reasoning understanding. 8Table 1: Evaluated Performances of VLA baselines on SimplerEnv with WidowX Robot Tasks: The zero-shot and fine-tuning results denote the performance of the pre-trained models on the OXE dataset (O’Neill et al., 2024) and fine-tuned models on the BridgeData-v2 (Walke et al., 2023), respectively. Bold denotes the best peformance and underline indicates the second-best one. 

VLA Baseline Robotic Task Put Spoon on Towel Put Carrot on Plate Stack Green Block on Yellow Block Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket Average Grasp Success Grasp Success Grasp Success Grasp Success RT-1-X (Collaboration et al., 2023b) 16.7% 0.0% 20.8% 4.2% 8.3% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 1.1% Octo-Base (Team et al., 2024) 34.7% 12.5% 52.8 % 8.3% 31.9% 0.0% 66.7% 43.1% 16.0% Octo-Small (Team et al., 2024) 77.8 % 47.2 % 27.8% 9.7% 40.3% 4.2% 87.5% 56.9% 30.0% OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) 4.1% 0.0% 33.3% 0.0% 12.5% 0.0% 8.3% 4.1% 1.1% RoboVLM (zero-shot) (Dorka et al., 2024) 37.5% 20.8% 33.3% 25.0% 8.3% 8.3% 0.0% 0.0% 13.5% RoboVLM (fine-tuning) (Dorka et al., 2024) 54.2% 29.2% 25.0% 25.0% 45.8% 12.5% 58.3% 58.3% 31.3% SpatialVLA (zero-shot) (Qu et al., 2025) 25.0% 20.8% 41.7% 20.8% 58.3% 25.0% 79.2% 70.8% 34.4% SpatialVLA (fine-tuning) (Qu et al., 2025) 20.8% 16.7% 29.2% 25.0% 62.5% 29.2 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 42.7% 

ReFineVLA (Ours) 42.9% 38.1% 33.3% 33.3 % 71.4 % 23.8% 100.0 % 95.2% 47.7 %

Table 2: Evaluated Performances of VLA baselines on SimplerEnv with Google Robot Tasks: The zero-shot and fine-tuning results denote the performance of the pre-traineđ models on the OXE dataset (O’Neill et al., 2024) and the fine-tuned models on the Fractal dataset (Brohan et al., 2022), respectively. Bold denotes the best peformance and underline indicates the second-best one.                                                                                                                           

> VLA Baseline Robotic Task Visual Matching Variant Aggregation
> Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Average Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Average RT-1 (begin) (Brohan et al., 2022) 2.7% 5.0% 13.9% 6.8% 2.2% 4.0% 6.9% 4.2% RT-1 ( 15% ) (Brohan et al., 2022) 71.0% 35.4% 56.5% 60.2% 81.3% 44.6% 26.7% 56.2% RT-1 (converged) (Brohan et al., 2022) 85.7 %44.2% 73.0 %74.6% 89.8% 50.0% 32.3% 63.3% HPT (Wang et al., 2024) 56.0% 60.0% 24.0% 46.0% ––––TraceVLA (Zheng et al., 2024) 28.0% 53.7% 57.0% 42.0% 60.0% 56.4% 31.0% 45.0% RT-1-X (O’Neill et al., 2024) 56.7% 31.7% 59.7% 53.4% 49.0% 32.3% 29.4% 39.6% RT-2-X (O’Neill et al., 2024) 78.7% 77.9% 25.0% 60.7% 82.3% 79.2% 35.3 %64.3% Octo-Base (Team et al., 2024) 17.0% 4.2% 22.7% 16.8% 0.6% 3.1% 1.1% 1.1% OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024) 16.3% 46.2% 35.6% 27.7% 54.5% 47.7% 17.7% 39.8% RoboVLM (zero-shot) (Li et al., 2024b) 72.7% 66.3% 26.8% 56.3% 68.3% 56.0% 8.5% 46.3% RoboVLM (fine-tuning) (Li et al., 2024b) 77.3% 61.7% 43.5% 63.4% 75.6% 60.0% 10.6% 51.3% SpatialVLA (zero-shot) (Qu et al., 2025) 81.7% 85.7% 56.0 % 74.4% 89.7% 79.7% 33.0% 67.4% SpatialVLA (fine-tuning) (Qu et al., 2025) 82.5% 85.7% 54.6% 74.3% 90.6 %79.1% 26.2% 65.3%
> ReFineVLA (Ours) 83.0 %95.3 %51.4% 76.6 %83.8% 88.1 %34.4% 68.8 %

Overall Performance: The results across both SimplerEnv benchmarks (Table 1 and Table 2) reveal that 

ReFineVLA achieves the highest average success rates in nearly all settings, reflecting improved learning behavior and generalization capacity. On the WidowX benchmark (Table 1), ReFineVLA achieves a 47 .7% 

average success rate, outperforming the second-best SpatialVLA ( 42 .7% ) by 5.0% . It achieves near-perfect performance on the Put Eggplant in Yellow Basket task with 95 .2% success, closely following SpatialVLA’s 

100 .0% , while demonstrating substantial improvements in more complex spatial reasoning tasks, such as Put Spoon on Towel (21 .4% over SpatialVLA) and Put Carrot on Plate (8.3% ). These results indicate enhanced spatial awareness and manipulation capabilities enabled by reasoning-guided supervision. In the SimplerEnv Google Robot tasks (Table 2), ReFineVLA achieves the highest average success in both 

visual matching (76 .6% ) and variant aggregation (68 .8% ) settings, outperforming SpatialVLA ( 74 .3% and 

65 .3% ) by 2.3% and 3.5% , respectively. Notably, ReFineVLA surpasses all baselines in the Move Near task with 95 .3% accuracy ( 9.6% over SpatialVLA) and on Open/Close Drawer in variant aggregation with 34 .4% 

(8.2% ). Therefore, these experimental results highlight ReFineVLA ’s robustness under spatial, visual, and temporal variations, thanks to its structured reasoning learning objective. For a comprehensive breakdown and further discussion of per-task results on SimplerEnv Google Robot benchmarks, please refer to Table 8 in Appendix B.2. 95.3 Ablation Studies 

To analyze the performance of ReFineVLA , we further study the following key questions: 

1) How does reasoning supervision affect learning during fine-tuning and generalizing robotic tasks? To further analyze how reasoning supervision enhances model performance, we conduct an ablation study using the SimplerEnv Google Robot benchmark (Table 3). We compare SpatialVLA fine-tuning against two variants of ReFineVLA : transfer fine-tuning only, and transfer fine-tuning with reasoning learning. Without reasoning, ReFineVLA already reaches 70 .8% of accuracy in visual matching settings and 67 .4% of accuracy in variant aggregation settings. However, once reasoning supervision is introduced, performance rises to 76 .6% and 68 .8% , respectively. The largest improvements are observed in high-level tasks requiring spatial and temporal abstraction, such as Move Near (9.6% over SpatialVLA) and Open/Close Drawer (8.2% ). These findings support our design that targeted fine-tuning of upper layers and explicit reasoning loss promotes more structured and transferable policies, enhancing robustness under visual and embodiment shift. 

Table 3: The Effect of Reasoning Supervision on Generalization and Transferability: The comparisons between SpatialVLA fine-tuning against two variants of ReFineVLA on SimplerEnv Google Robot tasks: (i) with transfer fine-tuning, and (ii) with transfer fine-tuning with explicit reasoning supervision. Bold indicates the best result, and underline denotes the second-best result per column.                                    

> VLA Baseline Robotic Task Visual Matching Variant Aggregation
> Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Average Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Average SpatialVLA (fine-tuning) (Qu et al., 2025) 82.5% 85.7% 54.6 %74.3% 90.6 %79.1% 26.2% 65.3%
> ReFineVLA with (i) 78.1% 83.3% 50.9% 70.8% 83.7% 86.4% 32.0% 67.4%
> ReFineVLA with (ii) 83.0 %95.3 %51.4% 76.6 %83.8% 88.1 %34.4 %68.8 %

In addition, to further investigate the role of explicit reasoning supervision in multimodal learning, we analyze the changes in training loss and action accuracy before and after introducing the ReFineVLA 

approach. As shown in Figure 4, the training L1 loss of the ReFineVLA model decreases more rapidly than the baseline model and maintains consistently lower values throughout the fine-tuning process. The improved loss trajectory suggests that explicitly guiding reasoning encourages the model to optimize its parameters more efficiently, potentially due to more structured gradients resulting from reasoning supervision. Similarly, Figure 4 demonstrates that the training action accuracy of ReFineVLA progressively increases and consistently surpasses the baseline, reflecting enhanced model generalization and a more precise alignment of learned representations with task requirements. These observations indicate that incorporating explicit multimodal reasoning supervision, as done in ReFineVLA , provides meaningful learning signals that guide the optimization process towards more accurate and stable multimodal policy representations. 

Figure 4: Training Loss and Action Accuracy During Fine-tuning on Fractal Dataset : Training progression of both the baseline and ReFineVLA models on the Fractal dataset: ( left ) the training L1 loss for ReFineVLA decreases more rapidly and remains lower throughout the fine-tuning process compared to the baseline, and ( right ) the action accuracy for ReFineVLA increases steadily and consistently surpasses that of the baseline at all training steps. The shaded regions represent the standard deviation across multiple runs. Together, these plots illustrate the differences in learning dynamics between the two approaches during fine-tuning. 

10 Figure 5: Reasoning accuracy over training steps. 

2) How does reasoning accuracy look like dur-ing ReFineVLA fine-tuning? To better under-stand the internal effect of reasoning supervision in our proposed ReFineVLA model, we conduct an ablation analysis focused explicitly on reasoning ac-curacy throughout fine-tuning, as illustrated in Fig-ure 5. Initially, reasoning accuracy improves rapidly during the early training steps, reflecting effective incorporation of reasoning-guided signals into the model’s learning process. As training progresses, rea-soning accuracy stabilizes, indicating that the model effectively maintains its reasoning capabilities over extended training periods. The observed stable trend and relatively low variance, depicted as the shaded regions, suggest robust internalization of reasoning processes. Thus, this analysis highlights that the ex-plicit reasoning supervision from ReFineVLA successfully enhances the model’s capability to reason about multimodal inputs, supporting more interpretable and structured decision-making. 

3) How does attention behavior change prior to and post ReFineVLA fine-tuning? To understand how reasoning supervision impacts model behavior, we analyze attention maps before and after fine-tuning with ReFineVLA . As shown in Figure 6, before fine-tuning, VLA models tend to focus narrowly on immediate action targets – often overlooking contextual elements such as the spatial arrangement of objects or instruction – relevant cues. This behavior reflects the model’s tendency to learn direct input-to-action mappings without deeper scene understanding. After applying ReFineVLA , we observe a consistent shift in attention toward semantically meaningful regions, empirically revealing that the model learns to reason more holistically about the task by integrating visual and linguistic information over time. Figure 6 shows that the model’s attention aligns better with the task instruction, supporting more robust and interpretable action decisions. These findings prove that ReFineVLA 

improves performance and promotes more structured, multimodal representations and human-understandable decision-making processes. Prompt : Pick the bottle . Prompt : Pick mushroom    

> into the pot .
> Prompt :Put small spoon
> from basket to tray .Prompt :Put the small spoon onto the towel .
> SpatialVLA
> ReFineVLA
> (Ours )

Figure 6: Attention Visualization of ReFineVLA and SpatialVLA: RefineVLA shows better attention to related entities within the given observations conditioned by the input prompts than what SpatialVLA does. 

4) How does ReFineVLA reason on complex or long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks? Figure 7 illustrates a reasoning procedure of ReFineVLA for a robotic actuator actions alongside the step-by-step task planning. For complex tasks that require visual and instruction understanding, like Close the drawer ,

ReFineVLA shows a fine-grained instruction and corresponding actions to achieve the goal. ReFineVLA ’s capability continues with long-horizon tasks, such as Move the coke can near the orange . The model can still generate proper actions with corresponding reasoning steps, not limited to observation, situation analysis, and spatial reasoning. It can be observed that ReFineVLA can identify the objects present in embodied 11 <Observation >: The image shows a table with a water bottle , a can of                                   

> coke ,and an orange on it .There is also a robot arm visible on the right
> side of the image .
> <Situation Analysis >:The task is to move the coke can near the orange .
> This requires the robot to identify the coke can and the orange ,and
> then manipulate the can to be closer to the orange .
> <Spatial Reasoning >:The coke can is located on the right side of the
> table ,and the orange is located near the center of the table .The robot
> arm is on the right side of the table .The robot needs to move the coke
> can to the left ,towards the orange .
> <Task Planning >:The robot needs to ...
> -Identify and grasp the coke can .
> -Move the coke can towards the orange .
> -Place the coke can near the orange .
> -Release the coke can .
> Action tokens :<ACTION 00880 >, < ACTION 05511 >, , < ACTION 08193 >
> <Observation >:The image shows a gray cabinet with three drawers .
> The top drawer is closed ,and the bottom drawer is open .There is also a
> robot arm visible on the right side of the image .
> <Situation Analysis >:The task is to close the top drawer of the cabinet .
> The drawer is currently open .
> <Spatial Reasoning >:The drawer needs to be pushed inwards to close it .
> The robot arm is positioned to the right of the cabinet .
> <Task Planning >:The robot needs to ...
> -Move its arm to the front of the cabinet .
> -Grasp the handle or the front of the drawer .
> -Push the drawer inwards until fully closed .
> Action tokens :<ACTION 02762 >, < ACTION 06089 >, , < ACTION 02738 >
> Prompt :What should robot do to move the coke can near the orange ?Prompt :What should the robot do to close the drawer ?
> ReFineVLA ReFineVLA action action

## 1 2Figure 7: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning of ReFineVLA : RefineVLA shows step-by-step reasoning to accomplish the prompted task given the initial observation. The examples illustrate the queries (1) for placing the coke can near the orange in the tabletop setting and (2) for closing the drawer while it is opening. More examples are shown in Figure 9 in Appendix B.1. 

scenes and estimate their approximate relative positions, which is critical for action learning. Furthermore, 

ReFineVLA is able to guide the robot to the next sub-actions, eventually achieving the goal task. 

5) How does ReFineVLA perform with different weighting of the reasoning loss, guided by the teacher’s multimodal supervision? An important hyperparameter in ReFineVLA is the reasoning loss weight λr, which determines the strength of the reasoning loss guided by the teacher’s multimodal supervision. A higher λr encourages the model to focus more on generating detailed step-by-step rationales, potentially improving task-level understanding and interpretability. However, when λr is set too high, it leads to overemphasis on reasoning generation, resulting in noisy outputs or misaligned attention that distracts from critical visual features such as the robot end-effector or target object. In contrast, a smaller 

λr reduces the risk of distraction but may produce shallow or underdeveloped reasoning traces, weakening the benefit of teacher-guided supervision. As shown on the left side of Figure 8, setting λr = 0 .3 achieves the best performance, yielding a 9.7% improvement in task success, empirically showing that integrating teacher-provided reasoning can meaningfully enhance decision quality. However, excessively low and high values of λr decrease performance, indicating the need to balance action prediction and reasoning learning. 

Figure 8: (left ) Average success rate of ReFineVLA with different weights of reasoning loss λr during teacher-guided fine-tuning for multimodal reasoning. ( right ) Average success rate of ReFineVLA with different numbers of frozen layers during teacher-guided fine-tuning for multimodal reasoning. 

12 6) How does ReFineVLA perform under different numbers of frozen layers during learning of teacher-guided multimodal reasoning supervision? We find that freezing lower layers helps preserve general visual and linguistic representations learned from large-scale pre-training, while allowing upper layers to specialize for structured reasoning. The performance peaks when freezing the first 24 transformer layers, resulting in an 8.2% improvement of task success rate, as shown on the right side of Figure 8, which suggests that the upper layers of the model are most critical for absorbing high-level reasoning supervision, while the lower layers should retain pre-trained perceptual grounding. In contrast, freezing too few layers can potentially degrade these generalizable features, leading to noisy attention and less stable reasoning outputs. Freezing too many layers restricts the model’s learning capacity and limits its ability to align with teacher-guided rationales. For more ablation studies and results, please see Appendix B. 

## 6 Conclusions and Discussions 

In this work, we proposed ReFineVLA , a teacher-guided fine-tuning framework that enhances VLA models with explicit multimodal reasoning. By leveraging structured rationales from an expert reasoning teacher, 

ReFineVLA trains policies that jointly predict actions and generate step-by-step reasoning, enabling more profound understanding of complex and long-horizon robotic tasks. Through selective layer tuning and penalty on weights for reasoning-governed loss, our method preserves generalizable features while injecting high-level reasoning capabilities. Moreover, experiments across simulated and real-world robotic settings in SimplerEnv with WindowX Robot and Google Robot tasks demonstrate that ReFineVLA outperforms existing baselines in performance and interpretability, establishing a promising direction for reasoning-driven generalist VLA-based robot policies. While ReFineVLA demonstrates strong performance and improved multimodal reasoning, several promising avenues remain for exploration. One direction is to scale reasoning supervision through human-in-the-loop refinement or self-improving teacher models using reinforcement learning. Besides that, extending this into real-world robotic systems will also help evaluate its robustness in sim-to-real transfer settings. Finally, incorporating memory mechanisms or temporal context could enable reasoning across long-horizon tasks. 

## References 

Marah Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat Behl, et al. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 , 2024. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Simeon Adebola, and Ken Goldberg. Berkeley UR5 demonstration dataset. 

https://sites.google.com/view/berkeley-ur5/home .Yew Ken Chia, Guizhen Chen, Luu Anh Tuan, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong Bing. Contrastive chain-of-thought prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09277 , 2023. Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Zhuo Xu, Zipeng Fu, Mithun George Jacob, Tingnan Zhang, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Wenhao Yu, Connor Schenck, David Rendleman, Dhruv Shah, et al. Mobility vla: Multimodal instruction navigation with long-context vlms and topological graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07775 , 2024. 13 Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard Schölkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, João Silvério, Joey Hejna, Jonathan Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Junhyek Han, Kaiyuan Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krishnan Srinivasan, Kuan Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina, Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani, Pannag R Sanketi, Patrick "Tree" Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Mart’in-Mart’in, Rohan Baijal, Rosario Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani, Shubham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Adebola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trinity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vincent Vanhoucke, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang Li, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yutaka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen Zhang, Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X models. https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864 ,2023a. Open-X Embodiment Collaboration, A Padalkar, A Pooley, A Jain, A Bewley, A Herzog, A Irpan, A Khazatsky, A Rai, A Singh, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 , 2023b. Luciano Del Corro, Allie Del Giorno, Sahaj Agarwal, Bin Yu, Ahmed Awadallah, and Subhabrata Mukherjee. Skipdecode: Autoregressive skip decoding with batching and caching for efficient llm inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02628 , 2023. 14 Nicolai Dorka, Chenguang Huang, Tim Welschehold, and Wolfram Burgard. What matters in employing vision language models for tokenizing actions in robot control? In First Workshop on Vision-Language Models for Navigation and Manipulation at ICRA 2024 , 2024. Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. Yuqing Du, Ksenia Konyushkova, Misha Denil, Akhil Raju, Jessica Landon, Felix Hill, Nando de Freitas, and Serkan Cabi. Vision-language models as success detectors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07280 , 2023. Frederik Ebert, Yanlai Yang, Karl Schmeckpeper, Bernadette Bucher, Georgios Georgakis, Kostas Daniilidis, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Bridge data: Boosting generalization of robotic skills with cross-domain datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13396 , 2021. Hao-Shu Fang, Hongjie Fang, Zhenyu Tang, Jirong Liu, Chenxi Wang, Junbo Wang, Haoyi Zhu, and Cewu Lu. Rh20t: A comprehensive robotic dataset for learning diverse skills in one-shot. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2024. Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Ludwig Schmidt, and Shuran Song. Clip on wheels: Zero-shot object navigation as object localization and exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10421 ,3(4):7, 2022. Siddhant Haldar and Lerrel Pinto. Polytask: Learning unified policies through behavior distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08573 , 2023. Siddhant Haldar, Zhuoran Peng, and Lerrel Pinto. Baku: An efficient transformer for multi-task policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07539 , 2024. William Harvey and Frank Wood. Visual chain-of-thought diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16187 ,2023. Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Xingyu Fu, Dan Roth, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, and Ranjay Krishna. Visual sketchpad: Sketching as a visual chain of thought for multimodal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09403 , 2024. Jitesh Jain, Jianwei Yang, and Humphrey Shi. Vcoder: Versatile vision encoders for multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 27992–28002, 2024. Guangqi Jiang, Yifei Sun, Tao Huang, Huanyu Li, Yongyuan Liang, and Huazhe Xu. Robots pre-train robots: Manipulation-centric robotic representation from large-scale robot datasets, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2410.22325 .Seil Kang, Jinyeong Kim, Junhyeok Kim, and Seong Jae Hwang. Your large vision-language model only needs a few attention heads for visual grounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06287 , 2025. Siddharth Karamcheti, Suraj Nair, Annie S Chen, Thomas Kollar, Chelsea Finn, Dorsa Sadigh, and Percy Liang. Language-driven representation learning for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12766 , 2023. Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, et al. Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12945 , 2024. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:22199–22213, 2022. 15 Qixiu Li, Yaobo Liang, Zeyu Wang, Lin Luo, Xi Chen, Mozheng Liao, Fangyun Wei, Yu Deng, Sicheng Xu, Yizhong Zhang, et al. Cogact: A foundational vision-language-action model for synergizing cognition and action in robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19650 , 2024a. Xinghang Li, Peiyan Li, Minghuan Liu, Dong Wang, Jirong Liu, Bingyi Kang, Xiao Ma, Tao Kong, Hanbo Zhang, and Huaping Liu. Towards generalist robot policies: What matters in building vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14058 , 2024b. Junbang Liang, Ruoshi Liu, Ege Ozguroglu, Sruthi Sudhakar, Achal Dave, Pavel Tokmakov, Shuran Song, and Carl Vondrick. Dreamitate: Real-world visuomotor policy learning via video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16862 , 2024. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36, 2024a. Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 ,2024b. Guanxing Lu, Ziwei Wang, Changliu Liu, Jiwen Lu, and Yansong Tang. Thinkbot: Embodied instruction following with thought chain reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07062 , 2023. Wentao Lu, Xiaofeng Wu, Shuyong Gao, Wei He, Qing Zhao, Lunning Zhang, Maodong Li, and Wenqiang Zhang. Research on task decomposition and motion trajectory optimization of robotic arm based on vla large model. In 2024 5th International Conference on Machine Learning and Computer Application (ICMLCA) , pp. 80–85. IEEE, 2024. Qing Lyu, Shreya Havaldar, Adam Stein, Li Zhang, Delip Rao, Eric Wong, Marianna Apidianaki, and Chris Callison-Burch. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. In The 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (IJCNLP-AACL 2023) , 2023. Zawalski Michał, Chen William, Pertsch Karl, Mees Oier, Finn Chelsea, and Levine Sergey. Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693 , 2024. Yao Mu, Qinglong Zhang, Mengkang Hu, Wenhai Wang, Mingyu Ding, Jun Jin, Bin Wang, Jifeng Dai, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. Embodiedgpt: Vision-language pre-training via embodied chain of thought. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Nghia Nguyen, Minh Nhat Vu, Tung D Ta, Baoru Huang, Thieu Vo, Ngan Le, and Anh Nguyen. Robotic-clip: Fine-tuning clip on action data for robotic applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17727 , 2024. Fei Ni, Jianye Hao, Shiguang Wu, Longxin Kou, Jiashun Liu, Yan Zheng, Bin Wang, and Yuzheng Zhuang. Generate subgoal images before act: Unlocking the chain-of-thought reasoning in diffusion model for robot manipulation with multimodal prompts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08864 , 2023. Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2024. 16 Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342 , 2015. Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Yuanqi Yao, Xinyi Ye, Yan Ding, Zhigang Wang, JiaYuan Gu, Bin Zhao, Dong Wang, et al. Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model. 

RSS , 2025. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-maron, Mai Giménez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1ikK0kHjvj . Featured Certification, Outstanding Certification. Daniel Rose, Vaishnavi Himakunthala, Andy Ouyang, Ryan He, Alex Mei, Yujie Lu, Michael Saxon, Chinmay Sonar, Diba Mirza, and William Yang Wang. Visual chain of thought: bridging logical gaps with multimodal infillings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02317 , 2023. Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295 , 2015. Hao Shao, Shengju Qian, Han Xiao, Guanglu Song, Zhuofan Zong, Letian Wang, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Visual cot: Unleashing chain-of-thought reasoning in multi-modal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16999 , 2024. Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 785–799. PMLR, 2023. Andreas Steiner, André Susano Pinto, Michael Tschannen, Daniel Keysers, Xiao Wang, Yonatan Bitton, Alexey Gritsenko, Matthias Minderer, Anthony Sherbondy, Shangbang Long, et al. Paligemma 2: A family of versatile vlms for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03555 , 2024. Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. Michael Tschannen, Alexey Gritsenko, Xiao Wang, Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Nikhil Parthasarathy, Talfan Evans, Lucas Beyer, Ye Xia, Basil Mustafa, et al. Siglip 2: Multilingual vision-language encoders with improved semantic understanding, localization, and dense features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14786 , 2025. Homer Rich Walke, Kevin Black, Tony Z Zhao, Quan Vuong, Chongyi Zheng, Philippe Hansen-Estruch, Andre Wang He, Vivek Myers, Moo Jin Kim, Max Du, et al. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 1723–1736. PMLR, 2023. 17 Jiangtao Wang, Zhen Qin, Yifan Zhang, Vincent Tao Hu, Björn Ommer, Rania Briq, and Stefan Kesselheim. Scaling image tokenizers with grouped spherical quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02632 , 2024. Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652 ,2021. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. Chuan Wen, Xingyu Lin, John So, Kai Chen, Qi Dou, Yang Gao, and Pieter Abbeel. Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00025 , 2023. Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, Yaxin Peng, Feifei Feng, et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12514 , 2024. Yecheng Wu, Zhuoyang Zhang, Junyu Chen, Haotian Tang, Dacheng Li, Yunhao Fang, Ligeng Zhu, Enze Xie, Hongxu Yin, Li Yi, et al. Vila-u: a unified foundation model integrating visual understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04429 , 2024. Tian-Yu Xiang, Ao-Qun Jin, Xiao-Hu Zhou, Mei-Jiang Gui, Xiao-Liang Xie, Shi-Qi Liu, Shuang-Yi Wang, Sheng-Bin Duang, Si-Cheng Wang, Zheng Lei, et al. Vla model-expert collaboration for bi-directional manipulation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04163 , 2025. Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582 , 2023. Wentao Yuan, Jiafei Duan, Valts Blukis, Wilbert Pumacay, Ranjay Krishna, Adithyavairavan Murali, Arsalan Mousavian, and Dieter Fox. Robopoint: A vision-language model for spatial affordance prediction in robotics. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= GVX6jpZOhU .Yang Yue, Yulin Wang, Bingyi Kang, Yizeng Han, Shenzhi Wang, Shiji Song, Jiashi Feng, and Gao Huang. Deer-vla: Dynamic inference of multimodal large language models for efficient robot execution. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:56619–56643, 2024. Michał Zawalski, William Chen, Karl Pertsch, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693 , 2024. Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 11975–11986, 2023. Haochen Zhang, Nader Zantout, Pujith Kachana, Zongyuan Wu, Ji Zhang, and Wenshan Wang. Vla-3d: A dataset for 3d semantic scene understanding and navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.03540 , 2024. Jianke Zhang, Yanjiang Guo, Yucheng Hu, Xiaoyu Chen, Xiang Zhu, and Jianyu Chen. Up-vla: A unified understanding and prediction model for embodied agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18867 , 2025. Qingqing Zhao, Yao Lu, Moo Jin Kim, Zipeng Fu, Zhuoyang Zhang, Yecheng Wu, Zhaoshuo Li, Qianli Ma, Song Han, Chelsea Finn, et al. Cot-vla: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22020 , 2025. Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09631 , 2024a. Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09631 , 2024b. 18 Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daumé III, Andrey Kolobov, Furong Huang, and Jianwei Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10345 , 2024. Zhongyi Zhou, Yichen Zhu, Minjie Zhu, Junjie Wen, Ning Liu, Zhiyuan Xu, Weibin Meng, Ran Cheng, Yaxin Peng, Chaomin Shen, et al. Chatvla: Unified multimodal understanding and robot control with vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14420 , 2025. Ruiqi Zhu, Siyuan Li, Tianhong Dai, Chongjie Zhang, and Oya Celiktutan. Learning to solve tasks with exploring prior behaviours. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 7501–7507. IEEE, 2023a. Xinghao Zhu, Ran Tian, Chenfeng Xu, Mingxiao Huo, Wei Zhan, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Mingyu Ding. Fanuc manipulation: A dataset for learning-based manipulation with fanuc mate 200id robot. 

https://sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/fanuc-manipulation , 2023b. 19 A More Implementation Details 

For the VLA backbone, we employ SpatialVLA (Qu et al., 2025) (2B parameters, PaliGemma-2 VLM), pre-trained on Open X-Embodiment (O’Neill et al., 2023) and RHT20 (Fang et al., 2024) datasets. All model fine-tuning is performed on multi-node clusters with NVIDIA H100 GPUs, using our shell scripts. 

A.1 Automated Data Processing for Reasoning Trace Generation 

To enable reasoning-augmented training, we construct a scalable pipeline to annotate every step of robot demonstration trajectories with structured multimodal reasoning traces. Our approach processes RLDS-format TFRecord datasets ( i.e. , BridgeData-v2 and Fractal datasets) by extracting per-step multi-view image observations and the associated language instructions. For each step, we use a reasoning teacher model ( i.e. ,Gemini-2.0) to generate a detailed reasoning trace, encompassing visual observation, situational analysis, spatial reasoning, and explicit task planning. The resulting traces are saved in JSON format and are aligned to each episode and action step. 

Prompt Design: We use a prompt to elicit detailed, step-by-step reasoning from the Gemini-2.0 teacher. For every set of images and instructions, the API is queried with: 

You are a robot. Given the images from different angles and instructions, observe the scene and reason step-by-step about what you see, what each object is, and what actions might be possible. Instruction: <language instruction> Now think carefully and describe: #1 <Observation>: What do you see in the image? #2 <Situation Analysis>: What is happening in the scene, and what is the task? #3 <Spatial Reasoning>: How are the objects arranged, and what spatial relationships matter for completing the task? #4 <Task Planning>: What are the logical steps to achieve the task, and what should be the robot’s next action? 

The above prompt is to produce interpretable, chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning traces. Example outputs and their impact on model performance are further illustrated below. 

Processing Workflow: The pipeline is fully parallelizable (e.g., via Python’s concurrent.futures ) for efficient, large-scale data annotation, ensuring every demonstration frame is paired with a high-quality, multi-modal reasoning trace for use in ReFineVLA’s reasoning-augmented training. 

• TFRecord Parsing: Each RLDS TFRecord file is parsed to extract robot demonstration episodes, retrieving step-wise images and language instructions. 

• Multiview Image Aggregation: At each time step, images from multiple camera viewpoints are aggregated as model input. 

• Teacher Model Query: For every step, we send images and the corresponding instruction to the Gemini-2.0 API using the structured prompt above, obtaining a reasoning trace. 

• Trace Saving: For each episode, the sequence of reasoning traces is saved as a JSON list, indexed by step, for downstream fine-tuning. 

Note: The code release includes our full data processing scripts, including parallelized trace generation and integration with Gemini 2.0. For additional qualitative examples, see Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6. 

A.2 Training Details 

We sample and annotate reasoning traces for approximately 125 , 000 trajectories from BridgeData-v2 (Walke et al., 2023) and Fractal (Brohan et al., 2022) datasets using our multimodal reasoning teacher pipeline in Section 4. Fine-tuning on the reasoning-augmented dataset is conducted on one H100 node (2 GPUs) for one epoch, from 52 to 72 hours, depending on the dataset size. 20 Task Instructions Reasoning Prompt : You are a robot. Given the image and the instruction to Move the spatula to the bottom left side of the table , scan the scene and reason step-by-step about what you see, what each object is, what the planning steps are for a robotic controller, and what actions might be possible? Think carefully and describe the steps followed the key questions: #1 <Observation>: What do you see in the images? #2 <Situation Analysis>: What is happening in the scene? #3 <Spatial Reasoning>: How are the objects arranged, and what spatial relationships matter for completing the task? #4 <Task Planning>: What are the logical steps to achieve the task, and what should be the robot’s sequential actions? 

Task Instruction : Move the spatula to the bottom left side of the table 

<Reasoning> <Observation> : I observe a toy kitchen setup with a wooden tabletop. On the tabletop, there is a silver pot, a blue cloth, a green and grey spatula, and a yellow toy corn cob. 

<Situation Analysis> : The scene shows various toy kitchen items on a table. The task is to move the spatula to the bottom left side of the table. 

<Spatial Reasoning> : The spatula is currently resting on the blue cloth, which is situated in the center-right of the table. The pot is on the left side of the table, and the corn cob is on the right. The "bottom left side of the table" is an empty area where the spatula should be moved. 

<Task Planning> : The robot needs to pick up the spatula and place it in the designated bottom left area of the table: <logical_steps><1> Identify and locate the spatula <2> Move gripper to spatula <3> Grasp the spatula <4> Lift the spatula <5> Move gripper to target <6> Place the spatula <7> Release the spatula <sub_action> Move its arm to a position suitable for grasping the spatula. 

Table 4: Instruction understanding with CoT reasoning for “ Move the spatula ” task. 

Task Instructions Reasoning Prompt : You are a robot. Given the image and the instruction to put egg on plate and stuffed duck in pot or pan on stove , scan the scene and reason step-by-step about what you see, what each object is, what the planning steps are for a robotic controller, and what actions might be possible? Think carefully and describe the steps followed the key questions: #1 <Observation>: What do you see in the images? #2 <Situation Analysis>: What is happening in the scene? #3 <Spatial Reasoning>: How are the objects arranged, and what spatial relationships matter for completing the task? #4 <Task Planning>: What are the logical steps to achieve the task, and what should be the robot’s sequential actions? 

Task Instruction : put egg on plate and stuff the duck in the pot or pan on the stove 

<Reasoning> <Observation> : I see a toy kitchen with a stove, sink, pot, green plate, yellow stuffed duck, white egg, and a robotic gripper arm. 

<Situation Analysis> : The scene shows a toy kitchen with various items on the stovetop. The robotic arm is present and capable of interacting with the objects. The task requires two distinct actions: putting the egg on the plate and putting the stuffed duck in the pot. 

<Spatial Reasoning> : All target objects and destinations are on the stove and within reach of the robotic arm. The egg is near the plate, and the stuffed duck is near the pot. 

<Task Planning> : The robot needs to pick up the egg and place it on the plate, then pick up the stuffed duck and place it in the pot: <logical_steps><1> Pick up egg <2> Place egg on plate <3> Pick up stuffed duck <4> Place stuffed duck in pot <sub_action> The robot first attempts to put the egg on the plate. 

Table 5: Instruction understanding with CoT reasoning for “ Put egg on plate and duck in pot ” task. 

21 Task Instructions Reasoning Prompt : You are a robot. Given the image and the instruction to Put the red brush on the table , scan the scene and reason step-by-step about what you see, what each object is, what the planning steps are for a robotic controller, and what actions might be possible? Think carefully and describe the steps followed the key questions: #1 <Observation>: What do you see in the images? #2 <Situation Analysis>: What is happening in the scene? #3 <Spatial Reasoning>: How are the objects arranged, and what spatial relationships matter for completing the task? #4 <Task Planning>: What are the logical steps to achieve the task, and what should be the robot’s sequential actions? 

Task Instruction : Put the red brush on the table 

<Reasoning> <Observation> : I see a white table, a wooden box with an open drawer containing a blue cloth and a red brush, and a green object on the table. 

<Situation Analysis> : The red brush is inside a confined drawer, requiring careful gripper access. The table offers ample clear space for placement. 

<Spatial Reasoning> : The drawer constrains access to the brush, which may require a specific approach vector. The table has flat open space suitable for placing the brush. 

<Task Planning> : <logical_steps> <1> Identify and locate red brush (in drawer) <2> Plan grasp to extract brush from drawer <3> Move gripper to brush and grasp <4> Lift brush from drawer <5> Identify and locate clear table space <6> Move brush to table and place <7> Release brush <sub_action> Reach into the drawer to grasp the red brush. 

Table 6: Instruction understanding with CoT reasoning for “ Put the red brush on the table ” task. 

A.3 Fine-tuning Hyperparameters 

We list our model’s hyperparameters in the pre-training and fine-tuning stages, as summarized in Table 7. 

Hyperparameters Fine-tuning Settings 

GPUs 2GPUs per Node 2Per-Device Batch Size 32 Gradient Accumulation 1Number of Workers 1Epochs 1Learning Rate 2e-5 Shuffle Buffer Size 131072 Image Resolution 224 × 224 

Action Token Size 12 Reasoning Token Size 244 

LoRA Params ( use_all_lora , lora_alpha , etc.) Off (default) Vision Zoe Depth On FlashAttention v2 On Checkpoint Interval ( save_steps ) 500 

Table 7: Fine-tuning hyperparameters and settings for ReFineVLA .

A.4 Layer Freezing and Efficient Adaptation 

During ReFineVLA fine-tuning, the vision encoder and early transformer blocks are frozen to preserve general visual-linguistic representations, while upper layers and the policy head are updated to integrate reasoning efficiently. Freezing the first 24 transformer layers, as validated in our ablations (Figure 8), provides the best trade-off between stability and adaptation. 22 A.5 Implementation of Forward Computation for Reasoning and Per-Step Reasoning Trace Generation 

For reproducibility, we provide Algorithm 2 as a detailed pseudo-code of our forward computation for both reasoning and action losses, which is implemented in our codebase. Also, the pseudo-code for per-step reasoning trace generation using Gemini 2.0 API is provided in Algorithm 3. 

Algorithm 2: Pseudo-code for ReFineVLA ’s Forward Computation for Reasoning and Action Losses. 

def forward ( input_ids , pixel_values = None , intrinsic = None , attention_mask = None , position_ids = None , past_key_values = None , token_type_ids = None , cache_position = None , inputs_embeds = None , labels = None , use_cache = None , output_attentions = None , output_hidden_states = None , return_dict = None , num_logits_to_keep =0 ): if inputs_embeds is None : inputs_embeds = embed_tokens ( input_ids ). clone () if use_spatial_token : spatial_selected = ( input_ids >= action_token_begin_idx ) & (input_ids < action_token_begin_idx + spatial_token_num )inputs_embeds [ spatial_selected ] = spatial_embed_tokens ( input_ids [ spatial_selected ] - action_token_begin_idx )if pixel_values is not None : image_features = get_image_features ( pixel_values , intrinsic ) special_image_mask = ( input_ids == image_token_index ). unsqueeze ( -1) inputs_embeds = inputs_embeds . masked_scatter ( special_image_mask , image_features ) causal_mask = update_causal_mask ( attention_mask , token_type_ids , past_key_values , cache_position , input_ids , inputs_embeds )outputs = language_model ( attention_mask = causal_mask , position_ids = position_ids , past_key_values = past_key_values , inputs_embeds = inputs_embeds , use_cache = use_cache , output_attentions = output_attentions , output_hidden_states = output_hidden_states , return_dict = return_dict , cache_position = cache_position , num_logits_to_keep = num_logits_to_keep , )logits = outputs . logits if labels is not None : shift_logits = logits [... , : -1 , :] shift_labels = labels [... , 1:] mask_action_tokens = ( shift_labels >= tr an sla ti on_ to ken _s ta rt_ id x ) & (shift_labels <= gripper_token_end_idx )shift_logits_action = shift_logits [ mask_action_tokens ]. contiguous () shift_labels_action = shift_labels [ mask_action_tokens ]. contiguous () shift_logits_reason = shift_logits [~ mask_action_tokens ]. contiguous () shift_labels_reason = shift_labels [~ mask_action_tokens ]. contiguous () loss_fct = nn . CrossEntropyLoss () loss_action = loss_fct ( shift_logits_action . view ( -1 , vocab_size ) , shift_labels_action . view ( -1) )loss_reasoning = loss_fct ( shift_logits_reason . view ( -1 , vocab_size ) , shift_labels_reason . view ( -1) )loss = loss_action + lambda_r * loss_reasoning return loss , logits , outputs . hidden_states , outputs . attentions 

23 Algorithm 3: Pseudo-code for Per-Step Reasoning Trace Generation with Gemini 2.0 API 

def g e n e rate _reasoni ng_traces ( tfrecord_file ): dataset = load_tfrecord ( tfrecord_file ) for episode_id , episode in enumerate ( dataset ): steps = extract_steps ( episode ) language_instruction = steps [ " language_instruction " ] all_traces = [] for t in range ( num_steps ( steps )): # Aggregate multi - view images at step timg_list = [ steps [ f " image_ { i } " ][ t ] for i in range ( num_cameras )] # Query Gemini API for reasoning using the Figure 9 prompt trace = call_gemini_api ( img_list , language_instruction ) all_traces . append ({ t : trace }) save_json ( all_traces , f " reasoning /{ file_id } _ { episode_id }. json " ) def call_gemini_api ( img_list , language_instruction ): contents = [] for img in img_list : # Wrap image bytes for API type_part = types . Part . from_bytes ( data = img , mime_type = ’ image / png ’ , )contents . append ( type_part ) # Append structured reasoning prompt ( see Figure 9) contents . append ( f ’ ’ ’ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ You ␣ are ␣ a ␣ robot . ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ Given ␣ the ␣ images ␣ from ␣ different ␣ angles ␣ and ␣ instruction , ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ observe ␣ the ␣ scene ␣ and ␣ reason ␣ step - by - step ␣ about ␣ what ␣ you ␣ see , ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ what ␣ each ␣ object ␣ is , ␣ and ␣ what ␣ actions ␣ might ␣ be ␣ possible . ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ Instruction : ␣ { language_instruction } ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ Now ␣ think ␣ carefully ␣ and ␣ describe : ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ #1 ␣ < Observation >: ␣ What ␣ do ␣ you ␣ see ␣ in ␣ the ␣ image ? ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ #1 ␣ < Situation ␣ Analysis >: ␣ What ␣ is ␣ happening ␣ in ␣ the ␣ scene ␣ and ␣ what ␣ is ␣ the ␣ task ? ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ #1 ␣ < Spatial ␣ Reasoning >: ␣ How ␣ are ␣ the ␣ objects ␣ arranged ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ and ␣ what ␣ spatial ␣ relationships ␣ matter ␣ for ␣ completing ␣ the ␣ task ? ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ #1 ␣ < Task ␣ Planning >: ␣ What ␣ are ␣ the ␣ logical ␣ steps ␣ to ␣ achieve ␣ the ␣ task , ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ and ␣ what ␣ should ␣ be ␣ the ␣ robot ’s next action ? ’ ’ ’) ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ try : ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ response ␣ = ␣ gemini_client . models . generate_content ( ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ model = ’ gemini -2.0 - flash ’ , ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ contents = contents ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ) ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ return ␣ response . text ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ except ␣ Exception ␣ as ␣ e : ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ print ( f " Error ␣ API ␣ GEMINI : ␣ { e }") ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ return ␣ "" ␣ ␣ ␣ ␣ 

24 A.6 Implementation of VLA Attention Visualization 

To support the analyses in Section 3, we outline our pipeline for extracting and aggregating attention maps from VLA models. During inference, we enable attention outputs to capture the attention weights for action and reasoning tokens across all layers and attention heads. These attention maps are then fused using a top-k

aggregation strategy to highlight the most salient input regions that influence the model’s predictions. By reshaping and normalizing these fused maps into interpretable grids, we visualize model focus as heatmaps overlaid on the input images. All visualizations in Section 3 are generated using the following implementation. Note that Algorithm 4 elaborates the extraction and top-k aggregation of cross-modal attention for target action tokens. 

Algorithm 4: Pseudo-code for Attention Extraction and top-k Aggregation in VLA Models 

def e x t r act _and _fu se_a tten tio n ( model , inputs , target_token_indices , top_k =5): # Run inference with output_attentions enabled outputs = model . generate ( ** inputs , output_attentions = True , return_dict_in_generate = True , )attentions = outputs [ " attentions " ] # ( layers , heads , src_len , tgt_len ) # Collect attention maps for each target token ( e . g . , action or reasoning token ) attn_maps = [] for t_idx in target_token_indices : # Gather attention weights for this token across all layers and heads layer_head_attns = [attn [: , : , : , t_idx ] for attn in attentions # attn : ( batch , heads , src , tgt ) ] # list of ( batch , heads , src_len ) per layer layer_head_attns = torch . stack ( layer_head_attns ) # ( layers , batch , heads , src_len ) # Aggregate the top - k values ( across layers and heads ) using the max or mean strategy fused = topk_aggregate ( layer_head_attns , k = top_k , method = " max " ) # ( src_len ,) attn_maps . append ( fused ) return attn_maps # List of attention maps , one per token def topk_aggregate ( attn_tensor , k =5 , method = " max " ): # attn_tensor : ( layers , batch , heads , src_len ) attn_tensor = attn_tensor . flatten (0 , 2) # ( layers * heads , batch , src_len ) topk_vals , _ = torch . topk ( attn_tensor , k =k , dim =0) # (k , batch , src_len ) if method == " max " : return topk_vals . max ( dim =0). values . squeeze (0) elif method == " mean " : return topk_vals . mean ( dim =0). squeeze (0) else : raise ValueError ( " Unsupported ␣ fusion ␣ method . " ) 

25 B Additional Ablation Studies 

B.1 Reasoning-Grounded, Multi-Modal Actions by ReFineVLA 

To demonstrate ReFineVLA ’s ability to generate multi-modal and reasoning-compliant actions, we present qualitative results from challenging real-world-like table-top and drawer manipulation scenarios. <Observation >: The image shows a table with a water bottle , a can of 

coke , and an orange on it . There is also a robot arm visible on the right 

side of the image .

<Situation Analysis >: The task is to move the coke can near the orange .

This requires the robot to identify the coke can and the orange , and 

then manipulate the can to be closer to the orange .

<Spatial Reasoning >: The coke can is located on the right side of the 

table , and the orange is located near the center of the table . The robot 

arm is on the right side of the table . The robot needs to move the coke 

can to the left , towards the orange .

<Task Planning >: The robot needs to ... 

- Identify and grasp the coke can .

- Move the coke can towards the orange .

- Place the coke can near the orange .

- Release the coke can .

Action tokens : <ACTION 00880 >, < ACTION 05511 >, , < ACTION 08193 >

<Observation >: The image shows a gray cabinet with three drawers .

The top drawer is closed , and the bottom drawer is open . There is also a 

robot arm visible on the right side of the image .

<Situation Analysis >: The task is to close the top drawer of the cabinet .

The drawer is currently open .

<Spatial Reasoning >: The drawer needs to be pushed inwards to close it .

The robot arm is positioned to the right of the cabinet .

<Task Planning >: The robot needs to ... 

- Move its arm to the front of the cabinet .

- Grasp the handle or the front of the drawer .

- Push the drawer inwards until fully closed .

Action tokens : <ACTION 02762 >, < ACTION 06089 >, , < ACTION 02738 >

Prompt : What should robot do to move the coke can near the orange ? Prompt : What should the robot do to close the drawer ?

ReFineVLA ReFineVLA  action  action 

<Observation >: The image shows a table with a can of Coca -Cola , a

sponge , and a bottle of water on it . The table is gray and has drawers .

There is also a robot arm visible on the right side of the image .

<Situation Analysis >: The task is to pick up the Coca -Cola can . The robot 

needs to identify the can and then plan a path to grasp it .

<Spatial Reasoning >: The Coca -Cola can is located on the left side of the 

table . The robot arm is on the right side of the table . The robot needs to 

move its arm to the can , grasp it , and then lift it .

<Task Planning >: The robot needs to ... 

- Move the robot arm to the location of the Coca -Cola can .

- Grasp the Coca -Cola can .

- Lift the Coca -Cola can .

- The next action is to move the robot arm to the Coca -Cola can .

Action tokens : <ACTION 00073 >, < ACTION 05223 >, , < ACTION 08192 >

<Observation >: The image shows a gray cabinet with multiple drawers .

A robotic arm is visible on the right side of the image .

<Situation Analysis >: The task is to open the bottom drawer of the 

cabinet .

<Spatial Reasoning >: The bottom drawer is the lowest of the three 

drawers . The robot needs to interact with the handle of the bottom 

drawer to open it .

<Task Planning >: The robot needs to ... 

- Move its arm to the handle of the bottom drawer .

- Grasp the handle .

- Pull the drawer open .

Action tokens : <ACTION 00386 >, < ACTION 05448 >, , < ACTION 08193 >

Prompt : What should the robot do to pick the Coca -Cola can ? Prompt : What should the robot do to open the bottom drawer ?

ReFineVLA ReFineVLA  action  action 

## 3 4

## 1 2

Figure 9: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning of ReFineVLA : RefineVLA shows step-by-step reasoning with cor-responding actions to accomplish the prompted task given the initial observations and linguistic command. The extended illustrations of Figure 7 are provided. 

Figure 9 depicts step-by-step examples where ReFineVLA observes the environment through multi-view images, grounds its actions in explicit multi-stage reasoning, and generates a sequence of action tokens that follow the reasoning trace. Each panel shows ReFineVLA first analyzing the visual scene ( Observation ), interpreting the current task ( Situation Analysis ), performing spatial and physical reasoning about object locations and relationships ( Spatial Reasoning ), and then generating a concrete action plan ( Task Planning ). For instance, in the “ move the coke can near the orange ” task (Panel 1), ReFineVLA decomposes the high-level goal into subtasks: identifying, grasping, moving, and releasing the can. Similarly, in drawer manipulation tasks (Panel 2 and Panel 4), the model reasons about the cabinet state and the spatial layout, plans to approach and operate the correct handle, and executes the whole action sequence accordingly. 26 ReFineVLA ’s explicit reasoning structure allows for diverse, context-dependent solutions. For grasping and placement tasks (Panel 1 and Panel 3), the model flexibly chooses different grasp approaches and trajectories based on the current spatial arrangement, demonstrating multi-modal action generation. The underlying action token sequence adapts to the inferred plan and spatial cues, showing that the model does not collapse to a single, rigid policy but samples actions probabilistically and with high fidelity to the reasoning trace. This multi-modal reasoning ability is a direct consequence of the joint fine-tuning on both action and reasoning supervision, which leads the model to fit action targets and the causal logic and spatial semantics necessary for robust decision-making. Empirically, this approach yields more accurate grasps, improved success rates on sequential tasks, and lower action prediction error compared to unimodal or non-reasoning baselines. Furthermore, our analysis confirms that ReFineVLA ’s generated actions are tightly coupled to its internal reasoning trace. Even when the model’s reasoning contains mistakes (for example, misidentifying an object or spatial relationship), the subsequent action sequence reliably follows from the reasoning output, demonstrating unified, reasoning-compliant behavior. For example, if ReFineVLA incorrectly reasons which drawer to open, it will still faithfully execute the corresponding drawer action described in its plan, between reasoning and action execution. These findings suggest that continued improvement is enhanced by reasoning accuracy, through precise annotation, richer multimodal context, or stronger vision-language models. In summary, we conclude that ReFineVLA is able to produce multi-modal, context-sensitive actions grounded in explicit, interpretable reasoning traces, consistently aligning its execution with its internal thought process. This structured, principled, reasoning-aligned control framework provides new opportunities for analysis and improvement in generalist robotic policy learning. 

Table 8: Evaluation results across different policies on SimplerEnv with Google Robot tasks in two settings: visual aggregation and visual matching. The evaluated tasks are “ Pick Coke can ”, “ Move Near ”, and “ Open/Close Drawer ”at different configurations. The overall performance across the tasks is also reported in the last column.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

> VLA Baseline Robotic Task Pick Coke Can Move Near Open/Close Drawer Overall Average Horizontal Laying Vertical Laying Standing Average Average Open Close Average Variant Aggregation RT-1 (begin) 2.2% 1.3% 3.1% 2.2% 4.0% 0.5% 13.2% 6.9% 4.2% RT-1 ( 15% )92.0% 70.4% 81.3% 81.3% 44.6% 21.2% 32.3% 26.7% 56.2% RT-1 (converged) 96.9% 76.0% 96.4% 89.8% 50.0% 27.0% 37.6% 32.3% 63.3% TraceVLA ———60.0% 56.4% ——31.0% 45.0% RT-1-X 56.9% 20.4% 69.8% 49.0% 32.3% 6.9% 51.9% 29.4% 39.6% RT-2-X 82.2% 75.4% 89.3% 82.3% 79.2% 33.3% 37.2% 35.3% 64.3% Octo-Base 0.5% 0.0% 1.3% 0.6% 3.1% 0.0% 2.1% 1.1% 1.1% OpenVLA 71.1% 27.1% 65.3% 54.5% 47.7% 15.8% 19.5% 17.7% 39.8% RoboVLM (zero-shot) 77.8% 48.0% 79.1% 68.3% 56.0% 1.6% 15.3% 8.5% 46.3% RoboVLM (fine-tuning) 93.8% 49.8% 83.1% 75.6% 60.0% 2.6% 18.5% 10.6% 51.3% SpatialVLA (zero-shot) 93.1% 83.6% 92.6% 89.7% 79.7% 19.0% 47.0% 33.0% 67.4% SpatialVLA (fine-tuning) 95.7% 82.0% 94.2% 90.6% 79.1% 18.5% 33.8% 26.2% 65.3%
> ReFineVLA (fine-tuning) 78.8% 80.4% 92.1% 83.8% 88.1% 18.6% 50.3% 34.4% 68.8% Visual Matching RT-1 (Begin) 5.0% 0.0% 3.0% 2.7% 5.0% 0.0% 27.8% 13.9% 6.8% RT-1 ( 15% )86.0% 79.0% 48.0% 71.0% 35.4% 46.3% 66.7% 56.5% 60.2% RT-1 (Converged) 96.0% 90.0% 71.0% 85.7% 44.2% 60.1% 86.1% 73.0% 74.6% HPT ———56.0% 60.0% ——24.0% 46.0% TraceVLA ———28.0% 53.7% ——57.0% 42.0% RT-1-X 82.0% 33.0% 55.0% 56.7% 31.7% 29.6% 89.1% 59.7% 53.4% RT-2-X 74.0% 74.0% 88.0% 78.7% 77.9% 15.7% 34.3% 25.0% 60.7% Octo-Base 21.0% 21.0% 9.0% 17.0% 4.2% 00.9% 44.4% 22.7% 16.8% OpenVLA 27.0% 3.0% 19.0% 16.3% 46.2% 19.4% 51.8% 35.6% 27.7% RoboVLM (zero-shot) 85.0% 43.0% 90.0% 72.7% 66.3% 28.7% 25.0% 26.8% 56.3% RoboVLM (fine-tuning) 94.0% 47.0% 91.0% 77.3% 61.7% 33.3% 53.1% 43.5% 63.4% SpatialVLA (zero-shot) 69.0% 79.7% 96.4% 81.7% 85.7% 49.1% 62.9% 56.0% 74.4% SpatialVLA (fine-tuning) 84.5% 67.8% 95.2% 82.5% 85.7% 45.3% 63.8% 54.6% 74.3%
> ReFineVLA (fine-tuning) 79.8% 75.0% 94.1% 83.0% 95.3% 43.5% 59.3% 51.4% 76.6%

27 B.2 Details of Evaluation on SimplerEnv with Google Robot Tasks 

Table 8 presents comprehensive results across all tasks for the SimplerEnv Google Robot evaluation. Our 

ReFineVLA is directly compared against strong baselines, including RT-1 (in various training stages), RT-2-X, SpatialVLA, and others, in both Variant Aggregation and Visual Matching settings. 

Variant Aggregation: In the “ Pick Coke Can ” task, ReFineVLA achieves competitive results: for can-standing configuration, ReFineVLA achieves 92 .1% , just below the top RT-1 (converged) at 96 .4% and SpatialVLA at 94 .2% , surpassing all other baselines. Meanwhile, at more difficult “Vertical Laying” and “Horizontal Laying” task configurations, ReFineVLA scores 80 .4% and 78 .8% , respectively, all ranking in the top three. Notably, for the “ Move Near ” task, ReFineVLA delivers the best performance overall ( 88 .1% ),outperforming all prior baselines, followed by RT-2-X ( 79 .2% ) and SpatialVLA ( 79 .1% ). In “ Open/Close Drawer ” tasks, ReFineVLA leads on “ Close Drawer ” with 50 .3% , and maintains comparable results for “ Open Drawer ” of 18 .6% , outperforming fine-tuned SpatialVLA and many other methods on average. As a result, 

ReFineVLA achieves the highest overall average ( 68 .8% ).

Visual Matching: For “ Pick Coke Can ” in can-standing configuration, ReFineVLA achieves a success rate of 94 .1% , nearly matching those performances of SpatialVLA and RT-1 (converged). In “ Move Near ” task, 

ReFineVLA achieves the highest score of all models (95.3%) . Meanwhile, for “ Close/Open Drawer ”, 

ReFineVLA also ranks in the top performance with 51 .4% and 59 .3% , respectively. Overall, ReFineVLA 

achieves the best average success rate of 76 .6% , outperforming both fine-tuned SpatialVLA ( 74 .3% )and all policy learning or VLM baselines, showing superior generalization and robustness in visually-diverse scenarios. In general, ReFineVLA is consistently top-2 or top-3 across nearly every sub-task and outperforms all prior methods in aggregate averages for both evaluation settings. Its task-level robustness, particularly excelling in “ Move Near ”, “ Pick Coke Can ”, and “ Close Drawer ” tasks, demonstrates the advantages of explicit reasoning-augmented training for robust, generalist robotic policies. 28