Title: ZeroWBC: Learning Natural Visuomotor Humanoid Control Directly from Human Egocentric Video

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09170v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:32:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# ZeroWBC: Learning Natural Visuomotor Humanoid Control Directly from Human Egocentric Video 

# Haoran Yang 1, 2 * Jiacheng Bao 2, 3 * Yucheng Xin 2, 4 * Haoming Song 2, 5 

# Yuyang Tian 1, 2 Bin Zhao 2, 3 Dong Wang 2, † Xuelong Li 6

1University of Science and Technology of China 2Shanghai AI Laboratory 

3Northwestern Polytechnical University 4Tsinghua University 

5Shanghai Jiao Tong University 6TeleAI, China Telecom 

*Equal contributions. †Corresponding author. 

# Project Website: ZeroWBC.github.io General Tracking Policy Input  

> Kick the ball into the goal
> Sit on the sofa in front of you
> Avoid obstacles and walk
> towards the chair

Multimodal Motion Generation 

Fig. 1: Overview of the ZeroWBC framework. We propose a novel framework that learns natural humanoid visuomotor control directly from human egocentric videos. The pipeline takes an initial egocentric image and text instruction as input (Left), synthesizes human whole-body motions via a fine-tuned the vision-language model (Middle), and executes robot motion on the Unitree G1 robot using a robust general tracking policy (Right). ZeroWBC enables complex scene interactions like kicking, sitting, and obstacle avoidance with zero real robot teleoperation data. 

Abstract —Achieving versatile and naturalistic whole-body con-trol for humanoid robot scene-interaction remains a significant challenge. While some recent works have demonstrated au-tonomous humanoid interactive control, they are constrained to rigid locomotion patterns and expensive teleoperation data collec-tion, lacking the versatility to execute more human-like natural behaviors such as sitting or kicking. Furthermore, acquiring the necessary real robot teleoperation data is prohibitively expensive and time-consuming. To address these limitations, we introduce ZeroWBC, a novel framework that learns a natural humanoid visuomotor control policy directly from human egocentric videos, eliminating the need for large-scale robot teleoperation data and enabling natural humanoid robot scene-interaction control. Specifically, our approach first fine-tunes a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to predict future whole-body human motions based on text instructions and egocentric visual context, then these generated motions are retargeted to real robot joints and executed via our robust general motion tracking policy for humanoid whole-body control. Extensive experiments on the Unitree G1 humanoid robot demonstrate that our method outperforms baseline approaches in motion naturalness and versatility, successfully establishing a pipeline that eliminates teleoperation data collection overhead for whole-body humanoid control, offering a scalable and efficient paradigm for general humanoid whole-body control. 

> arXiv:2603.09170v1 [cs.RO] 10 Mar 2026

I. I NTRODUCTION 

With the rapid advancement of Embodied AI, general-purpose humanoid robots are increasingly expected to ex-ecute a diverse range of tasks in real-world environments with human-like naturalness and flexibility. Currently, whole-body humanoid robot control methods for tracking a single human reference motion have reached a high level of ma-turity and stability [26, 40, 16, 17, 32, 47]. Furthermore, general motion tracking techniques [46, 10, 15, 33, 43, 51] and generation2control methods that synthesize motions from text [35, 24, 45, 23] or other modalities for subsequent tracking [21, 30], are becoming increasingly powerful for whole-body control. However, existing methods mainly focus on performative motions like dancing and kungfu, which do not require the perception of the surrounding real-world environment. Therefore, implementing real-world interaction with environmental visual contexts for task-oriented whole-body control remains a critical challenge. Existing vision-language control policies for humanoid robots are primarily categorized into two paradigms. The first paradigm relies on teleoperation-based data collection for imitation learning, such as WholeBodyVLA [20], Human-Plus [12], and Twist2 [46]. However, this approach requires teleoperating robots to collect real robot joint actions for every individual task, which is extremely costly and not scalable. Consequently, the resulting policies often struggle with gener-alization across diverse tasks and environments. Furthermore, data collected using decoupling strategies like [20, 5, 11, 22], where upper and lower body movements are separated, re-sults in highly unnatural whole-body robot motion. The sec-ond paradigm focuses on task-specific reinforcement learning within simulated environments, such as VisualMimic [44] and Doorman [41]. These approaches train agents to master single complex skills in physics-accurate simulators. However, they lack inherent adaptability to unseen scenarios and tasks, as the learned policies are strictly optimized for predefined tasks. Furthermore, the persistent sim-to-real gap remains a significant bottleneck, frequently leading to performance degradation when deployed on the real-world humanoid robot. To overcome these challenges, we propose ZeroWBC, a whole-body control framework for humanoid robots pre-trained on large-scale human egocentric video data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first model to leverage human video data paired with corresponding human motion capture(MoCap) data to enable humanoid whole-body con-trol for real-world interaction tasks. Specifically, ZeroWBC generates humanoid whole-body control signals for real-world interaction within a two-stage pipeline. In the first stage, the task is defined as motion generation conditioned on textual instructions and human egocentric image. We employ a VQ-VAE to discretize continuous movements into motion tokens and fine-tune the vision-language model on large-scale text-image-motion datasets to generate future human motions. In the second stage, the task is defined as a general motion tracker. We retarget the generated human motions onto the humanoid robot. These retargeted motions serve as input for the general tracking policy. The tracking policy is pre-trained on large-scale MoCap datasets, enabling the robot to execute arbitrary reference motions with exceptional precision. ZeroWBC not only eliminates teleoperation data collection overhead but also fundamentally ensures natural, human-like control for humanoid robots. We validated the feasibility and generalization of Ze-roWBC through a series of meticulously designed scene-interaction tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves performance comparable to current state-of-the-art models in the first-stage motion generation task. The second-stage general motion tracking policy outperforms pre-vious general motion tracking policies on existing benchmarks in terms of accuracy and stability. Furthermore, experiments indicate that ZeroWBC achieves a high success rate in real-world interaction scenarios, executing commands with natural and human-like robot motions. In summary, our key contributions are as follows:  

> •

We propose ZeroWBC, the first humanoid control frame-work driven by human egocentric video and human motion capture data. This significantly reduces the data collection costs required for training general-purpose humanoid robots.  

> •

We design a unified two-stage architecture for motion generation and tracking. By generating whole-body mo-tion tokens with textual instructions and visual contexts inputs followed with an advanced tracking policy, we achieve natural whole-body control for humanoid robots conditioned on scenes and instructions  

> •

We demonstrate superior execution and generalization capabilities in diverse scenarios. Extensive experiments show that ZeroWBC enables robust humanoid scene-interaction whole-body control across simulation and real-world environments. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Multimodal Motion Generation 

Text-conditioned human motion generation has reached a mature stage [1, 14, 19, 50, 36, 52, 48, 25]. By leveraging the pre-trained knowledge of Large Language Models (LLMs), autoregressive models such as MotionGPT [50, 19] and T2M-GPT [48] generate human motion by predicting discrete mo-tion tokens. These approaches demonstrate superior seman-tic understanding, generalization capabilities, and inference efficiency compared to diffusion-based methods [37, 49, 8]. While recent multimodal frameworks such as M3GPT [29] and MotionCraft [6] have expanded condition to include music and spatial trajectories, motion generation conditioned on human egocentric video remains largely unexplored due to data scarcity and the lack of suitable deployment platforms. Crucially, given that humanoid robots in real-world environ-ments rely exclusively on egocentric perception, there is an urgent need to construct frameworks capable of generating human interactive motions based on both visual perception and textual instructions. B. Humanoid Whole-body Control 

Humanoid whole-body control has evolved from task-specific reinforcement learning, which initially focused on isolated capabilities like robust locomotion [9] and park-our [53], to data-driven motion mimic frameworks designed to track human reference motions. While pioneering works like ExBody [18] explored decoupled control strategies and Om-niH2O [15] established the standard teacher-student distillation pipeline for unified whole-body Control, BeyondMimic [26] has recently emerged as the state-of-the-art method for high-fidelity tracking of single reference motions. Currently, the field is advancing toward General Motion Tracking, which aims to track arbitrary motion references without the need for per-motion reward engineering. In this direction, GMT [10] leverages Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures to enhance adaptability across diverse skills, while the Twist2 [46] em-ploys a general motion tracker to realize holistic whole-body teleoperation. However, currently, there lacks a robust and high-fidelity general motion tracker capable of executing diverse motions. 

C. Visual Humanoid Control 

Prior works on visual humanoid control have attempted to integrate perception with control but face critical limitations in task complexity, motion naturalness, and data scalability. Early keypoint-based frameworks like HEAD [7] introduced egocentric vision yet remain restricted to simple navigation tasks, while VideoMimic [2] enables environment interaction via a real2sim2real pipeline but lacks first-person perception and is confined to highly simplistic, static scenarios. In the domain of high-level planning, methods such as LEVER-B [42] embed latent vectors into reinforcement learning; however, they rely heavily on simulation data and third-person view, rendering them sensitive to real-world domain shifts and instruction variations. And methods like VisualMimic [44] and Doorman [41] are tailored for specific tasks and scenarios in simulation, leading to poor generalization and a significant sim-to-real gap. Furthermore, extensions of Vision-Language-Action models like Humanoid-VLA [53] focus predominantly on locomotion at the expense of complex scene interaction, whereas WholebodyVLA [20] adopts decoupled strategies that constrain lower-body locomotion, failing to produce natural, human-like behaviors. Although recent holistic systems like Twist2 [46] demonstrate whole-body control, they depend on expensive, hardware-dependent teleoperation for robot data collection, creating a severe bottleneck for data and training scalability. Addressing these gaps, we propose a framework that leverages scalable real-world human egocentric data to enable diverse, stable, and truly human-like whole-body inter-actions in complex environments. III. M ETHOD 

As illustrated in Fig 3, ZeroWBC employs a hierarchical two-stage framework designed to achieve vision-conditioned whole-body control for humanoid robots scene interaction. In stage 1, VQ-VAE [38] is utilized to encode continuous human 

Fig. 2: Hardware configuration for perspective alignment. To minimize the domain gap between human demonstrations and robot execution, the GoPro camera is mounted on the human’s chest at a height strictly aligned with the robot’s camera placement. motion space into discrete token representations. The Vision-Language Model (VLM) is fine-tuned using image-text-motion pairs to achieve cross-modal alignment. This enables the VLM to predict discrete action tokens based on visual and textual prompts, which are then reconstructed into continuous human motion via motion decoder. In the second stage, we develop a general motion tracker leveraging reinforcement learning integrated with a curriculum learning strategy. This tracker maps arbitrary reference motions into precise low-level control commands for the robot’s end-effectors. Furthermore, we employ an efficient and scalable data collection pipeline to facilitate fine-tuning and ensure robust performance of the entire system. 

A. Data Collection 

Collecting data via robot teleoperation is exceedingly diffi-cult, as it demands seamless coordination between the robot and the operator. This complexity creates a significant bottle-neck, rendering large-scale data acquisition nearly impractical. To address this challenge, we employ an efficient alternative: human-centric data collection. Our setup utilizes a chest-mounted GoPro camera integrated with a motion capture system (either optical or inertial). This approach requires only a MoCap suit and a portable action camera, offering high scalability and low acquisition costs. During inference, the robot perceives the environment through an identical camera configuration. To minimize the domain gap between human and robot perspectives, we ensure that the camera mounting height during data collection is strictly aligned with the robot’s camera height, as illustrated in Fig. 2. 

B. Motion Tokenizer 

We introduce the VQ-VAE [38] network tailored to SMPL [28] human-motion data, compressing continuous, Stage 1: Motion Generation Stage 2: General Motion Tracking via Curriculum Learning 

> Initial image
> observation
> task
> instruction

Retargeting   

> General Motion
> Tracking Policy(RL)
> Level 3: Hard
> (e.g.,Dancing Rolling)
> Level 2:Medium
> (e.g., Runing Jumping)
> Level 1: Easy
> (e.g.,Walking)
> Humanoid
> Unitree G1 Motion
> ...
> ...
> Increasing Difficulty &
> Sequential Training Flow
> ...

In put 

Motion tokens  

> ...
> human motion retargeted
> robot motion
> Please walk
> towards the
> sofa in front
> of you and
> turn around
> to sit down.

(a) (b)Fig. 3: Detailed architecture of ZeroWBC. The framework operates in two stages: (a) Multimodal Motion Generation: We use a VQ-VAE and fine-tuned Qwen2.5-VL to predict motion tokens from initial images and text instructions, decoding them into continuous human motions. (b) General Motion Tracking: Generated motions are retargeted and tracked by an RL-based policy. A curriculum learning strategy with increasing difficulty ensures robust tracking performance. high-dimensional motion sequences into compact discrete to-ken sequences that build a motion code-book and readily support downstream motion generation. The motion VQ-VAE network downsamples a motion clip of length ni into a latent sequence of length nt, where ni = nt ·2ndown and ndown refers to the number of downsampling encoder blocks, followed by a lightweight decoder that upsamples back to the original resolution. The encoder and decoder are based on ResNet structure. For a given motion sequence m, it contains SMPL-formatted pose data msmpl ∈ R66 as well as its global position component mtrans ∈ R3, we supervise 5 auxiliary losses to guarantee physical plausibility: 

1) Lrecons : a penalty between the ground-truth motion m

and the decoder output ˆm, guaranteeing faithful recovery. 

2) Lcommit : the term that encourages the encoder to com-mit to the chosen code-book entries. 

3) Lvel : a penalty on finite-difference joint velocities △m,penalizing jitter and enforcing temporal smoothness. 

4) Lrot : a penalty on the global root orientation, ensuring stable heading estimation, crucial for downstream tracking. 

5) Ltrans : a penalty on the global translation of body root 

mtrans , explicitly supervising the trajectory. The complete motion VQ-VAE training objective is 

LVQVAE = λr ∥m − ˆm∥1 + λc∥sg[ ze] − zq ∥22

+ λv ∥△ m − △ ˆm∥1 + λrr ∥m0:3 − ˆm0:3 ∥1 (1) 

+ λp∥mtrans − ˆmtrans ∥1.

where ze represents the latent vector produced by the encoder, 

zq is the discrete vector obtained by mapping ze to the nearest entry in the codebook, sg[ ·] means the gradient is detached during back-propagation, △(·) represents temporal finite-difference operator, ˆm means the decoder reconstruc-tion. More network details are provided in the Appendix. 

C. Fine-tuning Vision-Language Model 

We adopt the pre-trained Qwen2.5-VL-3B [4] as our foun-dational backbone to autoregressively predict motion tokens conditioned on multimodal inputs. Since the base model has already established robust alignment between visual and textual modalities, our primary objective is to align the motion space with this pre-existing joint embedding. To achieve this, we convert the quantized motion indices from the VQ-VAE codebook into discrete tokens format (e.g., ⟨motion token 1 ⟩)and incorporate them into the Qwen-VL vocabulary as special tokens. This formulation allows us to treat motion generation as a standard next-token prediction task. Formally, given a visual context v, a textual instruction t, and a target motion sequence represented by tokens z = {z1, z 2, . . . , z T }, we optimize the model parameters θ by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the motion tokens: 

Lgen = −

> T

X

> i=1

log Pθ (zi | v, t, z <i ), (2) where z<i represents the history of generated motion tokens. This approach effectively leverages the reasoning capabilities TABLE I: Actor Observation Space (616 dims)                      

> Component Description Dim
> Motion Command
> current target Current target pose 65 short future targets Short-horizon future targets (2 frames) 130 long future targets Long-horizon future targets (5 frames) 325 command (total) Multi-scale motion target 520
> Proprioceptive Observations
> motion anchor ori b Root orientation in body frame (6D) 6base ang vel Base angular velocity 3joint pos Joint positions 29 joint vel Joint velocities 29 prev actions Previous action 29 Total 616

of the pretrained VLM to map high-level textual instructions and visual observations to low-level motion representations. To ensure both generalization across diverse scenarios and precision in execution, we employ a progressive two-stage fine-tuning strategy. In stage 1, the model is trained on large-scale public datasets containing image-text-motion triplets. This stage focuses on cross-modal alignment, enabling the model to learn the fundamental mapping from vision-language instructions to the motion space. However, due to the broad data distribution and variable quality of public datasets, motion generation at this stage often lacks the physical stability and precise spatial grounding required for robust interaction. To address this, the second stage involves fine-tuning on our high-quality, self-collected dataset comprising motion capture data aligned with egocentric video. This domain-specific fine-tuning significantly enhances the model’s spatial understand-ing and its ability to generate precise, physically plausible in-teractions tailored to the robot’s egocentric view. Subsequently, the generated motion tokens will be decoded by the action decoder of the VQ-VAE into continuous human motions. 

D. General Motion Tracking 

We train a unified control policy to track a large collection of whole-body motion capture sequences. To ensure stable learning across heterogeneous motion styles and difficulty levels, we design the training process to adaptively schedule motion data and explicitly condition the policy on future motion context. 

1) Adaptive Motion Scheduling: Each motion clip is treated as an independent training unit and assigned a dynamic sampling weight that reflects its current tracking difficulty. For each motion file i, we maintain an exponential moving average (EMA) of the tracking error: 

Ei ← (1 − α)Ei + α˜ei, (3) where ˜ei denotes the mean tracking error over all environments using file i in the current iteration. To account for failure cases not fully captured by error magnitude, we additionally track success and failure statistics using EMA: 

Si ← (1 − β)Si + βs i, (4) 

Fi ← (1 − β)Fi + βf i, (5) where si and fi indicate success and failure events. The estimated success probability is given by 

ˆpsucc  

> i

= Si

Si + Fi + ϵ . (6) We define a difficulty score that combines persistent track-ing error and failure frequency: 

ri = (1 − w) clip 

 Ei

c , 0, 1



+ w (1 − ˆpsucc  

> i

) , (7) where c is a normalization constant and w balances the two terms. Sampling probabilities are obtained using a temperature-scaled softmax with a uniform exploration term: 

pi = (1 − ε) softmax 

 γ log( ri + ϵ)

T



+ εN , (8) which ensures minimum coverage over all motion files while prioritizing difficult clips. 

2) Progressive Difficulty Exposure: While adaptive sam-pling emphasizes challenging motions, exposing the policy to highly complex clips too early can impede convergence. We therefore organize motion files into a small number of difficulty levels based on semantic and kinematic complexity, and progressively expand the training set. Training begins with the lowest difficulty level. Let lmax 

denote the highest unlocked level. The curriculum advances when tracking performance at the current level satisfies 

MPJPE lmax < θ pos , MPJAE lmax < θ ang , (9) or automatically after a fixed number of iterations. Within the unlocked set, sampling is biased toward the most recently introduced difficulty level: 

wi =

(

wnew · pi, if li = lmax ,pi, otherwise . (10) To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, a minimum sampling ratio is enforced for each unlocked level. When a new difficulty level is unlocked, its motion files are gradually introduced over several iterations to avoid abrupt distribution shifts. 

3) Temporal Conditioning with Future Motion Encoding: 

Accurate motion tracking requires the policy to anticipate up-coming movements rather than relying solely on instantaneous pose targets. To this end, we augment the policy with an explicit future motion encoder and train the system using an asymmetric PPO formulation. During training, the critic is provided with privileged in-formation, including full reference motion states and future targets, while the actor is restricted to a compact observation space available at test time. This asymmetric design improves value estimation and stabilizes learning without increasing deployment-time complexity. The actor observation consists of a motion command and proprioceptive states, as summarized in Table I. The motion command has a total dimensionality of 520 and is con-structed by concatenating target poses over multiple temporal segments: one current target frame (65 dims), two short-horizon future frames (2 ×65 dims), and five long-horizon future frames (5 ×65 dims). The current and short-horizon targets are provided directly to the policy for precise near-term tracking, while the long-horizon sequence is processed by a lightweight temporal convolutional encoder to extract a compact representation of global motion trends. The encoded future motion representation is concatenated with proprioceptive observations, including root orientation in the body frame, base angular velocity, joint positions, velocities, and the previous action, and then used as the policy input. Conditioning the policy on this multi-scale future infor-mation enables anticipation of velocity changes, directional transitions, and contact events, leading to more stable tracking behavior for highly dynamic motions. More details on the gen-eral motion tracking framework are provided in the Appendix. IV. E XPERIMENT 

In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the ZeroWBC framework. We first introduce the datasets employed in our experiments. Following this, we separately evaluate the performance of the multimodal motion generation and general motion tracking modules. Finally, we demonstrate the integrated capabilities of ZeroWBC in environmental in-teraction tasks through real-world experiments on the Unitree G1 robot. 

A. Dataset 

Nymeria Dataset Nymeria [31] is a large-scale multimodal egocentric dataset featuring 300 hours of diverse daily activ-ities with synchronized Aria egocentric video, XSens whole-body motion, and hierarchical language annotations. In our work, we processed this data into 5–10 second clips of SMPL-formatted motion sequences paired with egocentric images and annotated text. This processed dataset is utilized for the first-stage fine-tuning of the vision-language model, establishing a foundational mapping between visual-textual context and motion tokens. 

HumanML3D Dataset HumanML3D [13] contains 14,616 high-quality 3D motion sequences (about 28.59 hours) with precise textual annotations. We utilize it in two capacities: (1) during vision-language model fine-tuning, it is co-trained with the Nymeria dataset to enhance text-motion alignment; and (2) for general motion tracker pre-training, we use GMR [3] to retarget its motions onto the Unitree G1 robot, establishing foundational motion control policies. 

Self-collected Dataset. To compensate for deficiencies in visual alignment and data quality found in Nymeria dataset, and to enhance the model’s precise perception of spatial position, we collected a high-quality human egocentric motion dataset utilizing the method described in Section III-A. Com-prising approximately 5 hours data, the dataset covers daily tasks such as navigation, box lifting, sitting and so on. Each task category consists of approximately 300 sequences, with durations ranging from 5 to 15 seconds. During collection, we ensured scene diversity by varying backgrounds and object placements, while synchronously capturing motion capture data, egocentric image, and annotated text instructions. This dataset is primarily utilized for: (1) the second stage of fine-tuning a vision-language model, enabling the generated motion tokens to possess precise spatial understanding and object interaction capabilities; (2) fine-tuning the general motion tracking policy to adapt to the dynamic characteristics of distinct tasks. 

B. Evaluation on Multimodal Motion Generation 

We first train the VQ-VAE across all three datasets to ensure high-fidelity motion encoding and reconstruction. Sub-sequently, we construct a mixed dataset comprising approxi-mately 200 hours of image-text-motion pairs from the Nymeria dataset and 25 hours of text-motion pairs from the Hu-manML3D dataset. In the first stage of fine-tuning, we employ this mixed dataset to fine-tune the Qwen2.5-VL-3B model. In the second stage of fine-tuning, we employ our self-collected data to further fine-tune the model derived from the first stage, thereby enhancing domain-specific and spatial perception capabilities. To preserve the VLM’s robust pre-trained vision language ability, we fine-tune only the LM Decoder while keeping all other parameters frozen. This phase utilizes 32 NVIDIA A100 GPUs for training and inference. Further experimental details are provided in the Appendix. To validate the superiority and rationality of our method, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of multimodal motion generation following standard protocols in this domain. The evaluation metrics include Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID), R-Precision (Top-1/Top-3), and Multimodal Distance (MM-Dist) and Diversity. Due to the scarcity of prior work on vision-language-conditioned motion generation, particularly on the Nymeria dataset, we restrict our analysis to evaluating different training schemes on both the Nymeria and self-collected datasets. When evaluating on the Nymeria dataset, we analyze the impact of different training data configurations: (1)fine-tuning exclusively on Nymeria. (2)fine-tuning on the mixed Nymeria and HumanML3D dataset. (3)fine-tuning on three datasets. As shown in Table II, the Nymeria dataset covers a vast range of human daily activities, resulting in high motion complexity and consequently lower baseline metrics. However, the joint fine-tuning with HumanML3D yields a significant performance improvement. Table II demonstrates that fine-tuning with self-collected data in the second stage leads to further improvements in model performance. To demonstrate the efficacy of leveraging the Nymeria dataset for pre-training, we conducted inference experiments on our self-collected test dataset. As shown in Table II, we find that pre-training with the joint Nymeria and HumanML3D dataset prior to domain-specific fine-tuning significantly out-TABLE II: Quantitative comparison on the Nymeria test dataset and Self-Collected test dataset . The “Data Composition” column indicates the datasets used for training. ↓ indicates lower is better, ↑ indicates higher is better. The best results are highlighted in bold .                                                                                                                                      

> Evaluation Dataset Data for Fine-tuning FID ↓R-Precision ↑MM-Dist ↓Diversity ↑
> Top-1 Top-3 Nymeria
> Nymeria 0.756 ±0.038 0.521 ±0.005 0.756 ±0.004 3.124 ±0.032 18.892 ±0.165 HumanML3D 0.923 ±0.065 0.382 ±0.006 0.663 ±0.005 3.842 ±0.048 18.456 ±0.203 Nymeria + HumanML3D 0.423 ±0.021 0.634 ±0.004 0.828 ±0.003 2.514 ±0.024 19.245 ±0.178 Nymeria + HumanML3D →Self-collected 0.298 ±0.012 0.668 ±0.003 0.847 ±0.002 2.286 ±0.019 19.534 ±0.165 Self-Collected Motions
> Nymeria 0.784 ±0.045 0.548 ±0.007 0.782 ±0.006 3.456 ±0.041 18.234 ±0.189 Nymeria + HumanML3D 0.628 ±0.031 0.604 ±0.006 0.825 ±0.005 3.128 ±0.036 18.456 ±0.195 Self-collected Motions 0.472 ±0.028 0.685 ±0.005 0.875 ±0.004 2.745 ±0.032 18.956 ±0.178 Nymeria + HumanML3D →Self-collected 0.245 ±0.018 0.741 ±0.004 0.892 ±0.003 2.456 ±0.028 19.124 ±0.172

TABLE III: Evaluation of text generation quality. We compare ZeroWBC with pure text-to-motion baselines.             

> Method Bleu@1 Bleu@4 CIDEr RougeL
> MotionGPT 17.09 15.57 42.16 37.53
> ZeroWBC (Ours) 50.11 43.26 78.25 72.33

performs fine-tuning on our pure self-collected dataset from scratch. This indicates that Nymeria and HumanML3D facili-tate the alignment of the tri-modal space (image-text-motion), equipping the model with robust preliminary capabilities. Finally, to validate the effectiveness of visual context, we compare our multimodal approach against MotionGPT (a pure text-to-motion model) on the Nymeria dataset. In Table III, we present the quality of motion tokens inferred by MotionGPT and ZeroWBC When both are trained on the Nymeria dataset with Qwen2.5-VL as the baseline. To evaluate the semantic consistency between predicted motion tokens and ground-truth descriptions, we introduce BLEU [34], CIDEr [39], and ROUGE-L [27] as complementary metrics. Specifically, Mo-tionGPT utilizes text-motion data, while ZeroWBC leverages text-image-motion data. The results indicate that incorporating the visual modality yields significantly better motion token quality compared to just using the text modality. 

C. Evaluation on General Motion Tracking 

We evaluate the proposed method on the task of general full-body motion tracking under three evaluation settings: HumanML3D, MoCap, and Generation, as summarized in Table IV. Our motion tracking policies are trained using two NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs for approximately two weeks. The HumanML3D dataset and the self-collected MoCap dataset follow the definitions introduced in Section IV-A, while the Generation setting evaluates tracking performance on motions generated by the multimodal motion generation module. To assess joint-level tracking accuracy and temporal consistency, we report kinematic error metrics computed in world coordinates, including Mean Per-Joint Position Error (MPJPE, in meters), Mean Per-Joint Angle Error (MPJAE, in radians), and Mean Per-Joint Velocity Error (MPJVE, in radi-ans per second). We compare our approach against GMT [10], a state-of-the-art general motion tracking method based on MLP-encoded motion history, as well as an ablated variant TABLE IV: Joint-level motion tracking evaluation. All metrics are computed in world coordinates and lower values indicate better performance.                                      

> Data Method MPJPE ↓MPJAE ↓MPJVE ↓
> HumanML3D GMT [10] 0.5530 0.1046 0.4882
> w/o Curr. 0.8957 0.1225 0.6478
> Ours 0.5360 0.0910 0.4947 MoCap GMT 0.4950 0.1014 0.4225 w/o Curr. 0.5205 0.1139 0.5029
> Ours 0.4472 0.0991 0.3944
> Generation GMT 0.6013 0.1375 0.5112 w/o Curr. 0.8633 0.1517 0.6206
> Ours 0.5671 0.1129 0.4680

of our method without curriculum learning that relies solely on error-driven adaptive sampling. All methods are evaluated under identical tracking settings, and results are averaged over 50 independent runs with different random seeds. As shown in Table IV, our full method consistently achieves the lowest joint-level tracking errors across all three evalua-tion settings or performs on par with the strongest baseline. Notably, curriculum learning yields clear improvements in joint position and velocity accuracy, with the most pronounced gains observed in MPJVE, indicating reduced error accumula-tion and improved temporal stability over long-horizon motion sequences. In contrast, removing curriculum learning leads to consistently higher errors across all metrics, highlighting its importance for robust general motion tracking. 

D. Real-world Evaluation 

We evaluate the comprehensive ZeroWBC framework across multiple distinct real-world interaction scenarios. Each task lasts approximately 10 to 20 seconds and requires com-plex whole-body control, ranging from obstacle avoidance, navigation, and ball kicking to sitting on sofas and so on. 

Hardware and System Setup We employ the Unitree G1 humanoid robot as our experimental platform. For egocentric visual perception, a GoPro action camera is mounted on the robot’s chest. During execution, the system wirelessly transmits the real-time camera feed to a local server hosting the fine-tuned Qwen2.5-VL-3B model. The VLM infers the context and generates continuous human motion sequences, avoid obstacles 

> &&
> Sit on the sofa
> Sit on the chair
> &&
> navigation to
> the chair

Fig. 4: Real-world interaction on Unitree G1. (a) Few-shot Generalization: The robot performs instructions, successfully adapting to varied obstacle layouts and shifted sofa positions. (b) Zero-shot Capabilities: The robot executes ”Sit on the chair” and ”walk towards the sofa”, interacting with the object despite the complete absence of the chair data during training. which are then retargeted to the robot’s kinematic structure. These reference robot motions are subsequently fed into the general motion tracking policy to drive the G1 controller. 

Few-shot Generalization We conducted extensive real-world experiments focusing on several core tasks: Obstacle Avoidance, Ball Kicking, Move boxes and Sofa Sitting. While these task categories were present in the training dataset, the physical properties of the objects (shape, style) and their spatial configurations in the testing environment differed sig-nificantly from the training data. Table V presents the success rates for these tasks, demonstrating the framework’s robust few-shot generalization capabilities. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the robot successfully adapts to varying environmental layouts and object positions to complete the actions. 

Zero-shot Capabilities We further evaluated the system’s ability to handle objects and instructions entirely absent from the training dataset. As shown in Fig. 4, despite the complete absence of “sitting on a chair” data during training, the robot successfully identified a chair, navigated towards it, and performed a stable sitting motion. Notably, the width of the single-seat chair was nearly identical to that of the robot, necessitating high-precision maneuvering. This superior performance highlights the significant advantage of leveraging the broad semantic knowledge embedded in the pre-trained VLM within the ZeroWBC framework. Additionally, Ze-roWBC shows remarkable instruction-following performance and the capability to execute whole-body control based solely on text. More results are provided in the Appendix. TABLE V: Real-world success rates for few-shot interaction tasks. The evaluation covers scenarios with object variations and placements distinct from the training dataset.           

> Task Trials Success Rate (%)
> Obstacle Avoidance 50 95.0 Ball Kicking 50 78.0 Sofa Sitting 50 84.0 Move boxes 50 30.0

V. CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS 

In this paper, we present ZeroWBC, a scalable framework that achieves versatile humanoid whole-body control by large-scale human egocentric videos and Mocap data, effectively eliminating the dependency on costly robot teleoperation. Our approach bridges the gap between high-level semantic planning and low-level control, enabling natural and versa-tile whole-body control for humanoid robot scene-interaction. Extensive experiments on the Unitree G1 robot demonstrate that ZeroWBC not only outperforms existing baselines in tracking precision and motion naturalness, but also exhibits strong generalization capabilities in diverse real-world interac-tion scenarios, offering a promising data-driven paradigm for general-purpose humanoid embodiment. This work provides a new feasible framework for the large-scale data collection and training of future general-purpose humanoid robots. Despite demonstrating superior performance, our system exhibits certain limitations. Currently, high vision-language model inference latency (at least 500ms) hinders real-time interaction with dynamic environments; we plan to accelerate inference or model distillation. And precise manipulation suffers from absent force feedback; we will integrate tactile sensing and body-hand datasets. Finally, given the inherent morphological discrepancies between the human body and the robot, the motion retargeting algorithm requires further optimization such as end-effector-based retargeting methods. REFERENCES 

[1] Hyemin Ahn, Timothy Ha, Yunho Choi, Hwiyeon Yoo, and Songhwai Oh. Text2action: Generative adversarial synthesis from language to action. In 2018 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 5915–5920. IEEE, 2018. [2] Arthur Allshire, Hongsuk Choi, Junyi Zhang, David McAllister, Anthony Zhang, Chung Min Kim, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Visual imitation enables contextual humanoid control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03729 , 2025. [3] Joao Pedro Araujo, Yanjie Ze, Pei Xu, Jiajun Wu, and C Karen Liu. Retargeting matters: General motion retargeting for humanoid motion tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02252 , 2025. [4] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. [5] Qingwei Ben, Feiyu Jia, Jia Zeng, Junting Dong, Dahua Lin, and Jiangmiao Pang. Homie: Humanoid loco-manipulation with isomorphic exoskeleton cockpit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13013 , 2025. [6] Yuxuan Bian, Ailing Zeng, Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Zhaoyang Zhang, Wei Liu, and Qiang Xu. Motioncraft: Crafting whole-body motion with plug-and-play multimodal con-trols. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 1880–1888, 2025. [7] Sirui Chen, Yufei Ye, Zi-ang Cao, Jennifer Lew, Pei Xu, and C Karen Liu. Hand-eye autonomous delivery: Learning humanoid navigation, locomotion and reaching. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03068 , 2025. [8] Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, and Gang Yu. Executing your commands via motion diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18000–18010, 2023. [9] Zixuan Chen, Xialin He, Yen-Jen Wang, Qiayuan Liao, Yanjie Ze, Zhongyu Li, S Shankar Sastry, Jiajun Wu, Koushil Sreenath, Saurabh Gupta, et al. Learning smooth humanoid locomotion through lipschitz-constrained poli-cies. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 4743–4750. IEEE, 2025. [10] Zixuan Chen, Mazeyu Ji, Xuxin Cheng, Xuanbin Peng, Xue Bin Peng, and Xiaolong Wang. Gmt: General motion tracking for humanoid whole-body control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14770 , 2025. [11] Xuxin Cheng, Yandong Ji, Junming Chen, Ruihan Yang, Ge Yang, and Xiaolong Wang. Expressive whole-body control for humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16796 , 2024. [12] Zipeng Fu, Qingqing Zhao, Qi Wu, Gordon Wet-zstein, and Chelsea Finn. Humanplus: Humanoid shad-owing and imitation from humans. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10454 , 2024. [13] Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji, Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse and natural 3d human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5152–5161, June 2022. [14] Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, and Li Cheng. Tm2t: Stochastic and tokenized modeling for the reciprocal generation of 3d human motions and texts. In Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 580–597. Springer, 2022. [15] Tairan He, Zhengyi Luo, Xialin He, Wenli Xiao, Chong Zhang, Weinan Zhang, Kris Kitani, Changliu Liu, and Guanya Shi. Omnih2o: Universal and dexterous human-to-humanoid whole-body teleoperation and learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08858 , 2024. [16] Tairan He, Jiawei Gao, Wenli Xiao, Yuanhang Zhang, Zi Wang, Jiashun Wang, Zhengyi Luo, Guanqi He, Nikhil Sobanbab, Chaoyi Pan, et al. Asap: Aligning simula-tion and real-world physics for learning agile humanoid whole-body skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01143 ,2025. [17] Tao Huang, Huayi Wang, Junli Ren, Kangning Yin, Zirui Wang, Xiao Chen, Feiyu Jia, Wentao Zhang, Jun-feng Long, Jingbo Wang, and Jiangmiao Pang. To-wards Adaptable Humanoid Control via Adaptive Motion Tracking, October 2025. [18] Mazeyu Ji, Xuanbin Peng, Fangchen Liu, Jialong Li, Ge Yang, Xuxin Cheng, and Xiaolong Wang. Ex-body2: Advanced expressive humanoid whole-body con-trol. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13196 , 2024. [19] Biao Jiang, Xin Chen, Wen Liu, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, and Tao Chen. Motiongpt: Human motion as a foreign language. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:20067–20079, 2023. [20] Haoran Jiang, Jin Chen, Qingwen Bu, Li Chen, Modi Shi, Yanjie Zhang, Delong Li, Chuanzhe Suo, Chuang Wang, Zhihui Peng, et al. Wholebodyvla: Towards unified latent vla for whole-body loco-manipulation control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.11047 , 2025. [21] Nan Jiang, Zimo He, Wanhe Yu, Lexi Pang, Yunhao Li, Hongjie Li, Jieming Cui, Yuhan Li, Yizhou Wang, Yixin Zhu, et al. Uniact: Unified motion generation and action streaming for humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24321 , 2025. [22] Jialong Li, Xuxin Cheng, Tianshu Huang, Shiqi Yang, Ri-Zhao Qiu, and Xiaolong Wang. Amo: Adaptive mo-tion optimization for hyper-dexterous humanoid whole-body control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03738 , 2025. [23] Peng Li, Zihan Zhuang, Yangfan Gao, Yi Dong, Sixian Li, Changhao Jiang, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Enyu Zhou, Jixuan Huang, et al. From-w1: Towards general humanoid whole-body control with language instruc-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12799 , 2026. [24] Zhe Li, Cheng Chi, Yangyang Wei, Boan Zhu, Yibo Peng, Tao Huang, Pengwei Wang, Zhongyuan Wang, Shanghang Zhang, and Chang Xu. From language to locomotion: Retargeting-free humanoid control via mo-tion latent guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14952 ,2025. [25] Han Liang, Jiacheng Bao, Ruichi Zhang, Sihan Ren, Yuecheng Xu, Sibei Yang, Xin Chen, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Omg: Towards open-vocabulary motion gen-eration via mixture of controllers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 482–493, 2024. [26] Qiayuan Liao, Takara E Truong, Xiaoyu Huang, Yu-man Gao, Guy Tevet, Koushil Sreenath, and C Karen Liu. Beyondmimic: From motion tracking to versatile humanoid control via guided diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08241 , 2025. [27] Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evalua-tion of summaries. In Text summarization branches out ,pages 74–81, 2004. [28] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Ger-ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 34(6):248:1–248:16, October 2015. [29] Mingshuang Luo, Ruibing Hou, Zhuo Li, Hong Chang, Zimo Liu, Yaowei Wang, and Shiguang Shan. M 3 gpt: An advanced multimodal, multitask framework for mo-tion comprehension and generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:28051–28077, 2024. [30] Zhengyi Luo, Ye Yuan, Tingwu Wang, Chenran Li, Sirui Chen, Fernando Casta˜ neda, Zi-Ang Cao, Jiefeng Li, David Minor, Qingwei Ben, et al. Sonic: Supersizing motion tracking for natural humanoid whole-body con-trol. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07820 , 2025. [31] Lingni Ma, Yuting Ye, Fangzhou Hong, Vladimir Guzov, Yifeng Jiang, Rowan Postyeni, Luis Pesqueira, Alexander Gamino, Vijay Baiyya, Hyo Jin Kim, et al. Nymeria: A massive collection of multimodal egocentric daily motion in the wild. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 445–465. Springer, 2024. [32] Gabriel B. Margolis, Michelle Wang, Nolan Fey, and Pulkit Agrawal. SoftMimic: Learning Compliant Whole-body Control from Examples, October 2025. [33] Yixuan Pan, Ruoyi Qiao, Li Chen, Kashyap Chitta, Liang Pan, Haoguang Mai, Qingwen Bu, Hao Zhao, Cunyuan Zheng, Ping Luo, et al. Agility meets stability: Versa-tile humanoid control with heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17373 , 2025. [34] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 311–318, 2002. [35] Yiyang Shao, Xiaoyu Huang, Bike Zhang, Qiayuan Liao, Yuman Gao, Yufeng Chi, Zhongyu Li, Sophia Shao, and Koushil Sreenath. Langwbc: Language-directed humanoid whole-body control via end-to-end learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21738 , 2025. [36] Haoming Song, Delin Qu, Yuanqi Yao, Qizhi Chen, Qi Lv, Yiwen Tang, Modi Shi, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Bin Zhao, et al. Hume: Introducing system-2 thinking in visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21432 , 2025. [37] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Amit H Bermano. Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916 , 2022. [38] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [39] Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Cider: Consensus-based image description eval-uation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4566– 4575, 2015. [40] Weiji Xie, Jinrui Han, Jiakun Zheng, Huanyu Li, Xinzhe Liu, Jiyuan Shi, Weinan Zhang, Chenjia Bai, and Xue-long Li. Kungfubot: Physics-based humanoid whole-body control for learning highly-dynamic skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12851 , 2025. [41] Haoru Xue, Tairan He, Zi Wang, Qingwei Ben, Wenli Xiao, Zhengyi Luo, Xingye Da, Fernando Casta˜ neda, Guanya Shi, Shankar Sastry, et al. Opening the sim-to-real door for humanoid pixel-to-action policy transfer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01061 , 2025. [42] Haoru Xue, Xiaoyu Huang, Dantong Niu, Qiayuan Liao, Thomas Kragerud, Jan Tommy Gravdahl, Xue Bin Peng, Guanya Shi, Trevor Darrell, Koushil Sreenath, et al. Le-verb: Humanoid whole-body control with latent vision-language instruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13751 ,2025. [43] Chao Yang, Yingkai Sun, Peng Ye, Xin Chen, Chong Yu, and Tao Chen. Egm: Efficiently learning general motion tracking policy for high dynamic humanoid whole-body control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19043 , 2025. [44] Shaofeng Yin, Yanjie Ze, Hong-Xing Yu, C Karen Liu, and Jiajun Wu. Visualmimic: Visual humanoid loco-manipulation via motion tracking and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20322 , 2025. [45] Junpeng Yue, Zepeng Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Weishuai Zeng, Jiangxing Wang, Xinrun Xu, Yu Zhang, Sipeng Zheng, Ziluo Ding, and Zongqing Lu. Rl from physical feedback: Aligning large motion models with humanoid control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12769 , 2025. [46] Yanjie Ze, Siheng Zhao, Weizhuo Wang, Angjoo Kanazawa, Rocky Duan, Pieter Abbeel, Guanya Shi, Jiajun Wu, and C Karen Liu. Twist2: Scalable, portable, and holistic humanoid data collection system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02832 , 2025. [47] Weishuai Zeng, Shunlin Lu, Kangning Yin, Xiaojie Niu, Minyue Dai, Jingbo Wang, and Jiangmiao Pang. Behav-ior Foundation Model for Humanoid Robots, September 2025. [48] Jianrong Zhang, Yangsong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Hongwei Zhao, Hongtao Lu, Xi Shen, and Ying Shan. Generating human motion from textual descrip-tions with discrete representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 14730–14740, 2023. [49] Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Mo-tiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion model. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 46(6):4115–4128, 2024. [50] Yaqi Zhang, Di Huang, Bin Liu, Shixiang Tang, Yan Lu, Lu Chen, Lei Bai, Qi Chu, Nenghai Yu, and Wanli Ouyang. Motiongpt: Finetuned llms are general-purpose motion generators. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 7368– 7376, 2024. [51] Yingnan Zhao, Xinmiao Wang, Dewei Wang, Xinzhe Liu, Dan Lu, Qilong Han, Peng Liu, and Chenjia Bai. Towards adaptive humanoid control via multi-behavior distillation and reinforced fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06371 , 2025. [52] Chongyang Zhong, Lei Hu, Zihao Zhang, and Shihong Xia. Attt2m: Text-driven human motion generation with multi-perspective attention mechanism. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 509–519, 2023. [53] Ziwen Zhuang, Shenzhe Yao, and Hang Zhao. Humanoid parkour learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10759 ,2024. APPENDIX AMOTION GENERATION IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

The VQ-VAE model was trained on 2 NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs; and detailed training configurations are provided in Table VI. We selected a code-book size of 2048 to balance the reconstruction fidelity of the VQ-VAE with the predictive capability of the VLM, thereby achieving optimal quality in the generated human motions. For the Qwen2.5-VL-3B model, all training processes were conducted on 32 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. During the fine-tuning, we froze all model parameters except for the LM Decoder, which was fine-tuned using full-parameter. The training dataset comprises approximately 140,000 sam-ples from Nymeria, 13,000 samples from HumanML3D, and 2,500 samples from our self-collected MoCap dataset. To structure the prediction output, we introduced special start and end tokens <motion_start> <motion_end> 

and incorporated them, along with the discrete motion to-kens (e.g., <motion_token_0> <motion_token_1> ), into the Qwen2.5-VL-3B tokenizer vocabulary. Representative fine-tuning samples are presented in Fig. 5. {

"conversations": [ 

{

"from": "human", 

"value": "A person walked towards the box in front of him and 

picked it up, placing it on the table in front of him." 

}, 

{

"from": "gpt", 

"value": 

"<motion_start><motion_token_29><motion_token_31><motion_ 

token_33><motion_token_524><motion_token_31><motion_ 

token_637>...<motion_end>" 

}

], 

"image": "mocap/.../image/000000.jpg" 

}

Fig. 5: An example of Fine-tuning Samples APPENDIX BGENERAL MOTION TRACKING IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

In this section, we provide the specific configuration for the General Motion Tracking policy, including the mathematical formulation of the reward functions and the curriculum learn-ing strategy based on motion difficulty grading. 

A. Reward Function Configuration 

The total reward rt is a weighted sum of task rewards (tracking precision) and regularization rewards (safety and smoothness). The formulation involves standard geometric computations, where p and q denote position and orientation (quaternion), v and ω denote linear and angular velocities. The hat notation (e.g., ˆp) indicates the robot’s actual state, while variables without hats represent the reference motion. The symbol ⊖ represents the quaternion error magnitude. TABLE VI: VQ-VAE training configuration.                          

> Hyper-parameter Value Architecture  Down-sample stages 2Stride per stage 2Latent code dim 512 Code-book Size 2048 Channel width 512 Residual blocks 3Activation ReLU
> Loss  Reconstruction λr1.0 Commitment λc0.02 Velocity λv0.10 Root-rotation λrr 0.5 Root-position λp0.8
> Optimisation  Optimizer AdamW Learning rate 2e-4 LR decay epochs 150, 250, 350 Batch size 256 Grad clipping 1.0 Mixed precision FP16 Epochs 1500

TABLE VII: Task Reward Terms. N denotes the number of tracked bodies.                           

> Reward Term Expression Weight Sens. ( σ)
> Global Anchor Pos. exp
> 
> −∥pa−ˆpa∥2
> σ2
> 
> 0.8 0.2 Global Anchor Ori. exp
> 
> −∥qa⊖ˆqa∥2
> σ2
> 
> 0.5 0.4 Relative Body Pos. exp
> 
> −1
> N
> P
> i∥pi−ˆpi∥2
> σ2
> 
> 1.0 0.3 Relative Body Ori. exp
> 
> −1
> N
> P
> i∥qi⊖ˆqi∥2
> σ2
> 
> 1.0 0.4 Body Linear Vel. exp
> 
> −1
> N
> P
> i∥vi−ˆvi∥2
> σ2
> 
> 1.0 1.0 Body Angular Vel. exp
> 
> −1
> N
> P
> i∥ωi−ˆωi∥2
> σ2
> 
> 1.0 3.14

1) Task Rewards: Task rewards penalize deviations from the reference motion using an exponential kernel 

exp( −d2/σ 2), where d is the error metric and σ controls the sensitivity. The specific terms and parameters used in our best-performing model are detailed in Table VII. 

2) Regularization Rewards: Regularization terms prevent unphysical behaviors and ensure hardware safety. These are implemented as penalties (negative rewards) or constraints, as shown in Table VIII. Notably, the Undesired Contacts term penalizes contact forces Fb > 1.0N on all body parts except the feet (ankles) and hands (wrists), allowing for locomotion and potential hand-ground interactions (e.g., crawling). 

B. Motion Difficulty Curriculum 

We categorize motions into difficulty levels from 1 to 10 based on their motion intensity, coordination complexity, and stability requirements. Lower difficulty levels correspond to static or simple locomotion motions, while higher levels involve dynamic, low-stability, or acrobatic actions. Table IX summarizes the grading criteria and representative motions. During training, the tracking policy is exposed to motions with gradually increasing difficulty. The policy first learns to track low-difficulty motions and is progressively trained on higher-difficulty motions as tracking performance improves. TABLE VIII: Regularization and Penalty Terms.                 

> Term Expression / Logic Weight
> Action Rate L2 −∥ at−at−1∥22-0.1 Joint Limit Penalty −P
> j1out (qj)(Binary check) -10.0 Undesired Contacts −P
> b / ∈B allow 1Fb>1.0-0.1

TABLE IX: Motion Difficulty Grading System.         

> Rating Representative Actions Interpretation
> 1Stand, raise arms, wave hands Mostly static or upper-body actions with low motion intensity. 2–4 Walk, step, turn Basic locomotion with stable rhythm and simple motion patterns. 5–7 Walk, run, jump, walk backwards Combined locomotion and dynamic actions requiring higher coordination. 8Crawl, kneel, crawl on knees Low-posture ground movements with increased body control demands. 9–10 Cartwheel, backflip, jump, dance High-skill or acrobatic actions with the highest complexity and risk.

This curriculum strategy encourages stable learning and im-proves robustness when tracking complex motions. The three difficulty levels illustrated in Fig. 3 are used only for visualization. Specifically, Fig. 3 Level 1 corresponds to difficulty ratings 1–4, Level 2 corresponds to ratings 5–7, and Level 3 corresponds to ratings 8–10. The actual training curriculum operates on the full 1–10 difficulty scale. APPENDIX CADDITIONAL ANALYSIS 

Feasibility Analysis of Real-time Control. We conducted a comprehensive investigation into the feasibility of real-time closed-loop control using visual feedback. By optimizing the inference process to generate a limited horizon of 4 motion tokens per step, we successfully reduced the model inference time to approximately 300 milliseconds on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. However, the total system latency inevitably ap-proaches 400 milliseconds when accounting for network data transmission, token-to-motion decoding, and retargeting over-heads. In high-frequency control loops, such significant latency introduces severe phase lag, often manifesting as control jitter or delayed reactions in real-world scenarios. Consequently, we conclude that under the current inference latency constraints of Vision-Language Models, our strategy of planning followed by execution is the optimal approach for static environments. By synthesizing the complete motion sequence based on the initial visual observation, our method ensures the generation of smooth, physically consistent, and goal-directed motions. This approach effectively decouples the high-level semantic planning from low-level execution, rendering the system robust against the noise and latency inherent in slow feedback loops. This confirms that our framework is particularly well suited for executing stable, long-horizon scene interactions in static environments. Future work will investigate highly efficient motion generation paradigms to realize real-time interaction within dynamic environments. 

Failure Case Analysis. In our real-world experiments, we define success based on the smooth and accurate execution of instruction tasks. However, a deeper failure analysis reveals that the bottlenecks lie in hardware limitations rather than algorithmic flaws. Specifically, regarding the box-carrying task, the 30% success rate does not reflect a failure of the algorithm. In nearly all trials, as shown in Fig. 6, the robot successfully approached and lifted the box, demonstrating cor-rect visual perception and motion generation. The failures were predominantly caused by the box slipping during transport due to insufficient friction and the absence of force feedback on the robot’s hands. This indicates that our visual motion generation is accurate, but the physical grasping stability is limited by the hardware configuration. For other failure cases, as shown in Fig. 6, the issues were attributed to minute spatial perception deviations. Even when the task was not successfully completed, the coordinate gaps were extremely small, and the robot still executed the motion sequences smoothly and naturally. This implies that ZeroWBC is highly effective and robust in generating semantically correct actions. 

Sensitivity to Camera Alignment. While we emphasize strict perspective alignment in Section III-A to minimize the human-to-humanoid domain gap, this protocol is adopted to maximize optimal performance potential rather than serving as a rigid constraint for deployment. In practice, our frame-work benefits from the inherent generalization capabilities of the pre-trained Vision-Language Model. To strictly validate this robustness, during our data collection and real-world evaluation, we intentionally introduced mounting deviations, varying the camera height by approximately ±5 cm and the pitch angle by roughly 20 ◦. Empirical results indicate that the system maintains stable performance despite these physical perturbations. This suggests that the learned policy effectively focuses on high-level semantic features rather than overfitting to a specific camera calibration, confirming that sub-millimeter alignment is not a prerequisite for successful real-world interaction. 

Zero-shot Generalization Tasks. It is important to high-light that the task of “sitting on the chair” presents significantly higher complexity than “sitting on the sofa.” While a sofa offers a broad, forgiving target area, a single-seat chair imposes strict geometric constraints: its width is nearly identical to that of the humanoid’s torso. Consequently, the margin for error is minimal, necessitating highly precise maneuvering and spatial alignment. Crucially, our training dataset never contained text-motion pairs for “chair sitting” or any similar high-precision Fig. 6: Failure Case Analysis for Box Moving, Sofa Sitting, and Ball Kicking. interaction tasks. Despite this absence, and the lack of such fine-grained examples, the robot successfully generalized the “sitting” affordance to different chair styles. This demonstrates the powerful capability of the pre-trained Vision-Language Model, which can adapt learned behaviors (sitting) to unseen objects with far stricter spatial tolerances.