Title: FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01505v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 03:29:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Bingchuan Wei * 1 Bingqi Huang * 1 Jingheng Ma 2 Zeyu Zhang 3 Sen Cui 4

## Abstract 

Recent breakthroughs in generative simulation have harnessed Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate diverse robotic task curricula, yet these open-loop paradigms frequently produce linguistically coherent but physically infeasible goals—stemming from ungrounded task specifi-cations or misaligned objective formulations. To address this critical limitation, we propose FATE (Feasibility-Aware Task gEneration)—a closed-loop, self-correcting framework that reimagines task generation as an iterative validation-and-refinement process. Unlike conventional methods that decouple generation and verification into dis-crete stages, FATE embeds a generalist embodied agent directly into the generation loop to proac-tively guarantee the physical groundedness of the resulting curriculum. FATE instantiates a sequen-tial auditing pipeline: it first validates static scene attributes (e.g., object affordances, layout compat-ibility) and subsequently verifies execution feasi-bility via simulated embodied interaction. Critical to its performance, upon detecting an infeasible task, FATE deploys an active repair module that autonomously adapts scene configurations or pol-icy specifications—converting unworkable pro-posals into physically valid task instances. Ex-tensive experiments validate that FATE generates semantically diverse, physically grounded task curricula while achieving a substantial reduction in execution failure rates relative to state-of-the-art generative baselines. 

> 1

School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Bei-jing, China 2School of Integrated Circuits, Tsinghua Univer-sity, Beijing, China 3State Key Laboratory of General Artifi-cial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelli-gence (BIGAI), Beijing, China 4Department of Automation, Ts-inghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Sen Cui 

<cuis@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn >.

Preprint. March 3, 2026. 

## 1. Introduction 

The paradigm of embodied artificial intelligence is shifting from static environments to open-ended, procedurally gener-ated worlds (Wang et al., 2023a;b). Open-loop LLM-based generators can produce diverse task proposals, but many are infeasible due to static inconsistencies (e.g., instruction– scene mismatch, asset affordance violations, or unsatisfied preconditions). Even when the initial setup is plausible, tasks may still fail at runtime due to robot reachability limits, contact instability, or planning/learning breakdowns. Con-sequently, unconstrained open-loop mechanisms produce invalid data and waste computational resources. Building on the aforementioned observations, we argue that task specification rationality (i.e., the alignment of task settings with real-world commonsense) and task objective executability (i.e., the practical feasibility of goal achieve-ment via robotic interaction) must be fully incorporated into a closed-loop task generation pipeline. This integration ensures that generated tasks not only maintain linguistic co-herence, but also adhere to physical grounding—addressing the fundamental limitation of open-loop generation. To overcome this challenge, we propose to treat feasibility as a hierarchical constraint satisfaction problem spanning static perception and runtime execution. Specifically, visual plausibility does not imply solvability; a coherent scene may fail due to unreachable target or inconspicuous collisions. Therefore, we address two distinct failure modes shown in Figure 1: static hallucinations (geometric/semantic vio-lations) and dynamic divergences (runtime kinematic or interaction failures). We advance FATE (Feasibility-Aware Task gEneration), brain-in-the-loop framework for hierarchical feasibility alignment with a decoupled strategy: first projecting pro-posals onto a statically valid manifold, then refining the task via in-execution feedback. Specifically, first, a static alignment operator rectifies perceptual violations (e.g., in-terpenetrations). Subsequently, a dynamic alignment audi-tor monitors execution, iteratively adjusts solver parameters to resolve runtime failures. This transforms task generation from stochastic sampling into closed-loop curriculum. We build FATE using a generative simulator and a generalist 1        

> arXiv:2603.01505v1 [cs.RO] 2 Mar 2026 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula
> Figure 1. FATE aligns task feasibility across static and dynamic dimensions. (Left) Static Alignment: The system corrects initial scene priors by resolving semantic violations (e.g., replacing raw eggs), geometric chaos, and precondition conflicts. (Right) Dynamic Alignment: FATE addresses runtime execution failures, such as high-torque grasps, unreachable targets, and collisions, through iterative rollback mechanisms. Red highlights indicate initial infeasibilities; Green indicates FATE-repaired executable environments.

embodied foundation model, and evaluate the framework on a new benchmark designed to stress-test feasibility-aware generation. We validate FATE along three axes: generative diversity , feasibility awareness , and refinement efficacy .Experiments show that FATE maintains strong linguistic and visual diversity compared to expert-designed benchmarks and open-loop generators, while substantially reducing the end-to-end feasibility gap via hierarchical audit-and-repair. We further report the auditor’s diagnostic accuracy and quan-tify how often infeasible proposals are salvaged by repair across stages. The contributions of this work are threefold: 1. We propose a new problem setting, Feasibility-Aware Open-Ended Task Generation , that proactively ac-counts for the feasibility gap induced by both unjusti-fied task settings and infeasible task goals. 2. We propose a brain-in-the-loop framework FATE ,which integrates dual-phase auditing and repair and proactively diagnoses failure modes via an iterative refinement process to guarantee practical feasibility. 3. Experiments demonstrate that FATE can effectively identify and correct infeasible tasks, reducing simula-tion waste at every stage of the process while signifi-cantly boosting the performance of downstream policy learning. 

## 2. Related Work 

The use of LLMs to procedurally generate simulation en-vironments has evolved significantly. Early systems like 

GenSim (Wang et al., 2023a) and RoboGen (Wang et al., 2023b) demonstrated the potential of generating simulation codes from text. Recent works have pushed this frontier: 

GenSim2 (University, 2025b) advances this paradigm by integrating multi-modal LLMs (e.g., GPT-4V) for better scene understanding and reasoning; AgentGen (ByteDance, 2025) introduces a bidirectional evolutionary strategy to generate tasks with a smooth difficulty gradient; ReGen 

(Laboratory, 2025) proposes an ”inverse design” paradigm, inferring simulation environments from desired agent behav-iors; and Factorsim (University, 2024) employs factorized POMDP representations to generate modular simulation codes. Despite these advances in structural coherence and difficulty scaling, these methods largely operate in a ”feed-forward” manner. They lack an active feasibility auditor to detect when generated constraints (e.g., target positions, object masses) violate the robot’s physical limits. While DrEureka 

(Ma et al., 2024) automates reward tuning and domain ran-domization for sim-to-real transfer, it assumes the task itself is valid. FATE addresses this limitation by introducing an adaptive repair module that actively modifies the task defi-nition to ensure physical executability prior to training. A parallel line of research focuses on amplifying scarce human demonstrations. MimicGen (NVIDIA, 2024) and its recent extensions DemoGen (University, 2025a) and 

SkillMimicGen (Garrett et al., 2024) leverage data augmen-tation (e.g., rigid body transformations, skill segmentation) 2FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

to expand a limited set of source demos into large datasets. 

DexMimicGen (Jiang et al., 2025) further extends this to bimanual dexterous manipulation. While highly effective, these methods are demonstration-dependent —they can only generate variations of tasks that have already been demon-strated by humans. In contrast, FATE is demonstration-free and fully open-ended. It targets the discovery of en-tirely novel task semantics (e.g., ”use the toaster to heat the mug”—a task a human may never have demonstrated) by synthesizing the task, environment, and solution policy from scratch, employing the MLLM auditor as a scalable proxy for human verification. The rise of video generation has led to methods that use synthesized videos as training supervision. DreamGen 

(NVIDIA, 2025) fine-tunes video world models to gener-ate future frames for robot learning; Gen2Real (CUHK-Shenzhen, 2025) and LuciBot (Amherst, 2025) extract poli-cies directly from generated videos; and IRASim (Zhu et al., 2025a) achieves fine-grained interaction modeling via dif-fusion transformers. However, generative video models are prone to ”physics hallucinations”—generating visually plau-sible but physically impossible transitions (Knightnemo, 2025). FATE treats these generative models not as ground truth, but as hypotheses. By placing an embodied brain (Au-ditor) in the loop, FATE validates the physical consistency of generated goals (akin to the reasoning in SEEA-R1 (CMU, 2025) and MindJourney (UMass-Embodied-AGI, 2025)) and repairs them when they violate physical laws, ensuring that the ”imagined” curriculum is semantically meaningful, physically grounded and learnable. 

## 3. Problem Formulation 

In this section, we start with the necessary notation and finally present the formal definition of the overall problem. 

3.1. Feasibility-Aware Task 

We posit that a robotic task is not merely a semantic in-struction but a coupled system comprising linguistic intent, physical environment, and a constrained solution space. 

Definition 3.1 (Feasibility-Aware Task) . A task instance is defined as a tuple τ = ( I, S, Ωπ ), where I represents the semantic-temporal specification, S denotes the physi-cal scene configuration, and Ωπ represents the constrained execution policy manifold. 

Instruction I as Semantic-Temporal Specification. The instruction I is formalized as a pair (L, ΨI ). Here, L ∈ V ∗

denotes a sequence of natural language tokens providing high-level intent. Crucially, L maps to an implicit, often non-differentiable, semantic predicate functional ΨI : Ξ →{0, 1}, where Ξ is the space of state-action trajectories. A trajectory ξ ∈ Ξ satisfies the instruction if and only if 

ΨI (ξ) = 1 . This encapsulates the temporal logic constraints of the task without assuming a specific decomposition. 

Scene S as Semantic Articulated Configuration. The scene S is defined as a set of semantic articulated enti-ties S = {(Mj , q j , Λj )}Nj=1 . Each entity consists of its physical manifold and inertial properties Mj , its kinematic configuration state qj ∈ Q (spanning the Lie group SE (3) 

and joint space Rdj ), and a semantic affordance mapping 

Λj : Mj → Lsem . The mapping Λj grounds geometric features to semantic labels (e.g., graspability, articulation types), providing the physical support necessary. 

Manifold Ωπ as Constrained Policies. Unlike standard reinforcement learning which explores the universal param-eter space Θ, generative simulation imposes structural con-straints on the solution search. We define Ωπ ⊂ Θ as a compact sub-manifold induced by the generator’s code spec-ification (e.g., specific reward structures, primitive selec-tions, or planning horizons). Ωπ effectively delineates the 

permissible search space for the agent’s learning algorithm. By including Ωπ in the task definition, we formulate the generated instance not merely as a problem to be solved, but as a self-contained learning unit . This formulation posits that a valid open-ended task must intrinsically encode its own solvability boundaries. 

3.2. Feasible Policy and Task Feasibility 

Validity in embodied tasks is not binary but measure-theoretic. A task is only practically feasible if the set of solutions has non-negligible volume under the agent’s ex-ploration capabilities. 

Definition 3.2 (Feasible Policy Set) . For a given task τ ,the feasible policy set Φτ ⊂ Ωπ is the subset of policies that satisfy the semantic predicate ΨI with high probability under the scene dynamics induced by S:

Φτ = θ ∈ Ωπ | Eξ∼(πθ ,S)[Ψ I (ξ)] ≥ 1 − ϵ (1) where ϵ is a tolerance parameter for execution stochasticity and πθ is a policy parameterized by θ.To quantify the tractability of finding such a policy, we model the policy search process as sampling from an initial-ization density. Let ρinit be a probability measure over the parameter manifold Ωπ . This measure represents the static exploration volume accessible to the optimization algorithm. 

Definition 3.3 (Task Feasibility Measure) . The feasibility 

μ(τ ) is defined as the measure of the feasible set under 

ρinit :

μ(τ ) = 

Z

> Ωπ

I(θ ∈ Φτ ) dρ init (θ) (2) 3FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Implication. A task is considered physically grounded if 

μ(τ ) > δ min . Conversely, if μ(τ ) ≈ 0, the task exhibits a 

Feasibility Gap . Practically, this manifests as execution fail-ures where the robotic RL agent never or hardly converge despite exhaustive training, either due to physical impossi-bility ( Φτ = ∅) or because the generated policy manifold 

Ωπ fails to intersect with the solution space. This leads to an infeasible generated task. 

3.3. Problem Statement: Feasibility-Aware Task Generation 

We model the generative process as sampling from a task distribution PG generated by a task generator G over the task space. The core challenge is that the support of the high-diversity generator PG , which consists of unverified task proposals, typically extends far beyond the physically grounded region where μ(τ ) > δ min .

Definition 3.4 (Feasibility Gap) . The feasibility gap is defined as the probability mass of generated tasks whose feasibility score fails to meet a minimum threshold. Given any refinement mapping A : τ 7 → τ , we define 

LG (A) ≜ Eτ ∼PG [I(μ(A(τ )) ≤ δmin )] . (3) In particular, the pre-alignment feasibility gap corresponds to the identity mapping A = Id .This definition provides an operational notion of executabil-ity : under the induced policy manifold Ωπ and initialization measure ρinit , a task is executable only if its feasible policy set has non-negligible measure (i.e., μ(τ ) > δ min ). 

Goal of FATE. Consequently, FATE is not merely to sam-ple from PG , but to construct a refinement mechanism that bridges this gap without collapsing the generative diversity or deviating from the user’s intent. Formally, we seek a mapping A : τ → τ that projects task hypotheses into the feasible region. The optimal operator is the solution to the following constrained minimization problem 

min  

> A

LG (A) (4a) s.t. Eτ ∼PG [D(τ, A(τ ))] ≤ ϵsem , (4b) where Eq. (4a) minimizes the feasibility gap (Definition 3.4). 

D : T × T → R≥0 denotes a semantic distance metric between two task instances, with smaller values indicating higher semantic consistency. Therefore, Eq. (4b) enforces that the projected task A(τ ) remains semantically congruent with the original intent within a tolerance ϵsem .

## 4. Methodology 

In this section, we present the constructive realization of the optimization objective defined in Eq.(4).                  

> Figure 2. Visualization of the Hierarchical Feasibility Alignment Process. The optimization trajectory evolves in the joint task space
> τ= ( I,S,Π) .(Left) Static Alignment ( Aperc ): The Ante-Auditor corrects Scene ( S)and Instruction ( I)incompatibilities via discrete repairs (e.g., RESCALE ), projecting τinit onto the per-ceptually valid manifold. (Right) Dynamic Alignment ( Aexec ):
> Targeting the Policy ( Π), the system refines the solver configura-tion using semantic feedback and dynamic APIs (e.g., INJECT REWARD ), guiding the task from failure (red trajectories) to the
> Feasible Space (green polyhedron).

4.1. Feasibility Alignment Operator 

To bridge the Feasibility Gap, we formally construct a map-ping A : T → T , termed the Feasibility Alignment Oper-ator . Unlike stochastic resampling, this operator functions as a constructive manifold projection, transforming an un-grounded hypothesis τ ∼ PG into a physically valid instance 

τ ∗ while minimizing semantic deviation: 

τ ∗ = A(τ ) ≜ arg min  

> μ(τ′)>δ min

D(τ ′, τ ). (5) Recognizing the hierarchical nature of physical constraints, we structurally decompose A into a sequential composition of Perceptual ( Aperc ) and Execution ( Aexec ) sub-operators. This enforces that the task is first mapped onto the geomet-rically valid subspace, and subsequently projected onto the dynamic intersection. 

A = Aexec ◦ A perc (6) We formulate the alignment operator A as a Constructive Residual Injection . Rather than stochastic resampling, our objective is to synthesize a task residual ∆τ that projects the current task τ into the feasible region defined by the measure μ(τ ) (Def. 3.3). Formally, at each iteration, the operator seeks an optimal update ∆τ ∗ that maximizes the feasibility likelihood: 

∆τ ∗ = arg max  

> ∆τ∈D

μ(τ ⊕ ∆τ ) (7) where ⊕ denotes the symbolic application of the residual, and D is the space of permissible edits. Since computing the 4FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

exact μ(τ ) is intractable, we instantiate this objective using stage-specific surrogates: maximizing the Static Validity Score ˆμstatic in Phase I (Sec. 4.3), and minimizing the 

Execution Failure Rate in Phase II (Sec. 4.4). 

4.2. Policy Specification via Execution Primitives 

To instantiate the constrained policy manifold Ωπ , FATE de-composes the global instruction I into a sequence of atomic primitives Π = {π1, . . . , π K }. We employ a hybrid solver strategy to address the distinct topological requirements of navigation and manipulation phases: 

Geometry-Aware Navigation (MPC). For non-contact phases (e.g., moving to a target), we utilize Model Predictive Control. The solver optimizes a trajectory to minimize the distance to sub-goals while strictly respecting collision constraints derived from the scene S. This solver exposes geometric parameters (e.g., obstacle inflation radius) that determine the conservatism of the motion. 

Contact-Rich Manipulation (RL). For interaction phases (e.g., grasping or opening), we employ Soft Actor-Critic (SAC). To facilitate learning in sparse-reward settings, the MLLM synthesizes a potential-based shaping function parameterized by weights θrew . This allows the system to guide the agent toward semantic keypoints by shaping the optimization landscape. 

Auditor Interface. Crucially, these primitives are not static black boxes but parameterized modules π(· | θ). They expose a tunable configuration space (including MPC con-straints and RL reward weights) which serves as the control interface for the Dynamic Alignment Operator (Aexec ). This design enables the Auditor to resolve execution failures by actively tuning the solver’s logic—effectively perform-ing a semantic policy gradient update—rather than merely resampling the task. 

4.3. Phase I: Static Alignment via Perceptual Projection 

The first stage, Aperc , acts as a perceptual gatekeeper that projects the initial task hypothesis onto the perceptually valid region. We postulate that static consistency—the align-ment between the semantic instruction I and the scene con-figuration S—is a strictly necessary condition for dynamic executability. 

Auditing: Detecting Hallucinations. To estimate the fea-sibility measure μ(τ ) (Def. 3.3) without expensive simula-tion, the Ante-Auditor employs a Static Feasibility Check 

ˆμstatic . This acts as a logical filter that verifies four consis-tency conditions: (i) reachability; (ii) affordance matching; (iii) physical plausibility; and (iv) morphological compati-bility. A failure in any condition implies the task is funda-

Algorithm 1 FATE: Feasibility-Aware Task Generation  

> 1:

Input: Random Seed s, Asset Library L 

> 2:

Output: Feasible Task τ = ( I, S, Ωπ ) 

> 3:

# 1. Initialization: Construct τinit  

> 4:

I ← SampleInstruction (L) 

> 5:

S ← InitScene (Default Pose , Raw Scale ) 

> 6:

Ωπ ← InitPolicySpec (Primitives Π = {π1, . . . , π K }) 

> 7:

τ ← (I, S, Ωπ ) {Initial Feasibility: Unknown } 

> 8:

# 2. Main Loop: Interleaved Alignment  

> 9:

for k = 1 , . . . , MaxIter do  

> 10:

# Phase A: Static Alignment (Targeting Scene S) 

> 11:

valid, inf o ← AnteAuditor (I, S) 

> 12:

if not valid then  

> 13:

{Repair geometric & semantic violations } 

> 14:

S ← StaticRepair (S, inf o ) 

> 15:

τ ← (I, S, Ωπ ) 

> 16:

continue  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

# Phase B: Dynamic Alignment (Targeting Policy 

Ωπ ) 

> 19:

trace ← RunSimulation (τ ) 

> 20:

success, inf o ← InStepAuditor (trace ) 

> 21:

if not success then  

> 22:

{Refine solver parameters & primitive configs } 

> 23:

Ωπ ← DynamicRepair (Ω π , inf o ) 

> 24:

τ ← (I, S, Ωπ ) 

> 25:

continue  

> 26:

end if  

> 27:

# Feasibility Confirmed  

> 28:

return τ 

> 29:

end for  

> 30:

return Failure mentally impossible ( μ(τ ) ≈ 0), immediately triggering the repair process. 

Repair: Scene Projection. Upon detecting a violation, the operator synthesizes a static residual ∆τstatic to rectify the scene or instruction. We define the optimal static repair as the one that maximizes the perceptual validity proxy 

ˆμstatic :

∆τ ∗ 

> static

= arg max  

> ∆τ∈D static

ˆμstatic (τ ⊕ ∆τ ) (8) The update τ ← τ ⊕ ∆τ ∗ 

> static

corresponds to a discrete pro-jection onto the geometrically valid manifold. In practice, 

∆τstatic is composed of two parts: Scene Reconfiguration 

(e.g., rescaling an asset Mj → M ′ 

> j

or moving an unreach-able object) and Instruction Refinement (e.g., relaxing an over-specific verb). By solving (8) , Aperc ensures the proposal is physically plausible before simulation. 5FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula        

> Figure 3. Evolutionary Trajectory of the ”Heat Food” Task. Starting from a chaotic initialization ( τinit ), FATE applies Static Repair
> to rearrange objects and correct affordances (swapping an egg for a meal). During execution, the system autonomously detects and repairs dynamic failures: a grasp failure is resolved via Motion Re-planning , and an insertion collision is fixed via Asset Resizing . The gray curved arrows illustrate our Sub-step Rollback mechanism, which invokes specific repair APIs (bottom icons) to iteratively refine the task into a successful policy.

4.4. Phase II: Dynamic Alignment via Semantic Policy Gradient 

While static alignment guarantees geometric validity, it can-not foresee failures arising from complex contact dynamics or controller instability. The second stage, Aexec , addresses the Feasibility Gap during runtime by ensuring the conver-gence of the policy specification Π.

Auditing: Monitoring Divergence. The In-step Auditor monitors the execution of primitive sequence {πk}. A task is flagged as a Dynamic Divergence if the agent fails to effect the desired state change within the allocated hori-zon or if the solver (MPC/RL) fails to find a valid solution. Common failure modes include high-torque grasp failures, collision-induced deadlocks, sparse reward stagnation, or latent geometric incompatibilities (e.g., tight insertion toler-ances) that only manifest during physical interaction. 

Repair: Execution Refinement. Dynamic failures imply that the policy specification Ωπ ⊂ τ is ill-posed for the current scene. To resolve this, FATE triggers a rollback and synthesizes a dynamic residual ∆τdynamic based on the failure trace ξf ail . The task is updated via: 

τnew ← τold ⊕ ∆τdynamic (9) Here, the residual ∆τdynamic specifically targets the pol-icy subspace Ωπ . This update acts as a Semantic Policy Gradient , where the Auditor modifies either the physical scene (e.g., Geometry Relaxation by rescaling an object to ease insertion) or the solver logic (e.g., Logic Tuning 

by injecting a dense reward shaping term). Through these iterative updates, FATE pulls the divergent trajectory back into the feasible region Φτ .

Proposition 4.1 (Convergence of Hierarchical Alignment) .

The sequential operation of static and dynamic alignment operators strictly increases the size of the feasible task set. Formally, the FATE operator A = Aexec ◦ A perc ensures 

|ΦA(τ )| ≥ | Φτ |. (10) The proof could be found in Appendix B. 

Implication. Proposition 4.1 guarantees that tasks with high semantic diversity but low structural stability are ac-tively projected onto the feasibility manifold μ(τ ) > δ min .

## 5. Experiments 

Our experiments validate three core claims: (1) Generative Capability , ensuring the proposal distribution achieves high semantic and visual diversity; (2) Feasibility Awareness ,assessing the embodied brain’s fidelity in discriminating feasibility boundaries; and (3) Refinement Efficacy , quan-tifying the projection operators’ success in bridging the feasibility gap. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

While framework-agnostic, we implement our system in NVIDIA Isaac Sim to leverage precise contact physics for the embodied brain’s visual-statistical inputs. We evaluate on long-horizon tasks using the RidgebackFranka (7-DoF arm on a holonomic base), which requires coordinated navi-gation and manipulation, utilizing assets from Objaverse and PartNet-Mobility. We employ a hybrid execution strategy: 

BIT* for collision-free navigation and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) for contact-rich manipulation. Both policy and Q-networks are MLPs with hidden layers of size [256 , 256] ,optimized via Adam .6FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

5.2. Generative Diversity Metrics and Baselines. To quantify generative diversity, we employ semantic and visual metrics. We utilize Self-BLEU-4 and S-BERT Similarity to measure linguistic re-dundancy, where lower scores indicate higher diversity. To capture structural variance, we assess Visual Diversity via ViT and CLIP embedding cosine similarity across scenes, ensuring morphological breadth. We benchmark against: (1) Expert-Designed Benchmarks (e.g., RLBench, Man-iSkill2, Behavior-100) representing human-curated stan-dards; and (2) GenSim-V2 , a state-of-the-art open-loop baseline lacking feasibility feedback. 

Results. Table 1 suggests that: FATE maintains strong lin-guistic and visual diversity relative to open-loop generation. We attribute this to the closed-loop repair mechanism, which discourages repeatedly sampling ”safe” but infeasible tem-plates and instead pushes the generator to search for diverse task realizations that remain physically grounded. 

5.3. Task Feasibility Metrics and Baselines. To quantify the reduction of the feasibility gap, we employ the Feasible Task Rate (FTR) , evaluating whether a task τ is feasible (i.e., sat-isfies μ(τ ) > δ min ) under our verification pipeline. We decompose FTR into two sub-metrics: first, the Scene Va-lidity Rate (SVR) measures perceptual alignment via BLIP-2 semantic coherence and geometric checks; second, the 

Execution Validity Rate (EVR) assesses dynamic feasibil-ity using a Simulation Oracle to verify successful physical rollouts with MPC and RL solvers. We benchmark FATE against a Vanilla (No Audit) lower bound and the state-of-the-art GenSim-V2 . Results. Table 2 highlights two key observations. First, static scene validity is necessary but not sufficient: many failures only emerge and discover-able during execution, so purely perceptual filtering leaves a large residual feasibility gap. Second, closing the loop with in-execution auditing and targeted repair substantially improves end-to-end yield, suggesting that feasibility is dominated by a small set of correctable misalignments (e.g., reachability, collisions, reward/horizon settings) rather than a lack of task diversity. 

5.4. Auditing Accuracy Metrics and Baselines. The reliability of the FATE frame-work hinges on the Auditor’s capacity to accurately approx-imate the feasibility indicator I[μ(τ ) > δ min ]. The auditor detects infeasible tasks by checking for failures across three specific aspects: Semantic Issues , Geometric Constraints ,and Dynamic Issues , as visually exemplified in Figure 1. To quantify this reliability, we measure Auditor Efficacy 

using the F1-score against a human-labeled ground truth dataset. This metric directly captures the discriminator’s accuracy in identifying these diverse failure types while minimizing false positives. Results. Table 3 confirms the Embodied Brain as a high-precision filter. The Ante-Auditor achieves F1-scores of 0.95 (Semantic ) and 0.86 (Geomet-ric ), effectively pruning static hallucinations like affordance violations before simulation. The Dynamic category proves more challenging (F1 0.83 ) due to the ambiguity between physical impossibility and algorithmic instability. However, a maintained precision of 0.85 ensures the In-step Auditor remains conservative, avoiding false negatives and guaran-teeing the reliable feedback necessary for the convergence of the self-correcting loop. 

5.5. Repair Efficacy Metric Definition. To measure the contribution of the ac-tive repair loops, we define the Repair Success Rate (RSR) .This metric calculates the conditional probability that an initially infeasible task hypothesis (i.e., μ(τ ) ≤ δmin ) is successfully mapped into the feasible region after mod-ification. We evaluate RSR across three distinct stages: 

Ante-Repair (Static scene adjustments), Primitive-Repair 

(Runtime logic corrections), and RL-Repair (Learning pa-rameter tuning). A high RSR indicates that the system is not merely functioning as a filter (discarding infeasible data), but is actively projecting the proposal distribution onto the feasibility manifold. Results. Table 4 shows that most in-feasible proposals are not fundamentally impossible. Most of these failures can be fixed by FATE eventually. The remaining hard cases largely stem from learning-induced brittleness, suggesting that improving the RL-side is the main bottleneck. Overall, these results support our claim that feasibility-aware generation is improving generated task qualities and executability. Table 4 quantifies the efficacy of the repair mechanisms. The high Aggregate RSR (89.5%) reveals that the major-ity of generated proposals that initially have low feasibility (i.e., μ(τ ) ≤ δmin ) are essentially sound but misaligned. By sequentially applying the hierarchical adjustment oper-ators—starting with Ante-Repair to resolve static (scene-level) violations (93.5% success), followed by In-step Re-pair to address dynamic (execution-level) failures—FATE successfully recovers these tasks. Notably, even for the most challenging failures requiring RL-Repair , the system salvages 76.3% of cases. 

5.6. Ablation Study 

To dissect the specific contributions of the alignment opera-tors, we evaluate the Feasible Task Rate across five distinct semantic categories. This breakdown reveals the comple-mentary nature of the static and dynamic phases. For geometry-sensitive tasks such as ”Ingredient into Pot” 

7FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Table 1. Generative Diversity Analysis. We compare the semantic and visual diversity of tasks generated by FATE against expert-designed benchmarks and open-loop baselines. FATE achieves diversity comparable to human-curated benchmarks while ensuring physical feasibility. 

RLBench ManiSkill2 Meta-World Behavior-100 GenSim-V2 FATE (Ours) Number of Tasks 106 20 50 100 70 352 

Semantic Diversity (Language) 

Task Desc. - Self-BLEU-4 ( ↓) 0.317 0.674 0.322 0.299 0.378 0.276 

Task Desc. - S-BERT Sim ( ↓) 0.200 0.194 0.263 0.210 0.288 0.158 

Visual & Configural Diversity (Scene) 

Scene Image - ViT Sim ( ↓) 0.375 0.332 0.517 0.389 0.717 0.189 

Scene Image - CLIP Sim ( ↓) 0.864 0.828 0.867 0.833 0.932 0.754 

Table 2. Quantifying the Feasibility Gap. We compare the validity of tasks generated by the vanilla baseline against FATE. We decompose the total yield (FTR) into static Scene Validity (SVR) and dynamic Execution Validity (EVR).                 

> Scene Validity (SVR) Execution Validity (EVR) Feasible Task Rate (FTR)
> (Static Validity) ( ↑)(Dynamic Validity) ( ↑)(End-to-End Yield) ( ↑)Baselines
> Vanilla (No Audit) 41.5% 30.4% 12.6% GenSim-V2 58.2% 51.2% 29.8%
> FATE (Ours)
> FATE-Static (Ante-Audit) 93.8% 69.7% 65.4%
> FATE (Full Pipeline) 97.5% 94.5% 92.1%

Table 3. Diagnostic Performance of the Auditor. We report the Precision, Recall, and F1-Score of the FATE Auditor across three error categories on a human-labeled test set. 

Diagnostic Category Precision Recall F1-Score 

Semantic 0.96 0.94 0.95 Geometric 0.88 0.85 0.86 Dynamic 0.85 0.81 0.83 

Overall 0.90 0.87 0.88 

or ”Heat Food in Microwave,” applying Static Alignment (Aperc ) alone yields significant gains, improving the yield by over 60% compared to the vanilla baseline. In these scenarios, the primary failure mode is geometric incompati-bility (e.g., the pot being smaller than the ingredient), which is efficiently resolved by the perceptual projection operator without requiring expensive simulation. Conversely, for contact-rich tasks like ”Open Sliding Win-dow,” Static Alignment is insufficient (20.6%), performing worse than Dynamic Alignment ( Aexec ) (41.8%). This is because sliding mechanics involve complex friction and articulation dynamics that cannot be verified statically. The Dynamic Alignment operator captures these physical in-teraction failures, but the Full FATE Pipeline is required to achieve high reliability ( ≈ 88% ). By sequentially ap-plying Aexec ◦ A perc , the system ensures that the scene is first geometrically feasible and then dynamically optimized, covering the diverse spectrum of open-ended tasks. 

Table 4. Repair Efficacy Analysis. We report the Repair Success Rate (RSR) across three stages. The ”Detected Failures” represents tasks identified as lying outside the manifold, and ”Successful Repairs” denotes tasks successfully projected onto the manifold.                

> Repair Stage Detected Failures (Input) Successful Repairs (Output) RSR (%)
> Ante-Repair (Static) 215 201 93.5% Primitive-Repair (Runtime) 42 39 92.9% RL-Repair (Learning) 76 58 76.3%
> Aggregate 333 298 89.5%

Figure 4. Task-Wise Success Rate Analysis. We evaluate per-formance across five tasks to disentangle the contributions of the alignment operators. The Static Alignment ( Aperc ) module excels in geometry-sensitive tasks (e.g., Ingredient into Pot ), while the Dynamic Alignment ( Aexec ) module is critical for contact-rich tasks (e.g., Sliding Window ). FATE (Green) combines both to achieve robust performance. 

## 6. Conclusion and Discussion 

In this work, we propose FATE, reformulating task synthe-sis as a closed-loop constraint optimization process. By integrating an Embodied Brain for hierarchical audit-and-repair, FATE aligns generated hypotheses with the feasibility manifold, mitigating physical hallucinations to produce a semantically diverse and rigorously grounded curriculum. Despite significant gains, limitations persist. First, inherent VLM stochasticity means subtle inconsistencies may still bypass our iterative filters. Second, our framework focuses on geometric and kinematic constraints, leaving fine-grained dynamics (e.g., friction, damping) less rigorously modeled. 8FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Consequently, tasks dependent on precise contact physics may still suffer execution failures beyond the current repair. Future work will address these by incorporating real-world failure logs to calibrate physical parameters against real-ity. Additionally, to mitigate computational latency and stochasticity, we plan to distill the auditing capabilities into a lightweight internal world model. This evolution aims to establish FATE as a self-correcting data engine, strictly grounded in both simulated and real-world physics. 

## Impact Statement 

This work advances open-ended robotic curriculum gen-eration by closing the loop between language-driven task proposal and embodied feasibility verification. By substan-tially reducing execution failures and simulation waste, the approach can lower the compute cost of data generation and improve the reliability of downstream policy learning, po-tentially benefiting research reproducibility and accelerating development of assistive and service robots that operate in human environments. At the same time, methods that scale task synthesis may also lower the barrier to developing harm-ful or unauthorized automation, and feasibility in simula-tion does not guarantee safety in the real world—especially under unmodeled dynamics, embodiment mismatch, or au-diting errors. Our experiments are confined to simulation, and failure modes related to contact dynamics and learned-controller brittleness may persist. We therefore position the system as a data engine and evaluation tool rather than a deployment-ready controller, and recommend responsible use with domain-specific validation, human oversight, and safety constraints. 

## References 

Amherst, U. Lucibot: Automated robot policy learning from generated videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09871 ,2025. Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. ByteDance. Agentgen: Enhancing planning abilities for large language model based agent via environment and task generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00764 , 2025. CMU. Seea-r1: Tree-structured reinforcement fine-tuning for self-evolving embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21669 , 2025. CUHK-Shenzhen. Gen2real: Towards demo-free dexter-ous manipulation by harnessing generated video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14178 , 2025. Deitke, M., Schwenk, D., Salvador, J., Weihs, L., Michel, O., VanderBilt, E., Schmidt, L., Ehsani, K., Kembhavi, A., and Farhadi, A. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 13142– 13153, 2023. Fu, X., Hu, Y., Li, B., Feng, Y., Wang, H., Lin, X., Roth, D., Smith, N. A., Ma, W.-C., and Krishna, R. Blink: Multi-modal large language models can see but not perceive. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 148–166. Springer, 2024. Garrett, C., Mandlekar, A., Wen, B., and Fox, D. Skillmim-icgen: Automated demonstration generation for effi-cient skill learning and deployment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18907 , 2024. He, Z., Liu, Y., Zheng, J.-s., Li, X., Yao, J.-G., Qin, B., Xuan, R., and Yang, X. Flagevalmm: A flexible frame-work for comprehensive multimodal model evaluation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) , pp. 51–61, 2025. Jia, M., Qi, Z., Zhang, S., Zhang, W., Yu, X., He, J., Wang, H., and Yi, L. Omnispatial: Towards comprehensive spatial reasoning benchmark for vision language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03135 , 2025. Jiang, Z., Xie, Y., Lin, K., Xu, Z., Wan, W., Mandlekar, A., Fan, L. J., and Zhu, Y. Dexmimicgen: Automated data generation for bimanual dexterous manipulation via imi-tation learning. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 16923–16930. IEEE, 2025. Kirillova, A., Lyapustin, E., Antsiferova, A., and Vatolin, D. Erqa: Edge-restoration quality assessment for video super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09992 , 2021. Knightnemo, e. a. Vid2world: Crafting video diffusion models to interactive world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14357 , 2025. Laboratory, S. A. Regen: Generative robot simulation via inverse design. OpenReview , 2025. Ma, J., Liang, W., Wang, H.-J., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., Bastani, O., and Jayaraman, D. Dreureka: Language model guided sim-to-real transfer. RSS, 2024. Mo, K., Zhu, S., Chang, A. X., Yi, L., Tripathi, S., Guibas, L. J., and Su, H. PartNet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3D object under-standing. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2019. 9FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

NVIDIA. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scal-able robot learning using human demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17596 , 2024. NVIDIA. Dreamgen: Unlocking generalization in robot learning through video world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12705 , 2025. Qiu, L., Chen, Y., Ge, Y., Ge, Y., Shan, Y., and Liu, X. Egoplan-bench2: A benchmark for multimodal large lan-guage model planning in real-world scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04447 , 2024. Song, C. H., Blukis, V., Tremblay, J., Tyree, S., Su, Y., and Birchfield, S. Robospatial: Teaching spatial understand-ing to 2d and 3d vision-language models for robotics. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pp. 15768–15780, 2025. Team, B. R., Cao, M., Tan, H., Ji, Y., Chen, X., Lin, M., Li, Z., Cao, Z., Wang, P., Zhou, E., et al. Robobrain 2.0 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02029 , 2025. UMass-Embodied-AGI. Test-time scaling with world models for spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12508 , 2025. University, S. Factorsim: Generative simulation via factor-ized representation. NeurIPS , 2024. University, T. Demogen: Synthetic demonstration genera-tion for data-efficient visuomotor policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16932 , 2025a. University, T. Gensim2: Scaling robot data generation with multi-modal and reasoning llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03645 , 2025b. Wang, L., Ling, Y., Yuan, Z., Shridhar, M., Bao, C., Qin, Y., Wang, B., Xu, H., and Wang, X. Gensim: Generating robotic simulation tasks via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01361 , 2023a. Wang, Y., Xian, Z., Chen, F., Wang, T.-H., Wang, Y., Fragki-adaki, K., Erickson, Z., Held, D., and Gan, C. Robo-gen: Towards unleashing infinite data for automated robot learning via generative simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01455 , 2023b. Weisz, J., Huang, Y., Lier, F., Sethumadhavan, S., and Allen, P. Robobench: Towards sustainable robotics sys-tem benchmarking. In 2016 IEEE International Confer-ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 3383–3389. IEEE, 2016. Zhu, F., Wu, H., Guo, S., Liu, Y., Cheang, C., and Kong, T. Irasim: A fine-grained world model for robot manip-ulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 9834–9844, 2025a. Zhu, N., Dong, Y., Wang, T., Li, X., Deng, S., Wang, Y., Hong, Z., Geng, T., Niu, G., Huang, H., et al. Cvbench: Evaluating cross-video synergies for complex multimodal understanding and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19542 , 2025b. 10 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

## A. Theoretical Analysis of Iterative Repair 

In this section, we provide the detailed mathematical proof for Proposition A.4 , establishing the linear convergence of the FATE repair mechanism. This analysis models the interaction between the Auditor (Embodied Brain) and the Task Manifold as a gradient-based dynamical system optimization. 

A.1. Setup and Definitions 

Let T denote the continuous task parameter space. To analyze the convergence properties, we define an Infeasibility Potential J : T → R≥0 based on the feasibility measure μ(τ ) introduced in Definition 3.3: 

J (τ ) ≜ max (0 , δ min − μ(τ )) (11) Our objective is to minimize this potential. The optimization proceeds via the update rule... 

A.2. Regularity Assumptions 

To guarantee convergence, we rely on standard assumptions in non-convex optimization, adapted for our ”Approximate Oracle” (the LLM-based Auditor) setting. 

Assumption A.1 (L-Smoothness) . The loss function J is differentiable and has an L-Lipschitz continuous gradient on the manifold. That is, for any τ, τ ′, there exists a constant L > 0 such that: 

∥∇J (τ ) − ∇J (τ ′)∥ ≤ L∥τ − τ ′∥ (12) This implies the standard quadratic upper bound inequality: 

J (τ ′) ≤ J (τ ) + ⟨∇J (τ ), τ ′ − τ ⟩ + L

2 ∥τ ′ − τ ∥2 (13) 

Assumption A.2 (Auditor Alignment Condition) . The Auditor does not compute the exact gradient ∇J (τk) (which requires expensive Monte Carlo simulation). Instead, it provides a semantic direction dk that is strictly aligned with the true gradient. We assume there exist constants c1, c 2 > 0 such that: 

⟨dk, ∇J (τk)⟩ ≥ c1∥∇J (τk)∥2 (Sufficient Descent) (14) 

∥dk∥ ≤ c2∥∇J (τk)∥ (Bounded Magnitude) (15) 

Assumption A.3 (Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) Condition) . Within the basin of attraction of the feasible manifold F = {τ |J (τ ) = 0 }, the loss satisfies the PL condition with parameter ν > 0:

12 ∥∇J (τ )∥2 ≥ νJ (τ ) (16) 

A.3. Proof of Linear Convergence (Proposition A.4) Proposition A.4 (Linear Convergence of Iterative Repair) . Under Assumptions A.1–A.3, for a sufficiently small step size η,the iterative repair update τk+1 = τk − ηd k converges linearly to the feasible manifold F = {τ | μ(τ ) ≥ δmin }.Proof. We begin by substituting the update rule τk+1 = τk − ηd k into the quadratic upper bound (13): 

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk) + ⟨∇J (τk), −ηd k⟩ + L

2 ∥ − ηd k∥2 (17) Rearranging the terms and applying the scalar properties of the inner product: 

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk) − η⟨∇J (τk), d k⟩ + Lη 2

2 ∥dk∥2 (18) 11 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Next, we apply the Auditor Alignment Assumption (A.2). We use the lower bound for the inner product and the upper bound for the norm of dk:

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk) − ηc 1∥∇J (τk)∥2 + Lη 2

2 (c2∥∇J (τk)∥)2 (19) Factor out ∥∇J (τk)∥2:

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk) −



ηc 1 − Lη 2c22

2



∥∇J (τk)∥2 (20) To ensure a decrease in loss, the coefficient of the gradient norm must be positive. This imposes a constraint on the step size 

η:

ηc 1 − Lη 2c22

2 > 0 = ⇒ η < 2c1

Lc 22

(21) Assuming η satisfies this condition, we define the descent coefficient Cη = ηc 1 − Lη 2c22 

> 2

> 0. Now, applying the PL Condition (A.3), we substitute ∥∇J (τk)∥2 ≥ 2νJ (τk):

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk) − C η · (2 νJ (τk)) (22) Simplifying the expression: 

J (τk+1 ) ≤ J (τk)(1 − 2νCη ) (23) Let ρ = 2 ν(ηc 1 − Lη 2c22 

> 2

). For a sufficiently small step size η, we can ensure 0 < ρ < 1. Thus, we obtain the linear recurrence relation: 

J (τk+1 ) ≤ (1 − ρ)J (τk) (24) By induction, after k steps: 

J (τk) ≤ (1 − ρ)kJ (τ0) (25) Since (1 − ρ) < 1, lim k→∞ (1 − ρ)k = 0 , implying lim k→∞ J (τk) = 0 . Therefore, the task τk converges linearly to the feasible region where μ(τ ) ≥ δmin .

## B. Proof of Convergence for Hierarchical Alignment 

In this section, we provide the detailed proof for Proposition 4.1 . We demonstrate that the FATE operator A = Aexec ◦A perc 

strictly maintains or expands the volume of the feasible policy set. 

B.1. Measure-Theoretic Formulation 

Let (Ω π , Σ, ρ init ) be the measure space of policy parameters. For any task τ , the feasible set is defined as: 

Φτ = {θ ∈ Ωπ | Eξ∼(πθ ,S)[Ψ I (ξ)] ≥ 1 − ϵ} (26) The feasibility volume is the measure V (τ ) = ρinit (Φ τ ). We analyze the monotonicity of V (·) through the two stages of alignment. 

B.2. Proof of Monotonicity Stage 1: Static Alignment ( Aperc ). Let τinit = ( I, S, Ωπ ) be the initial task proposal. We define the Static Validity Set 

Θstatic (S, I) ⊂ Ωπ as the set of policies that do not violate fundamental physical laws (e.g., trying to grasp an object that is kinematically unreachable). 

Lemma B.1 (Static Necessity) . For any policy θ, if θ ∈ Φτ (is dynamically feasible), then θ ∈ Θstatic (must be statically valid). Thus, Φτ ⊆ Θstatic .

12 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

If the initial task has static conflicts (e.g., severe interpenetration), then Θstatic = ∅, which implies Φτinit = ∅ and 

V (τinit ) = 0 . The Static Alignment operator Aperc applies a repair ∆static to ensure static compatibility, thereby creating a non-empty static validity set Θ′

> static

̸ = ∅. While this does not guarantee dynamic feasibility, it transforms the volume from a strictly zero state to a potentially positive state. Thus: 

V (Aperc (τinit )) ≥ V (τinit ) = 0 (27) 

Stage 2: Dynamic Alignment ( Aexec ). Let τstatic = Aperc (τinit ) be the statically valid task. The Dynamic Alignment operator employs a ”Rollback-and-Repair” mechanism. We model the execution of Aexec as generating a sequence of modified task/solver configurations T = {τ (0) , τ (1) , . . . , τ (T )}, where τ (0) = τstatic . Crucially, the FATE system accepts a task as ”feasible” if the policy succeeds under *any* of the refined configurations found during the iterative process. Let 

Φ(k) be the feasible policy set associated with configuration τ (k). The effective feasible set for the aligned task Aexec (τ ) is the union of feasible sets across the repair trajectory: 

Φtotal =

> T

[

> k=0

Φ(k) (28) Since the initial configuration corresponds to k = 0 , we have the trivial inclusion: 

Φ(0) ⊆

> T

[

> k=0

Φ(k) = Φ total (29) By the monotonicity of measures, if A ⊆ B, then ρinit (A) ≤ ρinit (B). Therefore: 

V (τ (0) ) ≤ ρinit (Φ total ) (30) Assuming the Auditor provides non-destructive updates (i.e., it does not purely shrink the feasible space of subsequent steps without adding new feasible regions), the effective solution space accessible to the system expands with each iteration. 

Conclusion. Combining the results from Stage 1 and Stage 2: 

V (A(τinit )) = ρinit (Φ total ) ≥ V (τstatic ) ≥ V (τinit ) (31) Consequently, the hierarchical alignment process guarantees that the measure of the feasible solution space is strictly non-decreasing, verifying Proposition 4.1. 

## C. Implementation Details of the FATE Pipeline 

Note: This appendix details the constructive realization of the Feasibility Alignment Operator A defined in Section 4. We describe how the theoretical projection steps ( Aperc and Aexec ) are instantiated as concrete algorithm loops governed by the Embodied Brain (detailed in Appendix D). 

C.1. Initialization: Diverse Task Proposal 

Before the alignment phases begin, we first sample from the generative distribution τinit ∼ PG (as defined in Eq. 3). The goal is to maximize semantic diversity before feasibility constraints are rigorously applied. 

Semantic Candidate Retrieval. We utilize assets from the Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023) and PartNet-Mobility 

(Mo et al., 2019) datasets. To ensure the diversity of the proposal distribution, the Embodied Brain performs a broad semantic search based on high-level tags (e.g., microwave , oven , food ). At this stage, strictly geometric filtering is relaxed to allow for novel object combinations. 

Scene Hypothesis Generation. The system outputs a preliminary Scene Graph Sinit and an Instruction I. This is parsed into a simulation-ready USD (Universal Scene Description) loader script, initializing the task tuple τinit = ( I, Sinit , Ωinit π ).13 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

C.2. Phase I: Static Alignment Operator ( Aperc )

This phase implements the Perceptual Projection Operator Aperc (Section 4.3). Its objective is to maximize the static feasibility proxy ˆμstatic by injecting a semantic residual ∆static .

Diagnostic Taxonomy (Estimating ˆμstatic ). The Ante-Auditor evaluates the task tuple against the four feasibility axes defined in Section 4.3: • Affordance Matching: Checks if semantic categories support the requested action (e.g., matching ”heat” with ”microwave”). • Geometric Reachability: Checks if the Scene Graph S contains objects placed outside the robot’s workspace. • Physical Plausibility: Checks for severe interpenetration or unstable placement in the initial configuration Sinit .• Morphological Compatibility: Checks if object scales are compatible (e.g., ”ingredient fits inside pot”). 

Repair Action Space (Implementing ⊕∆static ). The update step τ ′ ← τ ⊕ ∆static is realized through a set of atomic scene manipulation APIs (Table 5). These primitives directly address the violations in ˆμstatic .

Table 5. Static Repair API ( Aperc ). These primitives implement the discrete update ∆static to resolve perceptual hallucinations defined in Section 4.3. 

API Signature Functionality & Theoretical Mapping 

SWAP ASSET(tgt id, query) Substitutes an object to maximize Affordance Matching . Used when ΨI cannot be satisfied by the current object semantics. 

SPAWN ASSET(query, pose) Instantiates missing nodes in the Scene Graph S. Used when the instruction I

implies objects not present in Sinit .

REMOVE ASSET(tgt id) Prunes the Scene Graph. Used to remove clutter that violates Geometric Reacha-bility or creates collision conflicts. 

SET JOINT(tgt id, idx, val) Forces configuration state qj to a specific value. Used to resolve logical inconsis-tencies (e.g., ”Open a door” that is already open). 

TRANSFORM POSE(tgt id, ∆) Applies a rigid body transform. Used to resolve interpenetration ( Physical Plausi-bility ). 

RESCALE(tgt id, factor) Scales the physical manifold Mj . Directly addresses Morphological Compatibil-ity (e.g., resizing an object to fit a container). 

C.3. Phase II: Dynamic Alignment Operator ( Aexec )

This phase instantiates the Dynamic Alignment Operator Aexec (Section 4.4). It focuses on refining the Policy Specification 

Ωπ and Solver Hyperparameters θ to ensure the feasible policy set Φτ is non-empty. 

Hierarchical Decomposition & Checkpointing. The task is decomposed into primitives Π = {π1, . . . , π K }. To support the iterative optimization of the Semantic Policy Gradient (Eq. 9), we employ a state checkpointing mechanism. This allows the system to rollback and apply the update θ(t+1) ← θ(t) ⊕ ∇ sem without resetting the entire environment. 

Dynamic Intervention API (Implementing ∇sem ). When the In-Step Auditor detects a Dynamic Divergence , it synthesizes a repair command. For MPC primitives, repairs typically adjust geometric constraints (inflation radius). For RL primitives, the Brain actively synthesizes the Reward Landscape (Table 6). 

## D. Embodied Brain: Architecture and Specialization 

In the FATE framework, the efficacy of the auditing mechanism relies fundamentally on the underlying model’s ability to discern physical constraints from semantic hallucinations. We instantiate the Embodied Brain using a specialized version of 14 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Algorithm 2 Static Alignment Loop ( Aperc )

Input: Initial Task τ = ( I, S)

Scurr ← S 

while True do 

// Estimate Static Feasibility Proxy ˆμstatic 

Critique, IsV alid ← AnteAuditor (I, Scurr )

if IsV alid then break end if 

// Synthesize residual ∆static 

Repair Op ← Brain.generate repair (Critique )

// Apply projection S ← S ⊕ ∆static 

Scurr ← Simulator .apply (Repair Op, Scurr )

if M axIter reached then return Failure 

end if end while return Scurr 

RoboBrain 2.0 (Team et al., 2025), a 7B parameter Vision-Language Model fine-tuned specifically for spatial reasoning and executable planning. This appendix outlines the model’s architectural foundations, the composition of the training curriculum, and the quantitative validation of its embodied capabilities. 

D.1. Model Architecture 

The Auditor is built upon the RoboBrain 2.0 architecture, which derives from the Qwen2.5-VL foundation (Bai et al., 2025). The system comprises three primary components designed to bridge the gap between visual perception and logical reasoning. The perceptual front-end utilizes a Vision Transformer (ViT) encoder initialized from Qwen-VL’s visual backbone, ensuring robust feature extraction from high-resolution inputs. These visual features are mapped into the linguistic embedding space via a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) projector, which facilitates precise modality alignment. The core reasoning engine is a Qwen2.5-7B Large Language Model, which processes the aligned visual tokens to generate semantic critiques and repair codes. To handle the computational demands of long-horizon robotic tasks, the training infrastructure employs deep learning optimization strategies including parameter sharding and attention acceleration, enabling the processing of video contexts up to 16k tokens. 

D.2. Training Data Formulation 

To equip the Embodied Brain with the necessary intuition for feasibility auditing, we leveraged a curated hybrid dataset of approximately 145,000 samples. The data distribution was explicitly engineered to address the action gap often observed in generalist VLMs, balancing three critical cognitive axes: Embodied Action, Spatial Perception, and Reasoning. The largest portion of the curriculum, comprising 45 percent of the dataset, focuses on Embodied Action. This segment aggregates data from benchmarks including RoboBench (Weisz et al., 2016), EgoPlan-Bench2 (Qiu et al., 2024), and RoboSpatial-Home (Song et al., 2025), targeting capabilities in task decomposition, navigation, and affordance detection. An equal 45 percent share is dedicated to Spatial Perception, utilizing datasets like Blink (Fu et al., 2024), OmniSpatial (Jia et al., 2025), and CVBench (Zhu et al., 2025b) to provide rigorous supervision for visual grounding and geometric understanding. The final 10 percent of the data preserves the model’s high-level causal logic through the ERQA reasoning dataset (Kirillova et al., 2021). This strategic composition ensures that the Auditor does not merely label objects but understands their spatial relationships and interaction affordances within a physical scene. 

D.3. Empirical Validation 

The fine-tuned model was evaluated on the EmbodiedVerse benchmark (He et al., 2025) to quantify its improvements over the baseline Qwen2.5-VL. The results demonstrate that the specialized training regimen significantly enhances the metrics most critical for the FATE auditing process. Specifically, the model achieved a 34.15 percent absolute improvement in Relative 15 FATE: Closed-Loop Feasibility-Aware Task Generation with Active Repair for Physically Grounded Robotic Curricula 

Table 6. Dynamic Repair API ( Aexec ). These primitives instantiate the semantic policy gradient ∇sem , modifying the solver landscape to capture feasible solutions. 

API Signature Functionality & Theoretical Mapping 

RL-Specific Optimizations (Policy Manifold Shaping) 

INJECT REWARD(func str) Overwrites the reward function with code synthesized by the Brain. This imple-ments Reward Landscape Synthesis , allowing the VLM to reshape the optimiza-tion surface to guide exploration toward Φτ .

SET RL HORIZON(steps) Adjusts the maximum episode length. This expands the temporal search space of 

Ωπ , ensuring sufficient time for convergence. 

Execution Dynamics & Planner Tuning 

REPLAN PATH(inflation r) Modifies configuration space constraints for the MPC solver. Used to resolve collision-induced deadlocks. 

ADJUST GRASP(offset, vector) Modifies the end-effector approach pose. Used to correct high-torque grasp failures or singularities. 

TUNE IMPEDANCE(stiffness) Adjusts controller gains. Ensures stability during contact-rich interactions (e.g., opening heavy doors). 

SKIP SUBSTEP() Logically bypasses a primitive if the transition condition is already met (e.g., door opened by accidental contact). 

RESET ROBOT JOINT(cfg) Recovers from kinematic singularities, restoring the agent to a valid region of Ωπ .

Shape estimation, representing an 80.01 percent relative gain over the baseline. This metric is vital for the Ante-Auditor’s ability to detect morphological incompatibilities, such as an object being too large for a container. Furthermore, the model exhibited a 5.00 percent absolute improvement in Goal Decomposition. This enhancement validates the In-step Auditor’s capacity to break down high-level instructions into executable primitives and identify logical breaks in the planning sequence. Crucially, these gains were achieved without catastrophic forgetting, as evidenced by a 2.17 percent improvement in general perception tasks like Counting. These performance metrics confirm that the Embodied Brain possesses the requisite spatial precision and planning foresight to serve as a reliable feasibility auditor within the FATE loop. 16