Title: 26891291

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869v4.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

## Wing shape evolution is not constrained by ancestral genetic 

## covariances in the invasive  Drosophila suzukii 

Antoine Fraimout 1† , Stéphane Chantepie 1, Nicolas Navarro 2, Céline Teplitsky 3 and 

Vincent Debat 1

> 1

Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité, ISYEB – CNRS, MNHN, UPMC, EPHE, Université des 

Antilles, Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, 57 rue Cuvier, 75005 Paris, France 

> 2

UMR CNRS 6282 Biogéosciences, Université de Bourgogne -Franche -Comté, 21000 Dijon, France 

> 3

Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, CEFE – UMR 5175 – CNRS, IRD, EPHE, Université de 

Montpellier, Université Paul Valéry, 34293 Montpellier, France 

> †

Corresponding author, E -mail:  fraimout.antoine@gmail.com 

Abstract 

The extent to which phenotypic evolution can be constrained by genetic correlations is an important question 

in evolutionary biology. To address this question, biological invasions are opportune models where derived, 

invasive populations can be compared to  their extant ancestors, allowing to track the evolution of genetic 

correlations from the ancestor, throughout the invasion process. In this paper, we focused on the worldwide 

invasion of  Drosophila suzukii  (Matsumara, 1931) , and investigated the evolution  of the genetic covariance 

matrix  G of wing shape between ancestral native, and derived invasive populations. Leveraging demographic 

history resolved by population genetics approaches, we tested whether  G remained stable during the invasion. 

Using a multivariate Q ST -FST  approach, we further tested whether or not the observed phenotypic divergence 

in wing shape aligned with a neutral scenario of evolution. Our results show moderate yet significant 

quantitative genetic differentiation of wing shape among  D. s uzukii  populations and a relative stability in the 

structure of  G, presenting a roughly spherical shape but slightly different volumes. These characteristics likely 

reflect the demographic history of populations and suggest a low level of genetic constraint on wing shape 

evolution. The divergence between populations was  greater than expected under a purely neutral model of 

evolution, compatible with an effect of divergent selection among them. Overall, our study suggests that 

selection and drift, but not an cestral genetic constraints, affected the early stages of wing shape evolution 

during  D. suzukii  invasion. 

Key words:  Drosophila suzukii , G-matrix, geometric morphometrics, biological invasion, quantitative 

genetics, Q ST -FST 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Introduction 

Biological invasions often involve stochastic demographic changes through founder effects and genetic 

bottlenecks (Golani  et al. , 2007) or the shuffling of different alleles by genetic admixture between populations 

(Rius & Darling, 2014). Invasive populations can also be subjected to multiple and often novel selective 

pressures in the new environment and throughout the invasion pro cess (Kilkenny & Galloway, 2013). 

Consequently, they tend to show marked genetic and phenotypic differences compared to their source 

populations, and distinguishing whether this differentiation results from adaptive or neutral evolution is 

challenging (Lee , 2002; Wares, 2005; Facon  et al. , 2006; Hayes & Barry, 2008; Keller & Taylor, 2008; Prentis 

et al. , 2008; Bock  et al. , 2015; Dlugosch  et al. , 2015; Estoup  et al. , 2016). Furthermore, these evolutionary 

changes can happen over relatively short time scales (Colautti & Lau, 2015). Hence, a topical question in 

invasion biology is how fast can invasive populations evolve in their new environment? Can we detect adaptive 

evolution occurring at the onset of the invasion (Szűcs  et al. , 2017)? 

In a new environment, the evolution of a population’s mean phenotype towards a new fitness optimum ( i.e. 

adaptation) is conditioned by the genetic variances and covariances of the traits under selection, summarized 

in  G, the genetic variance -covariance matrix (Lande, 1976). For a set of traits measured in a given population, 

the  G matrix informs about genetic variation for each individual trait (diagonal elements) and for the genetic 

covariation between traits (off -diagonal elements). Statistical analysis o f G through an eigen decomposition 

can then identify the major axis of variation in the population, corresponding to the combination of traits with 

the most genetic variation, also known as  gmax (Schluter 1996). Identifying the axes of genetic covariance 

between traits is particularly important as theory predicts that they will influence the evolutionary response: 

adaptation will be facilitated if selection is aligned with  gmax, or constrained if it is in a direction where there 

is little, or no genetic var iation for the combination of traits under selection (Arnold  et al. , 2001, Agrawal & 

Stinchcombe, 2009; Fischer  et al. , 2016). This is formalized in the multivariate breeder's equation (Lande, 

1979): 

𝑅  = 𝐺𝛽 

where the response to selection  R - the change in average phenotype of the population in one generation  -

equals the product of  G and the directional selection gradient  β.

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

It has been proposed in the context of evolutionary diversification, that the  G matrix of an ancestral population 

can constrain derived populations to diverge along certain directions of the phenotypic space ( i.e.  the lines of 

least evolutionary resistance; Schluter, 1996). For instance, early stages of adaptive phenotypic divergence 

could be constrained by the direction of the major axis of the ancestral  G matrix ( i.e.  ancestral  gmax; Schluter, 

1996; McGuigan, 2006; Walter  et al. , 2018) and result in an al ignment between  gmax and the leading vector 

of divergence of the among -populations divergence matrix ( D). On the other hand, under a neutral model of 

phenotypic evolution, divergence among populations is also expected to take place along that same axis of 

greatest genetic variation (Lande 1979) and result in proportional  D and  G matrices  (Chenoweth  et al.  2010). 

In other words, a  concordance between the major axes of  D and  G could be both suggestive of neutral evolution 

(Arnold  et al.  2001; Bégin & Roff, 2003) or indicative of selection. 

Furthermore, valid predictions of evolutionary trajectories depend on whether or not  G remains stable across 

space and time (Jones  et al. , 2004; Arnold  et al. , 2008). The stability of  G has received much attention ( e.g. 

Roff, 2000; Steppan  et al. , 2002; Bégin & Roff, 2003; Mezey & Houle, 2003; Björklund, 2004; Blows & 

Hoffmann, 2005; Arnold  et al. , 2008; Walsh & Blows, 2009) and its sensitivity to selection, migration and 

drift has been investigated  both theoretically ( e.g.  Jones  et al. , 2004; Guillaume & W hitlock, 2007, Chantepie 

& Chevin, 2020), and empirically under natural and laboratory conditions (Merilä  et al. , 1994; Phillips  et al. ,

2001; Conner  et al. , 2003; Cano  et al. , 2004; Eroukhmanoff. & Svensson, 2011; Björklund  et al. , 2013; 

McGlothlin  et al. , 2018; Walter 2023; Henry & Stinchcombe 2023; Chantepie  et al.  2024) but no clear 

consensus has emerged. For instance, the recent work of Henry & Stinchcombe (2023) has shown that the  G

matrix of floral traits in the ivy ( Ipomoea hederacea ) remained stabl e across a large latitudinal gradient in 

continental USA, despite evidence of phenotypic divergence among populations. Conversely, Mallard  et al. 

(2023) have shown using a large experimental evolution study that the orientation of the  G matrix of locomotor 

traits in  C. elegans  can be altered by genetic drift, despite phenotypic stasis. Multiple additional lines of 

evidence suggest that  G can be reshaped by selection (Jones  et al. , 2003; Jones  et al. , 2004; Dugand  et al. 

2021), drift (Phillips  et al. , 2001)  and environmental conditions ( e.g.  Sikkink  et al. , 2015; Wood & Brodie, 

2015) even over the span of a single generation (Siren  et al. , 2017), but, there is also recent evidence for stable 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

G matrices across populations and continents  (e.g ., Puentes  et al. , 2016; Delahaie  et al. , 2017, Henry & 

Stinchcombe 2023). Overall clear -cut predictions on the interplay between  G and  phenotypic divergence in 

response to selection or drift are difficult to formulate, particularly at a contemporary timescale. Therefore, the 

stability of  G needs to be further explored  empirically along with clear testing of the neutral expectation for 

among -population divergence against observed data (Merilä & Björklund 2004). 

Here, we focus on the worldwide invasion of the spotted wing drosophila,  Drosophila suzukii  (Matsumura, 

1931) to assess the stability of  G between native and invasive populations across continents.  Drosophila 

suzukii  is a highly invasive pest of agricultural crops in Europe and North America where it was first detected 

almost simultaneously in 2008 (see Asplen  et al. , 2015 for review). We reconstructed the detailed history of 

this worldwide invasion and showed the presence of multiple independent introducti ons from Asia involving 

population bottlenecks and genetic admixture events within invaded regions (Fraimout  et al. , 2017). A 

consequence of this demographic history is that native and invasive populations show significant levels of 

neutral genetic differentiation as measured by F ST  estimated using microsatellite loci (Fraimout  et al. , 2015; 

Fraimout  et al. , 2017). At the phenotypic level, we showed using laboratory lines derived from samples of 

natural populations that native (Japanese) and invasive (Frenc h and North -American)  D. suzukii  display 

genetically based differences in wing shape and size (Fraimout  et al. , 2018). However, whether this phenotypic 

divergence is pervasive across replicated populations, and whether it is associated with changes in the structure 

of the underlying  G matrix  is unknown. This invasion  therefore  provides an opportune context to address long -

standing questions about the evolution of multivariate phenotypes and the structure of genetic variances and 

covariances in colonizing po pulations. Particularly the presence of multiple invasive populations within 

Europe and USA allows assessing the magnitude and direction of phenotypic evolution from the native 

ancestral populations. In other words, it is possible to estimate how much the  mean phenotype of each invasive 

population has diverged from the ancestral ( i.e.  native) population and whether phenotypic evolution 

repeatedly occurred in the same direction or at random, in all directions of the phenotypic space. Given the 

availability o f extant ancestral populations, this in turns allows to determine whether phenotypic divergence 

among invasive populations has been constrained by ancestral genetic covariances. Furthermore, comparing 

populations with known history could help identify the  effects of demographic processes on the structure of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

the  G matrix. For instance, we expect that periods of bottlenecks or population admixture  – all experienced by 

invasive  D. suzukii  populations to a different extent  (Fraimout  et al. , 2017, Olazcuaga  et al.  2020)  – may have 

altered the structure of  G in invasive populations. Specifically, depletion of genetic variance due to bottlenecks 

could result in a  G matrix of smaller volume. Alternatively, new combinations of alleles produced by genetic 

admixture, could increase the volume or  G, or alter its shape, by  changing the distribution of genetic variance 

over the first axes of variation.  Our main objective was thus to investigate whether or not  G remained stable 

throughout the invasion history of  D. suzukii . Additionally, access to both molecular and quantitative measures 

of genetic variation allows testing for a signal of selection in the observed phenotypic divergence. By 

comparing F ST  calculated from molecular markers to its phenotypic equivalent Q ST , it is possible to determine 

whether phenotypic divergence  exceeds or is equal to the divergence expected under genetic drift alone (Spitze 

1993, Whitlock 2008). While the former (Q ST  > F ST ) would be indicative of divergent selection acting on the 

study traits, the latter (Q ST  = F ST ) would suggest neutral phenotypic evolution. 

We used an isofemale line breeding design (Hoffmann & Parsons, 1988; David  et al. , 2005; Berger  et al. ,

2013) and a geometric morphometric approach ( e.g.  Klingenberg 2003) to estimate the quantitative genetic 

divergence in wing shape between six natural populations of  D. suzukii  sampled in the native area (Japan) and 

the two main invaded areas in Europe and the USA. We specifically addressed the following questions: i) how 

did wing shape evolve across multiple invasive populations? ii) did the  G-matrix rema in stable during the 

invasion ? iii) has phenotypic divergence among invasive populations been constrained by ancestral genetic 

covariances and iv) can it be attributed to selection acting on wing shape? 

Material and methods 

Samples, lines and data acquisition 

Drosophila suzukii  adults were sampled in 2014 using banana bait traps and net swiping at six localities 

representative of their global distribution range in Japan (native range), USA and France (invasive range) (Fig. 

1). Within each country, we sampled two localities repre sentative of a northern and a southern latitude. 

Repeated clinal evolution of wing morphology has been described in the related invasive species  Drosophila 

subobscura  and proposed as an adaptation to different temperature optima at northe rn and southern latitudes 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

(Huey  et al. , 2000; Gilchrist  et al. , 2001; Gilchrist  et al. , 2004). Thus, we hypothesized that sampling 

populations close to the extremes of their latitudinal distribution would maximize our chance to capture 

possibly adaptive phenotypic divergence in the invaded range. In USA and France, these localities were als o

representative of the invasion history, with the southern localities corresponding to the first reported 

occurrences of  D. suzukii  (Watsonville, USA and Montpellier, France; Hauser, 2011; Calabr ia  et al. , 2012) 

and the northern localities representing the expansion front of the species in the area at the time of sampling 

(Dayton, Oregon, USA and Paris, France). It is worth stressing that although the most likely genetic source of 

Europe and USA invasions  was identified as continental Asia ( i.e.  China, Fraimout  et al. , 2017),  F statistics 

and Bayesian clustering methods indicate weak genetic differentiation between these sources and our Japanese 

population samples, thereby suggesting that the use o f Japanese populations as ancestral representatives is an 

acceptable approximation. For the Japanese flies, a northern population was sampled in Sapporo (Hokkaido 

Island) and a southern population was sampled in Tokyo (Honshu Island). In both Japanese loca lities, traps 

were placed in gardens inside the university campuses. In the invasive North American range, sampling 

habitats corresponded to vineyards in Dayton, and strawberry fields in Watsonville. French samples were 

collected in the botanical garden of  the Natural History Museum in Paris and close to vineyards in Montpellier. 

30 isofemale lines on average (see Table S1 for details and population codes) were established for each locality 

by placing randomly chosen wild -caught gravid females in separate r earing vials, and splitting F 1 offsprings 

in five replicate vials. Following the isofemale approach, we further expanded each line by letting individuals 

mate freely within tubes ( i.e ., full -sib mating) and transferring their progeny to new rearing vials e ach 

generation. We repeated this for five generations and in the fifth generation, a single female per line was 

isolated in a new rearing tube to produce the focal offspring used in the study. At the end of the experiment, 5 

to 10 full -sib males were rando mly chosen from each line from each population for phenotyping. Rearing 

medium consisted of cornstarch and yeast with added anti -biotic (hydroxy -4 benzoate). Lines were randomly 

positioned in incubators and kept for the five generations at 22°C. A total of  1323 individuals distributed across 

177 isofemale lines were phenotyped. Wings were carefully clipped from over -anesthetized flies using 

tweezers and mounted on glass slides in a mixture of ethanol and glycerin. Coverslips were sealed using nail 

polish an d maintained with small weights to flatten the wing as much as possible. Images of the wings were 

acquired with a Leica DFC 420 digital camera mounted on a Leica Z6 APO microscope. Fifteen landmarks 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

were defined on the dorsal side of the right wing and digitized using a custom  ImageJ  plugin written by C. P. 

Klingenberg (pers. comm.). 

Wing shape differentiation  – Geometric morphometric analyses 

We focused our study on the analysis of wing shape variation among  D. suzukii  populations. Shape data have 

been used in multiple quantitative genetics studies (Klingenberg & Leamy, 2001; Klingenberg, 2003; Monteiro 

et al. , 2003; Hansen  & Houle 2004; Mezey & Houle, 2005; Myers  et al. , 2006; Polly, 2008; Klingenberg, 

2010; Adams, 2011; Leinonen  et al. , 2011; Martínez -Abadías  et al. , 2012) and are suitable for the estimation 

of  G, and relevant for the study of multivariate phenotypic evolution. We followed a s tandard geometric 

morphometrics protocol (Bookstein 1996) to characterize wing shape: first, Procrustes generalized least 

squares superimposition was used to extract shape information from the landmarks coordinates (GLS,  e.g. 

Dryden & Mardia, 1993). Briefly, this method allows to scale, rotate and translate the configuration of 

landmarks to obtain shape information that is free of orientation or size differences. Second, a principal 

component analysis (PCA) was applied to the  set of 30 coordinates (15 landm arks in 2 dimensions x and y) 

obtained after superimposition. From the PCA, 26 non -null components were conserved as input data 

(corresponding to the 30 coordinates minus 4 degrees of freedom lost through the scaling, rotation and 

translations (x and y)).  We estimated the centroid size of the wing as the square root of the sum of the squared 

distances of all landmarks from their centroid, and used this centroid size as a size variable in the subsequent 

analyses.  As divergence in wing shape first appeared to  be weak on the PCA plot, we further performed a 

between -group principal component analysis ( bgPCA ) to visualize the overall variation in wing shape among 

populations ( e.g.  Mitteroecker & Bookstein, 2011). We then estimated the statistical significance of the shape 

divergence among populations by applying a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) using the 26 PCs 

as response variables, and population of origin as a fixed  effect. We further estimated the pairwise differences 

among populations with permuta tional pairwise MANOVAs, using the  RVAideMemoire  R package (v.0.9 -55, 

Hervé, 2016). We used the Wilk’s lambda statistics and set the number of permutations to 10000 while 

correcting for multiple testing using the  fdr  method (Benjamini & Hochberg 1995). Finally, to account for any 

allometric effect (i.e.  a change in shape associated with a change in size,e.g. Klingenberg 2010), we also fitted 

the MANOVAs using the residuals of a size/shape multivariate regression, corresponding to the allometry -free 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

components of wing shape variation. 

Wing shape differentiation  – phenotypic divergence vector analysis 

To estimate the divergence in wing shape among populations of  D. suzukii , particularly the magnitude and 

direction of phenotypic evolution in the derived invasive populations from their Asian ancestors, we applied a 

geometric approach to phenotypic evolution ( e.g.,  Stuart  et al.  2017, Fraimout  et al.  2022), by calculating 

vectors o f phenotypic divergence among populations. The phenotypic mean of each population was first 

estimated from the MANOVA (see section above) using the 26 non -null PC representative of wing shape, and 

accounting for differences in wing size by adding the wing  centroid size as covariate. Then, we estimated the 

differences in mean wing shape between each invasive population and the ancestral wing shape, assessed as 

the average of the two Japanese populations (Fig. 2). We also estimated divergence at the country l evel, using 

the three countries average wing shapes. In total, we obtained six phenotypic divergence vectors describing 

the difference between the ancestral Japanese and each invasive population (4 vectors) and between the 

ancestor and each country’s mean  wing shape (2 vectors). To test whether phenotypic divergence occurred 

along similar or different directions, we assessed the similarity between these vectors of divergence by 

comparing their angle to the distribution of angles between 10,000 pairs of rand om vectors of the same 

dimensionality (Klingenberg and McIntyre, 1998). Angles between vectors were calculated as: 

α1 = cos −1(Δz Di , Δz TDj ) [1] 

where z D corresponds to a divergence vector of population  i or  j from the ancestor. An eigenanalysis of the 

matrix containing the four population vectors was applied to synthesize the main axes of divergences. 

Matrices estimations  – population -specific  G matrices 

We estimated the six  G matrices corresponding to the six sampled populations under a Bayesian framework 

using the R -package  MCMCglmm  (Hadfield, 2010; Fig. 3). To this end, we partitioned the phenotypic variance 

in wing shape for each population using a multivariate animal model (Kruuk, 2004) of the form: 

𝑦  = ∑ 𝑋𝛽  + ∑ 𝑍𝛾  + 𝜀  [2] 

where  y is the multivariate vector of phenotypic values for wing shape corresponding to the 26 non -null 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

principal components (PCs) accounting for the totality of shape variance;  β is the vector of fixed effect; γ is 

the vector of random effects; ε is the vector of residual errors and  X and  Z the design matrices relating to the 

fixed and random effects, respectively. We estimated  G matrices separately for each population using model 

[2] and appended the matrix of relatedness between individuals to the vector of random effects with the 

pedigree  option implemented in the  MCMCglmm  function . The pedigree correspon ding to our crossing design 

was coded in R using custom scripts (see  Data availability  statement).  In all models, wing centroid size was 

fitted  as a fixed effect. We used a prior set with variance estimates following a 'broken -stick' model of decrease 

of variance, appropriate for the use of PC scores representing decreasing proportion of explained variance 

(Jolliffe, 2002), with null covariances  and a degree of belief  nu  = n + 0.002 (where n is the number of traits, 

Houle & Meyer, 2015). We ran each model for 1 200 000 iterations with a burnin period of 200 000 and a 

thinning rate of 1000, resulting in 1000 Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) posterio r samples. The 

convergence of models was checked visually from plots of MCMC chains and posterior distributions as well 

as autocorrelation level (<0.05 in all models). All analyses were performed in R (v.4.2.2; R Core Team, 2022). 

Test of  G-matrix stability  – Differences in the size and shape of  G

One of our main objectives was to assess the stability of the  G matrix in the face of the demographic changes 

linked to the invasion . According to previous results (Fraimout  et al.  2017) all invasive  D. suzukii  populations 

have experienced genetic bottlenecks, and some populations show evidence of genetic admixture from 

differentiated sources. Our hypothesis was that the variation in total genetic variance due to these demographic 

events  - namely, reduction of ge netic variance by bottlenecks or increased ge netic variance from admixture  -

should be reflected in the structure of  G. To test this hypothesis, we estimated three parameters pertaining to 

the structure of  G and performed pairwise comparisons among all six studied populations. Matrix size ( i.e ., 

volume), estimating the overall amount of genetic variance for wing shape in the population, was calculated 

as the sum of the matrix eigenvalues. Matrix shape, estimating whether some directions of wing shape variation 

present more genetic variance than  others , was assessed by the matrix eccentricity ( i.e.  the ratio of the first to 

the second eigenvalue; Jones  et al. , 2003). Matrix shape was also estimated by the proportion of variance along 

gmax . Significance of metric differences between populations was assessed by estimating the ratio between each 

population metrics and examining the overlap between the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) of these ratios 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

calculated from the MCMC posterior samples, with zero. 

Test of  G-matrix stability  – Genetic covariance tensor 

We further tested for differences among  G matrices by following the approach of Hine  et al.  (2009) and 

Aguirre  et al.  (2014) using a fourth -order genetic covariance tensor analysis (hereafter ‘covariance tensors’). 

Briefly (see details in Hine  et al.  2009; Aguirre  et al.  2014), variances and covariances among all elements of 

the original set of  G matrices are calculated to construct the fourth -order covariance tensor  Σ and the second -

order ( i.e.  matrix) tensor  S. Eigenanalysis of the  S-matrix allows for the  construction of eigentensors which 

represent independent vectors of differences in variance and covariance among  G matrices (Fig. 4).  Covariance 

tensors provide a way to compare more than two genetic covariance matrices and describe independent axes 

of divergence among them. In other words, covariance tensors allow identifying trait combinations explaining 

most genetic variation among  G matrices. We applied the covariance tensor analysis to our set of six  G

matrices using the full 1000 MCMC samples for each matrix and compared the observed divergence to the 

null expectation obtained from the analyses of random  G matrices.  We used an appr oach based on Morrissey 

et al.  (2019) to simulate the null distribution of  G matrices. For each population, the breeding values of 

founders were drawn from a multivariate distribution with zero mean and a variance -covariance matrix equal 

to the  G-matrix estimated from this population with the animal model [2]. Breeding values were then randomly 

shuffled among the founders and the breeding values of all remaining individuals were estimated based on the 

pedigree of each population. As our breeding d esign incl uded five generations of inbreeding, we modeled a 

pedigree to better approximate the actual relatedness of our measured individuals. The breeding values of an 

individual were drawn from a multivariate normal distribution with a vector of means equal to the  mean 

breeding values of its parents and a deviation equal to the segregation variance (Walsh & Lynch, 2018). For 

an individual, the segregation variance was estimated as half the product of the randomized  G matrix of their 

population (estimated on the new  population’s founders) and one minus the average inbreeding coefficient of 

its parents (Walsh & Lynch, 2018, pp.557). The phenotypes were then recomposed by adding the random and 

fixed effects estimated by the animal model following [2]. 

We repeated this sequence for each posterior sample of animal models and resulted in 1000 null datasets for 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

each population. The  G matrix of null datasets was estimated following eq. [2]. To reduce computational 

burden, we sampled 200 posterior samples for each null animal model (Morrissey  et al ., 2019) to compute a 

mean null distribution  G matrix for each population that accounts for both the sampling effect and the 

uncertainty in the  G matrix estimates. Each final null  G matrix consisted of the average of the 1000 MCMC 

posterior for each of the 100 replicates and were used to estimate random genetic covariance  tensor as 

described in Aguirre  et al.  (2014) using custom scripts in R (see  Data availability  section for source code), 

Test of genetic constraints: proportionality between  G and  D

In the case of populations deriving from a common ancestor, quantitative genetics theory predicts that genetic 

constraints imposed by the ancestral  G-matrix can influence among -population divergence in a manner, 

leading to the proportionality of the divergence matrix  D and the ancestral  G under neutral or adaptive 

scenarios  (Lande, 1979; Merilä & Björklund 1994, 2004). This proportionality induced by genetic constraints 

is expected under selection, where the evolutionary response is biased along the ancestr al main directions of 

genetic variation (e.g. Schluter 1996, McGlothlin et al 2018), but also under neutral evolution, as genetic drift 

is expected to induce a global reduction in genetic variances, but no predictable change in the orientation of 

the diver gence, leaving on average  G and  D proportional (Lande 1979; Phillips  et al  2001). 

The similarity between  D and  G was first investigated by computing the angle between a divergence vector  d

and the ancestral  G matrix following Krzanowski (1979): 

𝜃  = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −1{(𝑑𝐿 𝐿 𝑡 𝑑 𝑡 )−0.5}

where  L is the set of first  q eigenvectors of  G, where  q was set equal to half the shape space dimensionality ( q

= (2 k – 4)/2 = 13; and  k is the number of digitized landmarks) and  d is a divergence vector.. 

We compared the observed angles to their random expectations by simulating 1000 random vectors  𝑣 2𝑘 

projected in the tangent space according to 

𝑑  = (𝐼 2𝑘  − 𝜇 𝜇 𝑡 )𝑣 

where  μ is the vectorised mean shape (Dryden and Mardia, 1998). 

Test of selection: multivariate Q ST -FST  comparison 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

A proportionality between  G and  D is indicative of an effect of genetic constraints on phenotypic evolution, 

but is insufficient to identify the evolutionary process at play, pointing at the need for a more stringent test to 

decipher the adaptive and neutral scenarios (Martin  et al . 2008). To test the hypothesis that phenotypic 

evolution among invasive  D. suzukii  populations resulted from divergent selection on wing shape, we used the 

two steps method proposed by Martin  et al.  (2008). Briefly, this method i s a multivariate extension of the 

classical Q ST -FST , testing whether the observed phenotypic divergence is greater (Q ST  > F ST ), equal to (Q ST  =

FST ), or smaller (Q ST  < F ST ) than expected under drift alone (see Martin  et al . 2008 and Chapuis  et al . 2008 for 

more details). First, proportionality between  D and  G was tested using the MANOVA estimates of the 

covariance matrices. Second, the coefficient of proportionality  ρST  between the ancestral  G matrix and the 

divergence matrix  D was estimated and compared to the predicted neutral divergence 2F ST /(1 -FST ) obtained 

from neutral molecular markers (Rogers & Harpending 1983; Martin  et al.  2008). While  ρST  is  not strictly 

equivalent to Q ST , the rationale behind its comparison to a measure of neutral differentiation ( i.e . F ST ) is very 

similar. ρ ST  is expressed as 1/n f(ρ MS  - 1) (equation 11 in Martin  et al.  2018; pp. 2139), where n f is the number 

of families sampled, and ρ MS  is the coefficient of proportionality between the among - and within -population 

mean square matrices, estimated from phenotypic data. Comparing the confidence intervals of ρ ST  to that of 

2F ST /(1 -FST ) estimated from molecular markers provides  a test of neutrality similar in rationale to the Q ST -FST 

comparison: in case of an overlap between the CIs, the neutrality hypothesis is not rejected, this is similar to 

observing Q ST  ≈ F ST . Conversely , deviation from this overlap would be indicative of selection. To test for 

proportionality between  D and  G, we used the Bartlett -adjusted test of proportionality between matrices as 

recommended in Martin  et al.  (2008). We used the  k.prop  R function of the neutrality package from Martin  et 

al.  (2008) to calculate  ρST  and the  hierfstat  R package (v.0.5.11; Goudet & Jombart 2015) to get bootstrapped 

estimates of F ST  from 25 neutral microsatellite loci (Fraimout  et al.  2015, 2017). Inputs for both tests were 

ob tained by performing a MANOVA on the wing shape data and using the log -centroid size as covariate and 

population of origin as fixed effect. Also following recommendation from Martin  et al.  (2008), we used the 

first 11 PCs describing wing shape variation to maximize accuracy of the statistical tests so that  p <  2nb  (where 

p is the number of traits and  nb  is the number of populations sampled) while retaining PCs accounting for > 

90% of variance. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

Test of selection: solving the multivariate breeder’s equation 

It has been suggested that in Drosophila, flight performance in different thermal conditions might be under 

selection, favouring the evolution of latitudinal gradients in wing size and shape (e.g. Gilchrist  et al.  2001). 

This hypothesis is indirectly supported by phenotypic plasticity analyses, showing better flight performance in 

cold air in flies reared at low temperatures, associated with different wing morphologies (Frazier  et al.  2008). 

While we are mostly oblivious to the selective factors affecting  D. suzukii  invasive success (but see Camus  et 

al.  2025), and specifically the evolution of its wing morphology, flight performance might play a role in its 

dispersive ability, or be under selection in the diverse thermal conditions encountered across its latitudinal 

ranges. We used data obtained in a prev ious study showing an association between wing shape and flight speed 

in  D. suzukii  (Fraimout  et al.  2018), to explore the hypothesis that selection on flight speed might have driven 

wing shape divergence am ong invasive populations, using the multivariate breeder’s equation (Lande 1979). 

First, an experimental selection differential was derived from Fraimout  et al . (2018) data. In this previous 

study, we reconstructed 3D flight trajectories of flies reared under different developmental temperatures and 

measured flight parameters such as speed, acceleration, or sinuosity. Recorded individual wings were digitized 

and  wing landmarks coordinates used to assess the relationship between flight parameters and wing sh ape (i.e. 

we identified wing shape variation associated with flight speed variation). Landmark data from this previous 

study were aligned onto the reference configuration of the present study to allow direct comparability. Solving 

the breeder’s equation as sumes that traits change is correlated with fitness. In the absence of fitness data, we 

hypothesized that flight performance might significantly contribute to fitness in Drosophila (e.g. Frazier  et al .

2008) and we therefore used the shape change associate d with the strongest flight speed difference as a 

hypothetical selection differential. Wing shape was regressed onto the log of flight speed using a multivariate 

regression ( e.g.  Mardia  et al.  1979; Monteiro 2003) to estimate the vector of shape change associated with 

highest flight velocity  svelocity . The corresponding response to selection  𝛥𝑧  was then predicted  using the 

multivariate breeder’s equation (Lande & Arnold 1983) and the estimated ancestral ( i.e.  Japanese)  G and  P

matrices: 

𝛥𝑧  = 𝐺 𝑗𝑎𝑝 𝑃 𝑗𝑎𝑝  

> −

𝑠 𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 

where  – is the Moore -Penrose generalized inverse. This predicted response to velocity selection was compared 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

to the different vectors of population divergences (see above) by computing the angle between them following 

𝛼 2 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −1 𝛥𝑧 

‖𝛥𝑧 ‖ ∙ 𝑑 𝑡 

‖𝑑 ‖

The observed angles were then compared to the expectation of the angle between  𝛥𝑧  and 1000 random vectors 

(see above). Our hypothesis here is that if a high flight speed has been favoured by selection throughout the 

invasion, we should observe a match between the evolutionary shape changes (the phenotypic divergence 

among populations)  and the shape change resulting from the hypothetical response to selection. 

Test of selection: percentage of genetic variance along divergence vectors 

Finally, we reasoned that if selection was involved in the short -term evolution of wing shape, it should manifest 

in a depletion of genetic variation in the selected directions ( e.g.  Agrawal & Stinchcombe 2009), corresponding 

to the directions of divergence from the hypothetical common ancestor (Fig. 5). To test this prediction,  G

matrices of each population were projected onto the shape space directions defined by the divergence vectors, 

𝑑 𝑡 𝐺𝑑 , and expressed in proportion of the total genetic variance. The amount of genetic variance in the 

direction defined by  d was then compared between the ancestral and derived  G matrices. We predicted that a 

reduction in this proportion of variance should be detected if selection was involved in the evolutionary 

divergence, as depletion of genetic variance due to drift would randomly affect all directions. To test whether 

genetic  variance along the directions of divergence was lower than expected by chance, we compared it to the 

variance estimated in random directions in the (tangent) shape space. 

Results 

Significant divergence of wing size and shape across populations 

We observed differentiation in wing centroid size between American and all other populations, as well as 

between the two American populations (Fig. S1): the American populations displayed smaller wing size, with 

US -WAT displaying the smallest wings.  Although the divergence for wing shape among populations was 

weak, the  bgPCA  showed a signal of geographic differentiation, opposing the pairs of populations according 

to their geographic origin (Fig. S2). This shape divergence was confirmed by the significant p opulation effect 

in the MANOVA (Wilk's lambda = 0.143, df = 5,  p < 0.001). The MANOVA performed on the residuals of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

the regression between shape and size also revealed a significant population effect (Wilk's lambda = 0.199, df 

= 5,  p < 0.001), suggesting that the shape difference goes beyond a simple allometric effect. The pairwise 

permutational MANOVAs revealed significant shape differences between all pairs of populations ( p < 1e -04). 

The analysis of the angles between the divergence vectors suggests that both French populations diverged from 

their common ancestor in the same direction of the phenotypic space: these two vectors are more similar than 

two random vectors (α = 31.9°,  p < 10 -4, Fig. 2, Table S2). For the American populations, the angle between 

the two divergence vectors was greater than that of the French populations (α = 49.9°,  p = 5 × 10 -4, Fig 2, Table 

S2) and hint towards divergence along different directions. The average  American and French direction of 

divergence from their common ancestor were strikingly different, and no more similar than random vectors ( α

= 71.9°,  p = 0.11, Table S2). In terms of amount of divergence based on the Procrustes distance, the American 

populations appeared to have slightly less diverge than French populations, from their hypothetical ancestor 

(5.72 × 10 -3, 7.46 × 10 -3, respectively; Table S3) and as observed from the  bgPCA  (Fig. S2). 

The  G-matrix for wing shape is mostly stable across populations 

We found significant differences in the size of the  G matrix among 3 pairs of populations, all involving the 

southern USA population US -WAT (Table 1). The  G matri x of the US -WAT population had a significantly 

larger volume than those of US -DAY (northern USA) and of both French populations (FR -PAR and FR -

MON). None of the other pairwise comparisons revealed any significant differences in the volumes of  G.

Regarding the shape of the  G matrices, none of the  G matrices exhibited pronounced eccentricity (i.e. no 

single PC dominated the others, inducing an elongated, “cigar -shaped” matrix). Visual inspection of the first 

two principal components indicated that all  G matrices were approximately circular in two -dimensional space 

(with the exception of FR -MON), and would likely appear relatively spherical if represented as three -

dimensional ellipsoids. (Fig. 3). Eccentricity values calculated as the ratio of the fi rst to the second eigenvalues 

of  G were indeed low and close to 1 for all matrices (Fig. S3). In other words, genetic variation in each 

population was relatively equally distributed among combinations of traits. We did not find any significant 

differences in the shape of the  G matrices as eccentricity and the amount of variance explained by  gmax  between 

any pairs of populations were not statistically different (Fig. S3). Similarly, no significant difference was found 

between the eigentensors of  S calculated from the set of random and observed sets of  G matrices based on the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

overlapping 95% HPD intervals (Fig. 4), suggesting a global stability of the  G matrices across populations. 

Proportionality of  D and ancestral  G: a constrained response to selection? 

Overall, the divergence matrix appeared fairly similar to the ancestral  G matrix, its first two PCs and the 

ancestral  G matrix respectively forming narrow angles of 13.6 and 15.8°, smaller than expected for random 

vectors (47.9°± 7.18). While the null hypothesis of proportionality between both matrices was not rejected 

(Bartlett -adjusted Χ² test;  p =  1), suggesting a close match, the coefficient of proportionality (ρ = 1.063; 95% 

CI, 0.763  – 1.751) was in turn higher than the coefficient estimated for micro satellite markers (2F ST /(1 -FST ) = 

0.160; 95% CI, 0.128  – 0.198). Therefore, while  D and  G are proportional, their coefficient of proportionality 

deviates from the neutral expectation, suggesting a role for selection in the observed divergence. 

No reduction in genetic variance in the direction of divergence 

We further projected each  G matrix onto their respective direction of divergence from the hypothetical ancestor 

and estimated the corresponding percentage of variance (Fig. 5). Overall, we found that amounts of genetic 

variance in these directions were not statistically different amo ng populations. Furthermore, we did not observe 

a lower amount of genetic variance between the projection of each population  G matrix and the projection of 

the ancestral  G matrix on their corresponding divergence vectors. This r esult goes against our expectation that 

selection would result in a depletion of genetic variance along each population’s divergence vector from the 

ancestor. 

The response to a theoretical selection does not match the observed divergences 

To investigate the possible selective factors affecting wing shape evolution in  D. suzukii  invasion, we simulated 

the evolutionary responses to a hypothetical selection differential, the wing shape difference between fast and 

slow flying  D. suzukii  individuals, as reported in Fraimout  et al.  (2018; Fig. 6). The evolution ary response is 

shown on Fig. 6 , as the average response derived from the full posterior of MCMC samples. The shape 

divergence of French and American populations from their common hypothetic al ancestor are shown on Figure 

6c and d (the two Japanese populations used to compute the ancestral  G matrix were considered too close from 

this ancestral state and were thus not considered). The pattern of shape change associated with  Svelocity  and the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

average response  Δz were very similar (mean α = 22.74°, SD 6.03) confirming that  G does not constrain the 

response to selection. This result is in line with the relatively spherical shape of the ancestral  G matrix, which 

should not constrain the response to selection. While a similarity in the shift of the basal landmarks can be 

found between the divergence of French populations and the theoretical response to selection, no obvious 

similarity with American p opulations divergences is detected (Fig 6, Fig. S4). However, this con gruence was 

not reflected in the correlation between vectors when accounting for the full landmark configurations as the 

evolution of the distal part of the wing did not match the expected  response to selection (Fig. 6 , Fig. S4). 

Overall, the similarity between the divergence vectors from each population and the response to selection  Δz

was low  (Fig. S4) suggesting that the observed divergence in wing shape does not result from selection on 

faster flight capacity. 

Discussion 

Genetic divergence of wing shape across populations of Drosophila suzukii 

Geographical variation of wing morphology has been described in several  Drosophila  species ( e.g.  Azevedo 

et al. , 1998; Haas & Tolley, 1998; Hoffmann & Shirriffs, 2002), including introduced ones (Huey  et al. , 2000). 

In particular, geographical clines of wing size and shape have been detected along latitudinal and altitudinal 

gradients (Huey  et al.  2000; Gilchrist  et al. , 2001; Gilchrist  et al. , 2004; Pitchers  et al. , 2013; Adrion  et al. ,

2015). These clines have typically been interpreted as adaptations to  flight conditions, specifically temperature 

and air pressure (Dillon & Frazier 2006; Pitchers  et al . 2013), although direct evidence on the nature of 

selection is lacking. In  D. suzukii , clines in wing morphology have been reported along an altitudinal gradient 

in Hawaii  – the first and oldest invaded territory (Asplen  et al. , 2015)  – with flies from high altitude (ca. 

2000m) displaying significantly larger wings than flies sampled at sea level (Koch  et al. , 2020). Here, we 

detected geographic variation of  wing shape across all populations, but the differences among north and south 

populations were different among continents. Gilchrist  et al.  (2000) reported differences in latitudinal wing 

shape changes in  D. melanogaster  from three continents, and suggested the occurrence of specific local 

selective pressures on wing shape. However, they also detected parallel clines in wing size across continents, 

suggesting common adaptive effects. In our study, wing size was more stable : the only difference between 

northern and southern populations was found in the USA. As for wing shape, although we found that 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

populations from the same continent have evolved in a relatively similar direction of the phenotypic space, we 

did not find any evidence for parallel latitudinal clines. At the time of sampling, the invasion of  D. suzukii  was 

initiated less than a decade ago in Europe and the USA and it is possible that adaptive geographical clines did 

not have enough time to evolve in these regions, contrary to the first invaded range in Hawaii (Koch  et al. 

2020). As a comparison, a latitudinal cline in  D. subobscura  follo wing colonization of the New World, was 

reported after two decades, while no difference had been detected ten years after the start of the invasion (Huey 

et al. , 2000; Gilchrist  et al. , 2004). At this point, it is unclear whether  D. suzukii  wing phenotypes are locally 

adapted, and additional work is warranted to decipher the interplay between wing plasticity, genetics and their 

association with fitness in natural  D. suzukii  populations . Nevertheless, by rearing flies in controlled laboratory 

conditions for  a few generations, we showed that the phenotypic divergence observed among populations is 

genetic rather than plastic (see also Fraimout  et al  2018) and that some evolutionary process independent of 

phenotypic plasticity have shaped the wings of  D. suzukii  in the wild. 

G matrix of wing shape is stable across populations 

Despite the wealth of theoretical and empirical research (e.g. Roff, 2000; Steppan  et al. , 2002; Bégin & Roff, 

2003; Jones  et al. , 2003; Mezey & Houle, 2003; Björklund, 2004; Jones  et al. , 2004; Blows & Hoffmann, 

2005; Arnold  et al. , 2008; Walsh & Blows, 2009; Jones  et al.  2014; Wood & Brodie, 2015; Puentes  et al. ,

2016; Svensson  et al. , 2021), predicting how natural selection or drift will affect the structure of  G and at 

which pace  G can  evolve in the wild remains a difficult task. As stated by Jones  et a l.  (2003): “[...]  the current 

state of analytical theory on  G-matrix evolution is that existing theory cannot guarantee stability of the  G-

matrix (Turelli 1988), but also does not guarantee instability ." Following this assertion, simulation studies 

(Jones  et al. , 2003; Jones  et al. , 2004; Arnold  et al. , 2008; Jones  et al. , 2014; Björklund & Gustafsson, 2015; 

Chantepie & Chevin 2020) have identified how correlative selection, pleiotropic mutations, population size 

and other evolutionary forces can affect the  stability of  G’s structure and orientation. However, empirically 

and 20 years later, evidence for both stability (Delahaie  et al. , 2017; McGlothlin  et al. , 2018, Henry & 

Stinchcombe  2023) and lability ( e.g ., Uesugi  et al. , 2017, Chantepie  et al . 2024) have been reported in varying 

contexts. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Here we found that the  G matrices were globally stable across populations, the differences between populations 

mainly pertaining to the volume of  G (i.e. the global amount of genetic variance). Specifically, French 

populations seemed to display less genetic variance as indicated by their smaller volumes, while the US -WAT 

population seemed more genetically variable than the rest of the populations. Red uction of genetic variance 

and, therefore, of the volume of  G, is expected under certain conditions such as increased genetic drift due to 

reduced effective population size (Shaw  et al. , 1995; Roff, 2000; Jones  et al. , 2004) or increased strength of 

stabil izing selection (Jones  et al.  2003). According to the results of Fraimout  et al.  (2017) obtained from neutral 

molecular markers and Olazcuaga  et al.  (2020) using whole -genome data, all invasive populations of  D. suzukii 

experienced significant loss of genetic diversity due to various intensities of bottlenecks upon introduction. 

Lesser levels of genetic variance and lower volumes in the French  G matrices are thus consistent with the 

effect of drift. Similarly, the higher volume of the US -WAT population coul d be explained by the genetic 

admixture of two highly differentiated lineages from Asia and Hawaii (Fraimout  et al.  2017). However, 

populations’ invasion history was not reflected in all  G matrices, as other genetically admixed populations 

(FR -PAR, US -DAY; Fraimout  et al.  2017) did not show higher volumes and neither did ancestral populations 

where genetic bottlenecks most likely did not occur. Contrasting with the random evolution of  G in all 

directions of the multivariate space expected under genetic drif t (Arnold  et al. , 2001; Phillips  et al. , 2001), our 

results show that most aspects of the eigenstructure of  G (size and shape) have remained stable throughout the 

invasion process. 

Our analyses may lack statistical power to detect more subtle differences between  G matrices. Indeed, while 

our crossing design consists of an acceptable number of genetic lines per population, the multidimensional 

nature of the  Drosophila  wing implies a large number of parameters to be estimated (n x (n -1) /2 + n; 351 in 

our case), larger than the number of replicates ( i.e.  isofemale lines). Nonetheless, replicating our analyses using 

fewer numbers of PCs  - and thus less parameters to be estimated  - led to  the same conclusions (see 

Supplementary material ). Finally, our design did not allow us to partition additive from non -additive genetic 

components of wing shape variation. Dominance genetic variance has been shown to explain up to 35% of 

phenotypic variation for wing traits in  D. serrata  (Sztepanacz & Blows 2015) and it is therefore possible that 

some of our estimates of genetic variance could be inflated by such non -additive components. Furthermore, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

the use of a limited number of isofemale lines to capture the possibly large standing genetic variation found in 

D. suzukii ’s wild populations could further exacerbate the effects of non -additivity on our estimates of the  G

matrix. Specifically, establishing isofemale lines could result in inbreeding depression, where mildly 

deleterious mutations otherwise sheltered in heterozygotes are expressed in the laboratory under sib -mating 

(Agrawal & Whitlock 2012). This in turns cou ld inflate the contribution of do minance genetic variance 

(Charlesworth & Willis 2009). While we did not estimate the contribution of dominance variance, the use of 

gravid females mated in the wild may have reduced the effect of inbreeding depression upon establishing 

isofemale lines. Whe ther between -population differences exist in the importance of dominance variance for 

wing shape is unknown, and future work including appropriate breeding designs ( e.g.,  double -cousins) should 

shed light on the importance of non -additive genetic component s in wing shape variation of  D. suzukii .

Phenotypic divergence is not constrained in D. suzukii’s invasive populations 

We tested the hypotheses of ancestral constraints on wing shape evolution by estimating the similarity between 

the ancestral  G matrix and the divergence matrix  D, and found that the leading vectors of both matrices were 

tightly associated. Such similarity can be viewed as a mark of genetic constraints affecting divergence, 

compatible with both neutral and adaptive scenarios. Genetic drift is expected to induce diver gence  along the 

axes with the most genetic variation, and  proportionally to the amount of var iation in the ancestral population 

(Lande 1979; Lofsvold 1998; Marroig & Cheverud, 2004). But this pattern of concordance between  G and  D

is also expected under selection, the main directions of genetic variation biasing the response to selection (i.e. 

the lines of genetic least resistance; Schluter, 1996). However, the estimated ancestral  G matrix for  D. suzukii 

wing shape had a relatively spherical shape, suggesting the existence of genetic variation in all directions of 

the phenotypic space, and therefor e a lack of genetic constraint. This is evident from the results of our 

phenotypic divergence vector analysis showing that, despite the relatively small differentiation among 

populations, the evolution of wing shape in France and USA has followed very diff erent directions (Fig. 2), 

suggesting no constraint. Finally, the response to selection predicted from our theoretical selection gradient 

applied to the estimated ancestral  G produced a wing shape different from that observed in any of the extant 

invasive populations, further supporting an absence of genetic constraint on wing shape evolution in this 

species. These results are interesting in the light of recent research invest igating the link between trait 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

evolvability and divergence (Tsuboi  et al.  2024, Pélabon  et al.  2025). Recent studies have shown that 

population divergence across species and traits tends to scale positively with standing additive genetic variance 

(i.e.,  evolvability; Opedal  et al.  2023, Holstad  et al.  2024), suggesting that phenotypic evolution can be 

channeled by ancestral genetic constraints through lines of least resistance. Here, we did not find evidence for 

genetic lines of least resistance, but rather, unconstrained phenotypic dive rgence from ancestral standing 

genetic variation. 

Adaptive or neutral divergence? 

The results from our multivariate Q ST -FST  support an adaptive scenario for wing shape evolution, as divergence 

was found to be significantly greater than expected under neutral evolution. While failure to account for 

demographic history and population structure can bias the outcome of Q ST -FST  comparisons (de Villemereuil 

et al.  2022, do O  et al.  2025), it does not seem to be the case here. The demographic history of  D. suzukii  is 

known, and there is no evidence for gene flow or migration among populations ( even within -country; Fraimout 

et al.  2017) that could reduce values of F ST , biasing upward the result for our test of selection (ρst > F ST ). As 

for a possible inflation of ρst, this could happen if all populations had undergone drastic bottlenecks and 

reductions in  G while  D remained large. We do not have evidence that this happened in our study populations, 

as the volume of most invasive populations’  G is not significantly smaller than that of the native population. 

The divergence in wing shape among invas ive populations of  D. suzukii  might thus be adaptive. The statistical 

power of this test is conditional on the sampling design and particularly the number of populations sampled 

(Martin  et al.  2008). While the test for departure of neutrality should be robust to a small number of populations 

(i.e.,  < 10 as in the current study) results of the proportionality test should be interpreted with caution. Similar 

analyses using long -diverged groups ( i.e.,  Teosinte and Maize), report values of ρ ST  several order of  magnitude 

above the neutral expectation (Yang  et al.  2019), suggesting that the signal of selection we observe in  D. 

suzukii  is rather low. The adaptive value of wing shape variation in  Drosophila  is a long -standing conundrum, 

and in the absence of fitness data, remains speculative (Gilchrist  et al.  2000). Given the role of wing in flight, 

we leveraged available flight data (Fraimout  et al  2018) to test whether selection on flight speed could be 

involved in wing shape divergence among our populations. Despi te partial correspondence, the response to 

this selection applied to the ancestral  G matrix, was very different from the observed evolutionary divergence, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

providing no support for selection on flight speed as a driver of this divergence. 

Finally, it is worth stressing that we focused our analyses on the study of male wings only. Wing shape is under 

strong sexual selection in Drosophila, as males produce a variety of visual and acoustic signalling using their 

wings during courtship (Debelle  et al.  2014). By focusing on male wings only, it is possible that we are missing 

an important component of evolutionary constraint, as previous work has shown that genetic covariance across 

sexes can bias the evolutionary response of wing shape to selecti on (McGuigan & Blows 2007, Sztepanacz & 

Houle 2019). Nonetheless, recent work on  D. buzzati  (Iglesias  et al.  2023) suggests that adaptive divergence 

in wing shape can be attributable  to selection on courtship traits in males among populations. Additionally, 

Branden & De Lisle (2026) have shown that the effect of stabilizing selection is particularly pronounced in 

male Drosophila, where departure from the average wing shape is associate d with lower fitness in males. Our 

results could be compatible with those studies, reflecting a combination of stabilizing selection on  D. suzukii 

males’ wing shape and divergent selection among populations. Without access to fitness assays and its 

relatio nship to wing shape variance in our study, this hypothesis cannot however be formally tested with the 

data at hand. The nature of the selective factors affecting wing shape evolution thus remains to be identified 

in  D. suzukii , and further work would be valuable to shed light on the relationship between wing shape and 

fitness in males, and on the effect of stabilizing selection on the wing shape  G matrix. 

Conclusion 

Consensual predictions on the effect of selection and drift on the  G matrix  remain scarce in the literature and 

most empirical evidence are based on experimental evolution studies ( e.g.  Doroszuk  et al. , 2008; Careau  et al. ,

2015) or comparisons among long -diverged species (e.g. McGlothlin  et al. , 2018). In this context our study 

provides new insights on the evolution (or lack thereof) of  G over a relatively short evolutionary time scale in 

natural conditions. We showed that native and invasive populations o f D. suzukii  display quantitative genetic 

differentiation in wing shape across continents and at an early stage of their worldwide invasion. Our results 

suggest an effect of selection acting on a poorly constraining ancestral G matrix. They provide a reference 

point fo r future studies quantifying phenotypic evolution in this species. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Acknowledgments 

AF was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche, through the LabEx ANR -10 -LABX -0003 -BCDiv, 

of the program “Investissements d’avenir” (ANR -11 -IDEX -0004 -02). VD was funded by ANR SWING 

(ANR -16 -CE02 -0015). The authors are grateful to S. Fellous, A. X uéreb, K. Tamura, M. Toda, P. Shearer, T. 

Schlenke and A. Kopp for help with flies sampling. We thank M. Guillaume for helping with the stock flies 

maintenance and F. Peronnet for providing flies rearing medium. 

Author contribution 

AF, VD and CT designed the study; AF, SC and NN analyzed the data; AF and VD obtained the samples; AF 

led the writing of the first draft and all authors contributed critically to the manuscript. 

Data availability 

Data and code necessary to replicate the analyses presented in the manuscript have been deposited on the 

Zenodo platform (zenodo.org). 

References 

Adams, D. C. (2011). Quantitative genetics and evolution of head shape in Plethodon salamanders. 

Evolutionary Biology , 38 (3), 278 -286. 

Adrion, J. R., Hahn, M. W., & Cooper, B. S. (2015). Revisiting classic clines in Drosophila 

melanogaster in the age of genomics.  Trends in Genetics, 31 (8), 434 -444. 

Agrawal, A. F., & Stinchcombe, J. R. (2009). How much do genetic covariances alter the rate of 

adaptation?  Proc Biol Sci, 276 (1659), 1183 -1191. 

Agrawal, A. F., & Whitlock, M. C. (2012). Mutation load: the fitness of individuals in populations 

where deleterious alleles are abundant.  Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 

Systematics , 43 (1), 115 -135. 

Aguirre, J. D., Hine, E., McGuigan, K., & Blows, M. W. (2014). Comparing G: multivariate analysis 

of genetic variation in multiple populations.  Heredity , 112 (1), 21 -29. 

Arnold, S. J., Burger, R., Hohenlohe, P. A., Ajie, B. C., & Jones, A. G. (2008). Understanding the 

evolution and stability of the G -matrix.  Evolution, 62 (10), 2451 -2461. 

Arnold, S. J., Pfrender, M. E., & Jones, A. G. (2001). The adaptive landscape as a conceptual bridge 

between micro -and macroevolution  Microevolution Rate, Pattern, Process  (pp. 9 -32): 

Springer. 

Asplen, M. K., Anfora, G., Biondi, A., Choi, D. -S., Chu, D., Daane, K. M., Gibert, P., Gutierrez, A. 

P., Hoelmer, K. A., Hutchison, W. D. , et al.  (2015). Invasion biology of spotted wing 

Drosophila (Drosophila suzukii): a global perspective and future priorities.  Journal of Pest 

Science, 88 (3), 469 -494. 

Azevedo, R. B., James, A. C., McCabe, J., & Partridge, L. (1998). Latitudinal variation of wing: 

thorax size ratio and wing‐aspect ratio in Drosophila melanogaster.  Evolution , 52 (5), 1353 -

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

1362. 

Bégin, M., & Roff , D. A. (2003). The constancy of the G matrix through species divergence and the 

effects of quantitative genetic constraints on phenotypic evolution: a case study in crickets. 

Evolution , 57 (5), 1107 -1120. 

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful 

approach to multiple testing.  J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B , 57 , 289 –300 

Berger, D., Postma, E., Blanckenhorn, W. U., & Walters, R. J. (2013). Quantitative genetic 

divergence and standing genetic (co)variance in thermal reaction norms along latitude. 

Evolution, 67 (8), 2385 -2399. 

Björklund, M. (2004). Constancy of the G Matrix in Ecological Time.  Evolution, 58 (6). 

Björklund, M., & Gustafsson, L. (2015). The stability of the G -matrix: The role of spatial 

heterogeneity.  Evolution , 69 (7), 1953 -1958. 

Bjorklund, M., Husby, A., & Gustafsson, L. (2013). Rapid and unpredictable changes of the G -matrix 

in a natural bird population over 25 years.  Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 26 (1), 1 -13. 

Blows, M. W., & Hoffmann, A. A. (2005). A reassessment of genetic limits to evolutionary change. 

Ecology, 86 (6), 1371 -1384. 

Bock, D. G., Caseys, C., Cousens, R. D., Hahn, M. A., Heredia, S. M., Hubner, S., Turner, K. 

G.Whitney, K. D., & Rieseberg, L. H. (2015). What we still don't know about invasion 

genetics.  Molecular Ecology, 24 (9), 2277 -2297. 

Bookstein, F. L. (1996). Combining the tools of geometric morphometrics. In  Advances in 

morphometrics  (pp. 131 -151). Boston, MA: Springer US. 

Bränden, A., & De Lisle, S. P. (2026).  Apparent stabilizing selection explains micro and 

macroevolution of Drosophila wings.  bioRxiv , 2026 -01. 

Calabria, G., Máca, J., Bächli, G., Serra, L., & Pascual, M. (2012).  First records of the potential pest 

species Drosophila suzukii (Diptera: Drosophilidae) in Europe.  Journal of Applied 

Entomology, 136 (1 -2), 139 -147. 

Camus, L., Rode, N. O., Serga, S., Loiseau, A., Chen, X., Iampietro, C., ...  & Gautier, M. (2025). 

Adaptive Challenges of Past and Future Invasion of Drosophila suzukii: Insights From Novel 

Genomic Resources and Statistical Methods Combining Individual and Pool Sequencing 

Data.  Molecular Ecology , e70192. 

Cano, J. M., Laurila, A., Palo, J., & Merilä, J. (2004). Population differentiation in G matrix structure 

due to natural selection in Rana temporaria.  Evolution , 58 (9), 2013 -2020. 

Careau, V., Wolak, M. E., Carter, P. A., & Garland, T. (2015). Evolution of the additive genetic 

variance –covariance matrix under continuous directional selection on a complex behavioural 

phenotype.  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 282 (1819). 

Chantepie, S., & Chevin, L. M. (2020).  How does the strength of selection influence genetic 

correlations?.  Evolution letters , 4(6), 468 -478. 

Chantepie, S., Charmantier, A., Delahaie, B., Adriaensen, F., Matthysen, E., Visser, M. E., ...  &

Teplitsky, C. (2024). Divergence in evolutionary potential of life history traits among wild 

populations is predicted by differences in climatic conditions.  Evolution Letters , 8(1), 29 -42. 

Chapuis, E., Martin, G., & Goudet, J. (2008). Effects of selection and drift on G matrix evolution in 

a heterogeneous environment: a multivariate Q st –F st test with the freshwater snail Galba 

truncatula.  Genetics , 180 (4), 2151 -2161. 

Chenoweth, S. F., Rundle, H. D., & Blows, M. W. (2010). The contribution of selection and genetic 

constraints to phenotypic divergence.  The American Naturalist , 175 (2), 186 -196. 

Colautti, R. I., & Lau, J. A. (2016). Contemporary evolution during invasion: evidence for 

differentiation, natural selection, and local adaptation.  Invasion Genetics: The Baker and 

Stebbins Legacy , 101 -121. 

Conner, J. K., Franks, R., & Stewart, C. (2003). Expression of additive genetic variances and 

covariances for wild radish floral traits: comparison between field and greenhouse 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

environments.  Evolution, 57 (3), 487 -495. 

David, J. R., Gibert, P., Legout, H., Pétavy, G., Capy, P., & Moreteau, B. (2005). Isofemale lines in 

Drosophila: an empirical approach to quantitative trait analysis in natural populations. 

Heredity , 94 (1), 3 -12. 

Debelle, A., Ritchie, M. G., & Snook, R. R. (2014). Evolution of divergent female mating preference 

in response to experimental sexual selection.  Evolution , 68 (9), 2524 -2533. 

Delahaie, B., Charmantier, A., Chantepie, S., Garant, D., Porlier, M., & Teplitsky, C. (2017). 

Conserved G -matrices of morphological and life -history traits among continental and island 

blue tit populations.  Heredity , 119 (2), 76 -87. 

de Villemereuil, P., Gaggiotti, O. E., & Goudet, J. (2022).  Common garden experiments to study local 

adaptation need to account for population structure.  Journal of Ecology , 110 (5), 1005 -1009. 

Dillon, M. E., & Frazier, M. R. (2006). Drosophila melanogaster locomotion in cold thin air.  Journal 

of Experimental Biology , 209 (2), 364 -371. 

Dlugosch, K. M., Anderson, S. R., Braasch, J., Cang, F. A., & Gillette, H. D. (2015). The devil is in 

the details: genetic variation in introduced populations and its contributions to invasion. 

Molecular Ecology, 24 (9), 2095 -2111. 

do O, I., Gaggiotti, O. E., de Villemereuil, P., & Goudet, J. (2025).  A method for identifying local 

adaptation in structured populations.  PLoS Genetics , 21 (9), e1011871. 

Doroszuk, A., Wojewodzic, M. W., Gort, G., & Kammenga, J. E. (2008). Rapid divergence of genetic 

variance -covariance matrix within a natural population.  The  American Naturalist, 171 (3), 

291 -304. 

Dryden, I. L., & Mardia, K. V. (1993). Multivariate shape analysis.  Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of 

Statistics, Series A , 460 -480. 

Dugand , R. J., Aguirre, J. D., Hine, E., Blows, M. W., & McGuigan, K. (2021). The contribution of 

mutation and selection to multivariate quantitative genetic variance in an outbred population 

of Drosophila serrata.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118 (31). 

Eroukhmanoff., & Svensson, E. I. (2011). Evolution and stability of the G -matrix during the 

colonization of a novel environment.  Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 24 (6), 1363 -1373. 

Estoup, A., Ravigné, V., Hufbauer, R., Vitalis, R., Gautier, M., & Facon, B. (2016). Is There a Genetic 

Paradox of Biological Invasion?  Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 

47 (1), 51 -72. 

Facon, B., Genton, B. J., Shykoff, J., Jarne, P., Estoup, A., & David, P. (2006).  A general eco -

evolutionary framework for understanding bioinvasions.  Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 

21 (3), 130 -135. 

Fischer, E. K., Ghalambor, C. K., & Hoke, K. L. (2016). Plasticity and evolution in correlated suites 

of traits.  Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 29 (5), 991 -1002. 

Fraimout, A., Debat, V., Fellous, S., Hufbauer, R. A., Foucaud, J., Pudlo, P., ... & Estoup, A. (2017). 

Deciphering the routes of invasion of Drosophila suzukii by means of ABC random forest. 

Molecular biology and evolution , 34 (4), 980 -996. 

Fraimout, A., Jacquemart, P., Villarroel, B., Aponte, D. J., Decamps, T., Herrel, A., ...  & Debat, V. 

(2018). Phenotypic plasticity of Drosophila suzukii wing to developmental temperature: 

implications for flight.  Journal of Experimental Biology , 221 (13). 

Fraimout, A., Loiseau, A., Price, D. K., Xuereb, A., Jean -Francois, M., Vitalis, R., Fellous, S., Debat, 

V., & Estoup, A. (2015). New set of microsatellite markers for the spotted -wing Drosophila 

suzukii (Diptera: Drosophilidae): A promising molecular tool  for inferring the invasion 

history of this major insect pest.  European Journal of Entomology, 112 (4), 855 -859. 

Fraimout, A., Päiviö, E., & Merilä, J. (2022). Relaxed risk of predation drives parallel evolution of 

stickleback behavior.  Evolution , 76 (11), 2712 -2723. 

Frazier, M. R., Harrison, J. F., Kirkton, S. D., & Roberts, S. P. (2008). Cold rearing improves cold -

flight performance in Drosophila via changes in wing morphology.  Journal of Experimental 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

Biology , 211 (13), 2116 -2122. 

Gilchrist, G. W., Huey, R. B., Balanyà, J., Pascual, M., & Serra, L. (2004). A Time Series of Evolution 

in Action: A Latitudinal Cline in Wing Size in South American Drosophila Subobscura. 

Evolution, 58 (4). 

Gilchrist, G. W., Huey, R. B., & Serra, L. (2001). Rapid evolution of wing size clines in Drosophila 

subobscura.  Genetica , 112 (1), 273 -286. 

Golani, D., Azzurro, E., Corsini -Foka, M., Falautano, M., Andaloro, F., & Bernardi, G. (2007). 

Genetic bottlenecks and successful biological invasions: the case of a recent Lessepsian 

migrant.  Biology letters , 3(5), 541 -545. 

Goudet, J., Jombart, T., & Goudet, M. J. (2015). Package ‘hierfstat’. Estimation and Tests of 

Hierarchical F -Statistics. 

Guillaume, F., & Whitlock, M. C. (2007). Effects of migration on the genetic covariance matrix. 

Evolution , 61 (10), 2398 -2409. 

Haas, H. L., & Tolley, K. A. (1998). Geographic variation of wing morphology in three Eurasian 

populations of the fruit fly, Drosophila lummei.  Journal of Zoology , 245 (2), 197 -203. 

Hadfield, J. D. (2010). MCMC methods for multi -response generalized linear mixed models: the 

MCMCglmm R package.  Journal of Statistical Software, 33 (2), 1 -22. 

Hansen, T. F., & Houle, D. (2004). Evolvability, stabilizing selection, and the problem.  Phenotypic 

integration: Studying the ecology and evolution of complex phenotypes , 130 .

Hauser, M. (2011). A historic account of the invasion of Drosophila suzukii (Matsumura) (Diptera: 

Drosophilidae) in the continental United States, with remarks on their identification.  Pest 

Manag Sci, 67 (11), 1352 -1357. 

Hayes, K. R., & Barry, S. C. (2008). Are there any consistent predictors of invasion success? 

Biological Invasions, 10 (4), 483 -506. 

Henry, G. A., & Stinchcombe, J. R. (2023). G -matrix stability in clinally diverging populations of 

an annual weed.  Evolution , 77 (1), 49 -62. 

Hervé, M. (2016). RVAideMemoire: diverse basic statistical and graphical functions. R package v 

0.9 -55. 

Hine, E., Chenoweth, S. F., Rundle, H. D., & Blows, M. W. (2009). Characterizing the evolution of 

genetic variance using genetic covariance tensors.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 

Society B: Biological Sciences , 364 (1523), 1567 -1578. 

Hoffmann, A. A., & Parsons, P. A. (1988). The analysis of quantitative variation in natural 

populations with isofemale strains.  Génétique sélection évolution , 20 (1), 87 -98. 

Hoffmann, A. A., & Shirriffs, J. (2002). Geographic variation for wing shape in Drosophila serrata. 

Evolution , 56 (5), 1068 -1073. 

Houle , D., & Meyer, K. (2015). Estimating sampling error of evolutionary statistics based on genetic 

covariance matrices using maximum likelihood.  Journal of Evolutionary Biology , 28 (8), 

1542 -1549. 

Huey, R. B., Gilchrist, G. W., Carlson, M. L., Berrigan, D., & Serra, L. (2000). Rapid evolution of a 

geographic cline in size in an introduced fly.  Science , 287 (5451), 308 -309. 

Jolliffe, I. T. (2002). Graphical representation of data using principal components. In  Principal 

component analysis  (pp. 64 -91). New York, NY: Springer New York. 

Jones, A. G., Arnold, S. J., & Bürger, R. (2003). Stability of the G‐matrix in a population experiencing 

pleiotropic mutation, stabilizing selection, and genetic drift.  Evolution , 57 (8), 1747 -1760. 

Jones, A. G., Arnold, S. J., & Burger, R. (2004). Evolution and stability of the G‐matrix on a 

landscape with a moving optimum.  Evolution , 58 (8), 1639 -1654. 

Jones, A. G., Bürger, R., & Arnold, S. J. (2014). Epistasis and natural selection shape the mutational 

architecture of complex traits.  Nature communications, 5 (1), 1 -10. 

Keller, S. R., & Taylor, D. R. (2008). History, chance and adaptation during biological invasion: 

separating stochastic phenotypic evolution from response to selection.  Ecology letters , 11 (8), 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

852 -866. 

Kilkenny, F. F., & Galloway, L. F. (2013). Adaptive divergence at the margin of an invaded range. 

Evolution, 67 (3), 722 -731. 

Klingenberg, C. P., & Leamy, L. J. (2001). Quantitative genetics of geometric shape in the mouse 

mandible.  Evolution , 55 (11), 2342 -2352. 

Klingenberg, C. P., & McIntyre, G. S. (1998). Geometric morphometrics of developmental 

instability: analyzing patterns of fluctuating asymmetry with Procrustes methods.  Evolution ,

52 (5), 1363 -1375. 

Klingenberg, C. P. (2003). Quantitative genetics of geometric shape: heritability and the pitfalls of 

the univariate approach.  Evolution , 57 (1), 191 -195. 

Klingenberg, C. P. (2010). Evolution and development of shape: integrating quantitative approaches. 

Nature Reviews Genetics , 11 (9), 623 -635. 

Koch, J. B., Dupuis, J. R., Jardeleza, M. -K., Ouedraogo, N., Geib, S. M., Follett, P. A., & Price, D. 

K. (2020). Population genomic and phenotype diversity of invasive Drosophila suzukii in 

Hawai ‘i.  Biological Invasions , 1 -18. 

Kruuk, L. E. (2004). Estimating genetic parameters in natural populations using the ‘animal model’. 

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences ,

359 (1446), 873 -890. 

Krzanowski, W. J. (1979). Between -groups comparison of principal components.  Journal of the 

american statistical association , 74 (367), 703 -707. 

Lande, R. (1976). Natural selection and random genetic drift in phenotypic evolution.  Evolution , 314 -

334. 

Lande, R. (1979). Quantitative genetic analysis of multivariate evolution, applied to brain: body size 

allometry.  Evolution , 402 -416. 

Lande, R., & Arnold, S. J. (1983). The measurement of selection on correlated characters.  Evolution ,

1210 -1226. 

Lee, C. E. (2002). Evolutionary genetics of invasive species.  Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 17 (8), 

386 -391. 

Leinonen, T., Cano, J. M., & Merila, J. (2011). Genetics of body shape and armour variation in 

threespine sticklebacks.  Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 24 (1), 206 -218. 

Lofsvold D. (1988). Quantitative genetics of morphological differentiation in Peromyscus. II. 

Analysis of selection and drift.  Evolution , 42(1) :54 -67. 

Lynch, M., & Walsh, B. (1998).  Genetics and Analysis of Quantitative Traits : Sinauer. 

Mardia, K. V., Kent, J. T., & Bibby, J. M. (1979). Multivariate analysis. 

Marroig, G., & Cheverud, J. M. (2004). Did natural selection or genetic drift produce the cranial 

diversification of neotropical monkeys?.  The American Naturalist , 163 (3), 417 -428. 

Martin, G., Chapuis, E., & Goudet, J. (2008). Multivariate Q st –F st comparisons: a neutrality test for 

the evolution of the G matrix in structured populations.  Genetics , 180 (4), 2135 -2149. 

Martínez -Abadías, N., Mitteroecker, P., Parsons, T. E., Esparza, M., Sjøvold, T., Rolian, C., ... & 

Hallgrímsson, B. (2012). The developmental basis of quantitative craniofacial variation in 

humans and mice.  Evolutionary Biology , 39 (4), 554 -567. 

Matsumura, S. (1931).  6000 illustrated insects of Japan -Empire .

McGuigan, K., & Blows, M. W. (2007). The phenotypic and genetic covariance structure of 

drosphilid wings.  Evolution , 61 (4), 902 -911. 

McGlothlin, J. W., Kobiela, M. E., Wright, H. V., Mahler, D. L., Kolbe, J. J., Losos, J. B., & Brodie, 

E. D., 3rd. (2018). Adaptive radiation alon g a deeply conserved genetic line of least resistance 

in Anolis lizards.  Evolution Letters, 2 (4), 310 -322. 

McGuigan, K. J. M. (2006). Studying phenotypic evolution using multivariate quantitative genetics. 

Molecular Ecology, 15 (4), 883 -896. 

Merilä, J., Bjorklund, M., & Gustafsson, L. (1994). Evolution of Morphological Differences with 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

Moderate Genetic Correlations among Traits as Exemplified by 2 Flycatcher Species 

(Ficedula, Muscicapidae).  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 52 (1), 19 -30. 

Merilä, J. & Björklund, M. (2004). Phenotypic integration as a constraint and adaptation.  Phenotypic 

integration: studying the ecology and evolution of complex phenotypes , 107 -129. 

Mezey, J. G., & Houle, D. (2003). Comparing G matrices: Are common principal components 

informative?  Genetics, 165 (1), 411 -425. 

Mezey, J. G., & Houle , D. (2005). The dimensionality of genetic variation for wing shape in 

Drosophila melanogaster.  Evolution , 59 (5), 1027 -1038. 

Mitteroecker, P., & Bookstein, F. (2011). Linear Discrimination, Ordination, and the Visualization 

of Selection Gradients in Modern Morphometrics.  Evolutionary Biology, 38 (1), 100 -114. 

Monteiro, L. R., Duarte, L. C., & dos Reis, S. F. (2003). Environmental correlates of geographical 

variation in skull and mandible shape of the punar rat Thrichomys apereoides (Rodentia: 

Echimyidae).  Journal of Zoology, 261 (1), 47 -57. 

Morrissey, M. B., Hangartner, S., & Monro, K. (2019). A note on simulating null distributions for G 

matrix comparisons.  Evolution , 73 (12), 2512 -2517. 

Myers, E. M., Janzen, F. J., Adams, D. C., & Tucker, J. K. (2006). Quantitative genetics of plastron 

shape in slider turtles (Trachemys scripta).  Evolution , 60 (3), 563 -572. 

Olazcuaga, L., Loiseau, A., Parrinello, H., Paris, M., Fraimout, A., Guedot, C., ...  & Gautier, M. 

(2020). A whole -genome scan for association with invasion success in the fruit fly Drosophila 

suzukii using contrasts of allele frequencies corrected for population structure.  Molecular 

biology and evolution , 37(8), 2369 -2385. 

Pélabon, C., Hansen, T. F., Carter, A. J., & Houle, D. (2010). Evolution of variation and variability 

under fluctuating, stabilizing, and disruptive selection.  Evolution , 64 (7), 1912 -1925. 

Pélabon, C., Agudelo -Cantero, G. A., Araya Ajoy, Y. G., Bolstad, G. H., Cheng, C., Galis, F., ... & 

Wright, J. (2025). Evolvability: progress and key questions.  BioScience , 75 (12), 1042 -1057. 

Phillips, P. C., Whitlock, M. C., & Fowler, K. (2001). Inbreeding changes the shape of the genetic 

covariance matrix in Drosophila melanogaster.  Genetics , 158 (3), 1137 -1145. 

Pitchers, W., Pool, J. E., & Dworkin, I. (2013). Altitudinal clinal variation in wing size and shape in 

African Drosophila melanogaster: one cline or many?.  Evolution , 67 (2), 438 -452. 

Polly, P. D. (2008). Developmental dynamics and G -matrices: Can morphometric spaces be used to 

model phenotypic evolution?.  Evolutionary biology , vol. 35, no 2, p. 83 -96. 

Prentis, P. J., Wilson, J. R., Dormontt, E. E., Richardson, D. M., & Lowe, A. J. (2008). Adaptive 

evolution in invasive species.  Trends in Plant Science, 13 (6), 288 -294. 

Puentes, A., Granath, G., & Agren, J. (2016). Similarity in G matrix structure among natural 

populations of Arabidopsis lyrata.  Evolution, 70 (10), 2370 -2386. 

R Core Team (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R -project.org/ 

Rius, M., & Darling, J. A. (2014). How important is intraspecific genetic admixture to the success of 

colonising populations?  Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 29 (4), 233 -242. 

Roff, D. (2000). The evolution of the G matrix: selection or drift?  Heredity , 84 (2), 135 -142. 

Rogers, A. R., & Harpending, H. C. (1983). Population structure and quantitative characters. 

Genetics , 105 (4), 985. 

Rogers, A. R., & Harpending , H. C. (1983). Population structure and quantitative characters. 

Genetics , 105 (4), 985. 

Schluter, D. (1996). Adaptive radiation along genetic lines of least resistance.  Evolution , 50 (5), 1766 -

1774. 

Shaw, F. H., Shaw, R. G., Wilkinson, G. S., & Turelli, M. (1995). Changes in genetic variances and 

covariances: G whiz!.  Evolution , 1260 -1267. 

Sikkink, K. L., Reynolds, R. M., Cresko , W. A., & Phillips, P. C. (2015). Environmentally induced 

changes in correlated responses to selection reveal variable pleiotropy across a complex 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

genetic network.  Evolution, 69 (5), 1128 -1142. 

Siren, J., Ovaskainen, O., & Merila, J. (2017). Structure and stability of genetic variance -covariance 

matrices: A Bayesian sparse factor analysis of transcriptional variation in the three -spined 

stickleback.  Molecular Ecology, 26 (19), 5099 -5113. 

Spitze, K. (1993). Population structure in Daphnia obtusa: quantitative genetic and allozymic 

variation.  Genetics , 135 (2), 367 -374. 

Steppan, S. J., Phillips, P. C., & Houle, D. (2002). Comparative quantitative genetics: evolution of 

the G matrix.  Trends in ecology & evolution , 17 (7), 320 -327. 

Sztepanacz, J. L., & Blows, M. W. (2015). Dominance genetic variance for traits under directional 

selection in Drosophila serrata.  Genetics , 200 (1), 371 -384. 

Sztepanacz, J. L., & Houle, D. (2021). Allometry constrains the evolution of sexual dimorphism in 

Drosophila across 33 million years of divergence.  Evolution , 75 (5), 1117 -1131. 

Stuart, Y. E., Veen, T., Weber, J. N., Hanson, D., Ravinet, M., Lohman, B. K., ... & Bolnick, D. I. 

(2017). Contrasting effects of environment and genetics generate a continuum of parallel 

evolution.  Nature ecology & evolution , 1(6), 0158. 

Svensson, E. I., Arnold, S. J., Bürger, R., Csilléry, K., Draghi, J., Henshaw, J. M., Jones, A. G., De 

Lisle, S., Marques, D. A., & McGuigan, K. (2021). Correlational selection in the age of 

genomics.  Nature Ecology and Evolution , 1 -12. 

Szűcs, M., Vahsen, M. L., Melbourne, B. A., Hoover, C., Weiss -Lehman, C., & Hufbauer, R. A. 

(2017). Rapid adaptive evolution in novel environments acts as an architect of population 

range expansion.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114 (51), 13501 -13506. 

Tsuboi, M., Gaboriau, T., & Latrille, T. (2024). An introduction to the special issue: inferring 

macroevolutionary patterns and processes from microevolutionary mechanisms.  Journal of 

evolutionary biology , 37 (12), 1395 -1401. 

Turelli, M. (1988). Phenotypic evolution, constant covariances, and the maintenance of additive 

variance.  Evolution , 1342 -1347. 

Uesugi, A., Connallon, T., Kessler, A., & Monro, K. (2017). Relaxation of herbivore‐mediated 

selection drives the evolution of genetic covariances between plant competitive and defense 

traits.  Evolution, 71 (6), 1700 -1709. 

Walsh, B., & Blows, M. W. (2009). Abundant Genetic Variation plus Strong Selection = Multivariate 

Genetic Constraints: A Geometric View of Adaptation.  Annual Review of Ecology Evolution 

and Systematics, 40 , 41 -59. 

Walsh, B., & Lynch, M. (2018).  Evolution and selection of quantitative traits . Oxford University 

Press. 

Walter, G. M., Aguirre, J. D., Blows, M. W., & Ortiz -Barrientos, D. (2018). Evolution of genetic 

variance during adaptive radiation.  The American Naturalist , 191 (4), E108 -E128. 

Walter, G. M. (2023). Experimental evidence that  phenotypic evolution but not plasticity occurs along 

genetic lines of least resistance in homogeneous environments.  The American Naturalist ,

201 (4), E70 -E89. 

Wares, J. (2005). Mechanisms that drive evolutionary change. Insights from species introduction and 

invasions.  Species invasions: insights into ecology, evolution, and biogeography , 229 -257. 

Whitlock, M. C. (2008). Evolutionary inference from QST.  Molecular ecology , 17 (8), 1885 -1896. 

Wood, C. W., & Brodie, E. D., 3rd. (2015). Environmental effects on the structure of the G -matrix. 

Evolution, 69 (11), 2927 -2940. 

Yang, C. J., Samayoa, L. F., Bradbury, P. J., Olukolu, B. A., Xue, W., York, A. M., ... & Doebley, J. 

F. (2019). The genetic architecture of teosinte catalyzed and constrained maize domestication. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116 (12), 5643 -5652. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

FIGURES AND TABLES 

Figure 1. Sampling locations of the six D. suzukii populations. Adult D. suzukii were sampled from the 

wild in 3 countries (dark grey shading) from the native range in Japan (green circles) and the invasive range 

in France (blue circles) and the USA (red circles). 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 2. Phenotypic divergence of the invasive populations from their common ancestor. Graphical 

representation of the vectors of phenotypic divergence of each invasive population (solid line) from their 

hypothetical common ancestor (Japan, grey filled circle). The vectors are projecte d on the multivariate 

divergence space where d1 and d2 represent the first and second main axes of the multivariate divergent 

covariance matrix. The magnitude (length of the arrow) and direction (angles between arrows) of the vectors 

reflect the difference in mean wing shape phenotype among groups. Dashed lines represent the vector of 

phenotypic divergence of the average wing shape by country (USA or France) from the Japanese hypothetical 

ancestor. Colors correspond to Japanese (green), French (blue) and Am erican (red) wing shape. Wing shape 

outlines represent the mean shape of each group and show the wing shape evolution from the Japanese 

ancestor. Outlines were obtained via a thin plate spine warping of a reference outline using MorphoJ 

(Klingenberg, 2011) , based on the position of landmarks and are used for visualization purposes only. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3. Graphical representation of the population -specific G -matrices. For each population -specific G

matrix, the projection of the mean G matrix (red circles) onto th e first two axes of the eigen decomposition 

(PC1 & PC2) are shown (top 6 panels). For each population, a sample of 200 ellipses corresponding to 200 

random posteriors drawn from the MCMC outputs (grey ellipses) illustrate the uncertainty around our 

estimat ed G matrices. Results from the eigen decomposition of each matrix is shown by plotting the percentage 

of variance explained by the first 11 PCs (blue histograms; mean total variance explained across PC and 

populations = 91.22%) for both observed matrices, and null matrices (black filled points). This shows that the 

main axes of variation (PC1 and PC2) explain more variance than expected at random. It is important to note 

that no conclusions should be drawn beyond PC3, as differences in eigenvectors between null and observed G

matrix prevent interpretation. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4. Results of the genetic covariance tensor analysis. Eigenvalues of the 5 observed eigentensors of 

S (black) are shown against the random expectation from the estimated null G matrices(grey). Overlapping of 

the 95% confidence intervals indicates that the six observed G matrices are not more different than a random 

set of G matrices. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figu re 5. Percentage of genetic variance along divergence vectors. A) Conceptual figure for our test of 

selection based on the percentage of genetic variance along divergence vectors. In a bivariate trait space, 

population means (black filled circle) of three populations have diverged from a common ancestor (ANC). The 

within -population variance (Var.pop) corresponds to the amount of genetic variance in the direction of the 

phenotypic change between the ancestor (ANC) and the focal population. The ancestral var iance (Var.ANC) 

corresponds to the amount of genetic variance in the ancestral G matrix, along that same divergence axis. 

According to our hypothesis, reduction of the within -population variance (shortening of the Var.pop arrow) 

would be suggestive of the effect of selection. B) For each population, the observed amount of genetic variation 

in the direction of divergence was computed (Var. pop.) and compared to the amount of variation in the 

ancestral G matrix in that direction (Var. ANC). The percentage of genetic variance along this axis is plotted 

(filled grey dot) with the 95% highest posterior density interval (black horizontal lines) next to the population 

code on the y axis. We hypothesize that selection would result in a reduction in genetic variance in the 

directions of divergence. This is clearly not observed, as none of the directions shows depleted genetic 

variance. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.01.02.573869 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 6. Response to a hypothetical selection compared to observed shape changes. The observed wing shape change of the average Fr ench (blue arrows) 

and USA (red arrows) population are shown, representing the directions of change for each landmark, from the ancestral wing s hape. The shape change associated 

with the selection differential defined by the shape difference between slow a nd fast fliers from Fraimout et al (2018) ( svelocity ) is shown with black arrows on 

the left panels. The shape change corresponding to the response to selection (∆z) based on the MCMC estimates of the ancestra l G and P matrices is shown with 

black arrows on right panels. The results show similarity in the shift of the basal landmarks between the divergence of French populations and the theoretical 

response to selection (alignment between blue and black arrows of the leftmost landmarks; upper right panel) but no congruence in any other comparison, 

suggesting limited evidence for selection on flight performance in these populations. Population  JP -TOK  JP -SAP  US -DAY  US -WAT  FR -PAR 

JP -SAP  1.03 

[0.83:1.3] 

US -DAY  0.88 

[0.69:1.08] 

0.87 

[0.66:1.03] 

US -WAT  1.17 

[0.95:1.45] 

1.14 

[0.9:1.38] 

1.32 

[1.09:1.65] 

FR -PAR  0.93 

[0.73:1.13] 

0.89 

[0.7:1.07] 

1.05 

[0.83:1.29]] 

0.79 

[0.63:0.94] 

FR -MON  0.93 

[0.73:1.11] 

0.88 

[0.7:1.06] 

1.04 

[0.83:1.26] 

0.76 

[0.62:0.92] 

0.95 

[0.79:1.2] 

Table 1. Pairwise comparison of G matrices’ volumes. For each pair of G matrix the posterior mode of the 

ratio between volumes is shown along with the Highest Posterior Density (HPD) interval. Bold values 

correspond to significant differences between two m atrices volumes whether the ratio is significantly > 1 

(row matrix is larger) or < 1 (row matrix is smaller).