Title: Reinforcement Learning from Rich Feedback with Distributional DAgger

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05152v2

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 01:15:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Reinforcement Learning from Rich Feedback with Distributional DAgger 

Rishabh Agrawal , Jacob Fein-Ashley , Paria Rashidinejad 

University of Southern California Reasoning models have advanced rapidly, but the dominant reinforcement learning from verifiable rewards (RLVR) recipe remains surprisingly narrow: sample many responses and reward each with a single bit indicating whether the final answer is correct. Yet many settings provide rich feedback ,including execution traces, tool outputs, expert corrections, and model self-evaluations. We study how to use such feedback through a distributional variant of the classic imitation learning algorithm DAgger, where the learner has local access to an expert distribution on states visited by the current policy. This yields a simple forward cross-entropy objective that admits a blackbox expert and whose sequence-level gradient conduct rich credit assignment by propagating future expert-student disagreement back to earlier decisions. We show that prior RL with self-distillation objectives based on reverse KL or Jensen-Shannon fail to guarantee monotonic policy improvement: even when the expert has higher reward, their updates may increase probability on worse actions. In contrast, we show that forward cross-entropy admits monotonic policy improvement and enjoys guarantees on regret. We further show that our objective optimizes a lower bound on teacher-weighted likelihood of success, leading to improved Pass@N. Empirically, our approach, DistIL, improves over RLVR and RL with self-distillation baselines across a variety of domains: scientific reasoning, coding, and solving hard mathematical problems. 

Date: June 3, 2026 

Website: https://rishabh-1086.github.io/project-distIL 

Code: https://github.com/rishabh-1086/distIL 

Correspondence: {rishabha, feinashl, paria.rashidinejad}@usc.edu 

Figure 1 Validation Best@16 (top) and Maj@16 (bottom) over training for RL with self-distillation algorithm SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026) and DistIL (ours) on Qwen3-8B across four scientific reasoning domains: biology, chemistry, materials, and physics. DistIL generally achieves higher validation performance than SDPO across domains and metrics, with gains often appearing early and sustained during training. SDPO exhibits greater variability with longer training, including a pronounced decline in biology Best@16 after roughly 100 steps and larger oscillations in chemistry and physics; DistIL is comparatively more stable. 

1

> arXiv:2606.05152v2 [cs.LG] 5 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Reasoning large language models have made significant recent progress (Jaech et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Comanici et al., 2025; Olmo et al., 2025). The dominant paradigm, reinforcement learning from verifiable rewards (RLVR) improves reasoning by sampling many candidate solutions from the model and providing each with a single bit of feedback: whether the final answer is correct. This simple paradigm has been remarkably successful in domains such as coding and mathematical and scientific reasoning tasks where final answers can be checked automatically (Tan et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2025; Zeng et al., 2025; Pan and Liu, 2025; Luo et al., 2025). However, RLVR has important limitations. A scalar terminal reward is typically broadcast across the entire response, causing every token to receive the same weight regardless of its actual contribution. This provides little credit assignment: it does not reveal which tokens, phrases, or reasoning steps caused the success or failure. Moreover, the paradigm’s reliance on automatic final-answer verification makes it difficult to apply in unverifiable domains, where final answer correctness cannot be easily checked. Many important settings, however, provide feedback that is far richer than a single correctness bit: error logs, unit-test results, natural-language critiques, hints, or ground-truth responses. Inspired by the seminal work on knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), a growing line of research seeks to exploit these signals through on-policy self-distillation, in which the current model is conditioned on feedback to produce a privileged teacher, whose distribution is then distilled back into the original policy (Hübotter et al., 2026; Zhao et al., 2026). This turns sparse outcome supervision into dense token-level guidance. In particular, viewed through the lens of policy gradients, these objectives induce an implicit form of credit assignment: different tokens receive different weights, e.g., determined by the local discrepancy between the student and feedback-conditioned teacher policies (Hübotter et al., 2026). 

## 1.1 Contributions 

This motivates us to take a closer look at on-policy self-distillation. Many classical policy-optimization methods—such as conservative policy iteration (Kakade and Langford, 2002), natural policy gradient (Kakade, 2001), and trust-region policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2015)—are designed around monotonic policy improvement : under an idealized update, such as a sufficiently small natural-gradient or trust-region step, each update should increase policy’s average reward. This raises a natural question for on-policy self-distillation. If a feedback-conditioned teacher achieves higher average reward than the student, should an idealized update that pulls the student toward the teacher improve the student? We show that, for on-policy self-distillation objectives with f -divergences, the answer is in general, no. To address this, we revisit the classical DAgger framework (Ross et al., 2011) and propose a distributional variant that enjoys monotonic policy-improvement and regret guarantees, while empirically outperforming existing methods. Concretely, we make the following contributions: 

Provable limitations of existing on-policy self-distillation. We begin by analyzing on-policy self-distillation objectives based on general f -divergences, a class that subsumes existing objectives such as reverse-KL divergence (Hübotter et al., 2026) and Jensen–Shannon divergence (Zhao et al., 2026). We identify two limitations. First, we prove that optimizing an f -divergence does not, in general, guarantee monotonic policy improvement; even when the teacher is strictly better than the student and the update is an idealized natural-gradient step, the objective can increase probability on suboptimal actions (Propositions 1, 2). Second, existing methods typically rely on approximate gradients that provide only local credit assignment, measuring teacher–student discrepancy at individual tokens. We show that this local approximation ignores how early token choices shape the future states where teacher–student disagreement appears, erasing precisely the delayed feedback needed to credit earlier decisions. We prove that this can cause learning to converge to strictly suboptimal policies (Proposition 3). 

DistIL: A new algorithm for RL with rich feedback. To address these limitations, we propose DistIL, a distributional variant of the DAgger imitation-learning algorithm. DistIL optimizes a forward cross-entropy loss between the feedback-conditioned teacher and the student policy, on states visited by the student (c.f. Equation (4) ). Unlike reverse-KL or Jensen–Shannon self-distillation objectives, DistIL can leverage teacher log-probabilities when available, but does not require them and its objective can be estimated using samples from the teacher alone, and therefore naturally accommodates black-box teachers such as external models or 2human experts. Furthermore, DistIL performs future-aware credit assignment: teacher–student disagreement at later timesteps can be propagated back to the earlier decisions (c.f. Equation (5)). 

DistIL enjoys theoretical guarantees. Beyond algorithmic simplicity, DistIL comes with several theoretical guarantees that explain why the objective is well aligned with reward improvement. First, we show that DistIL’s forward cross-entropy loss guarantees monotonic-improvement property missing from prior self-distillation objectives: under standard local assumptions, moving toward a better teacher improves the student’s expected reward (Proposition 4). Second, we prove that DistIL achieves sublinear regret (Theorem 1). Finally, we show that DistIL maximizes a teacher-weighted lower bound on the expected log-likelihood of success, drawing connections to maximum-likelihood RL (Tajwar et al., 2026) and providing a principled explanation for improvements in pass@ N for any N (Proposition 5, c.f. Figure 1). 

Empirical results. The theoretical advantages of DistIL translate into consistent empirical gains. Across scientific reasoning (Feng et al., 2024), coding (Jain et al., 2024), and challenging mathematical reasoning benchmarks, DistIL outperforms strong RL and self-distillation baselines, including SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026), OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026), and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024). The gains hold across different feedback regimes, from sparse final-answer correctness to execution traces and ground-truth solutions, highlighting the practical benefit of pairing a reward-aligned objective with future-aware credit assignment. 

# 2 Background and Problem Formulation 

Contextual Markov decision process and reinforcement learning. We model consider finite-horizon con-textual Markov decision processes as the environment. At the beginning of each episode, a context (i.e., a prompt/problem) x ∼ ρ is sampled. The initial state is set to be the context s1 = ( x, ∅). At each timestep 

t ∈ [H], the policy selects an action yt ∼ π(· | st), and the environment transitions to the next state. In the autoregressive language-model setting considered in this work, the transition is deterministic and the next state is obtained by appending the sampled action to the current prefix. Thus, we write st = ( x, y 1: t−1). For simplicity, we sometimes write the entire trajectory as y = ( y1, . . . , y H ).Given per-step rewards rt(x, y 1: t), the goal of reinforcement learning is to learn a policy maximizing expected cumulative reward: 

J(π) := Ex∼ρEy∼π(·| x)

[ H∑

> t=1

rt(x, y 1: t)

]

. (1) 

Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR). In many reasoning tasks, rewards can be obtained from automatic verifiers: code can be checked with unit tests, while in some mathematical and scientific problems final answer correctness can be checked. This gives rise to reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR), where supervision is typically sparse and outcome-based: rt = 0 for t < H , and the terminal reward rH evaluates the final answer, often as a binary correctness signal. Methods such as GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) and its variants (Liu et al., 2025; Ahmadian et al., 2024) optimize policies using such rewards. Despite its simplicity and empirical success, RLVR provides only delayed supervision. Furthermore, the terminal reward is broadcast across the response, giving every token the same weight regardless of its role in the reasoning process. This makes credit assignment difficult. Moreover, in group-relative or advantage-based updates (Shao et al., 2024), the learning signal can vanish when all sampled responses receive identical outcomes, such as all correct or all incorrect. 

Learning from rich feedback via distillation. In many settings, supervision extends beyond final-answer correctness and includes richer signals such as execution traces, error messages, expert annotations, or feedback from other models. These signals provide more informative guidance and can be leveraged to improve learning. Inspired by knowledge distillation, a recent line of work studies variants of on-policy distillation , where a student policy πS is trained to match a teacher policy πT along trajectories sampled from the student (Agarwal et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025a; Xiao et al., 2026; Zeng et al., 2026). In on-policy self -distillation, the teacher is derived from the same model but conditioned on additional feedback f :

πT (· | x, y 1: t−1) := πθ (· | x, f, y 1: t−1), πS (· | x, y 1: t−1) := πθ (· | x, y 1: t−1),

3where πT denotes the feedback-conditioned teacher and πS denotes the student policy. Given trajectories 

y ∼ πS (· | x), training minimizes 

Lself-distill := Ex∼ρ, y ∼πS (·| x)



> |y|

∑

> t=1

D(πS (· | x, y 1: t−1) ∥ πT (· | x, y 1: t−1)) 

 , (2) where D is a divergence measure, such as reverse KL in SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026) or Jensen–Shannon divergence in OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026). 

Problem formulation: RL from rich feedback. We now formalize the reinforcement-learning problem considered in this paper. We work with the deterministic contextual MDP introduced above, and let πθ ∈ Π

denote a policy parameterized by θ. As in the self-distillation setting, at each training round rich feedback f

induces a privileged teacher policy πT , which is held fixed during the student update. Our central assumption is that this feedback is useful: for some underlying, possibly unknown reward function, the feedback-induced teacher is at least as good as the current unconditioned student in expected reward. Formally, for the student policy πθ , we assume 

∆ := Ex∼ρ,,y ∼πT (·| x) [r(x, y )] − Ex∼ρ,,y ∼πθ (·| x) [r(x, y )] ≥ 0. (3) For example, the above assumption says that a model conditioned on execution logs, critiques, hints, or a correct solution should, on average, achieve a higher success rate than the same model without access to that feedback. This assumption is precisely what makes the self-distillation paradigm meaningful; if the privileged teacher were not better aligned with the task reward than the student, then distilling the teacher would have no reason to improve the student. Since the reward r may be unknown, the learning algorithms do not optimize the reward objective directly and they instead optimize distillation-based surrogate losses. 

Notation. For distributions p and q, we write KL (p∥q) := Ey∼p [log p(y)/q (y)] to denote the Kullback–Leibler divergence and JS (p∥q) := 12 KL (p∥m) + 12 KL (q∥m) for Jensen–Shannon divergence, where m := 12 (p + q). We also write H×(p, q ) := −Ey∼p[ log q(y)] for forward cross-entropy. The operator sg (·) denotes stop-gradient. We write x ≲ y when there exists a constant c > 0 such that x ≤ cy .

# 3 Limitations of Existing On-Policy Self-Distillation Methods 

The formulation above raises the following question: if rich feedback induces a better teacher, does self-distillation necessarily turn this advantage into policy improvement? In this section, we start by analyzing the two consequential choices made in existing methods: the divergence measure used to distill the teacher, and the gradient estimator used to optimize it. We show that both choices can fail in principle, even in favorable, idealistic scenarios. First, we ask whether divergence minimization guarantees monotonic policy improvement when the teacher is better than the student (Section 3.1). Second, we show that the local, tokenwise gradients used in prior works (Zhao et al., 2026; Hübotter et al., 2026) can ignore how early decisions affect future teacher–student disagreement, leading to strictly suboptimal policies (Section 3.2). 

## 3.1 Does divergence minimization guarantee monotonic policy improvement? 

A useful property for policy optimization algorithms is monotonic policy improvement : under an idealized update, the policy should move in a direction that increases expected reward. This principle underlies classical methods such as natural policy gradient (NPG) (Kakade, 2001), and is approximately enforced by widely used trust-region and proximal methods such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024). This motivates the analogous question for self-distillation: if the teacher has higher expected reward than the student, does an ideal update that pushes the student toward the teacher necessarily improve the student? We answer this question for general f -divergence self-distillation objectives, a class that includes reverse KL as used in SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026) and Jensen–Shannon divergence as used in OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026). The proposition below shows that, even in contextual bandits, minimizing such objectives does not in general guarantee monotonic policy improvement. 4Proposition 1 (f -divergence self-distillation does not guarantee monotonic policy improvement ). Let πT

be a fixed teacher and πθ a student policy. For the softmax parameterization, the Natural Policy Gradient (NPG) step minimizing an f -divergence Df (πT ∥πθ ), i.e., θ′ = θ − η F (θ)−1∇θ Df (πT ∥πθ ), satisfies 

J(πθ′ ) = J(πθ ) − η Cov y∼πθ (r(y), g (y)) + O(η2),

where g(y) = f

( πT (y) 

> πθ(y)

)

− πT (y)  

> πθ(y)

f ′

( πT (y) 

> πθ(y)

)

. Consequently, for sufficiently small η > 0, the NPG step provides a policy improvement if and only if Cov y∼πθ (r(y), g (y)) < 0. In particular, a positive teacher–student reward gap ∆ > 0 alone does not guarantee monotonic policy improvement. 

A detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.1. Proposition 1 highlights a simple but important distinction: a teacher can be better on average, while the update induced by a distillation objective can still point in a reward-decreasing direction. For SDPO, which corresponds to reverse KL, the first-order change in reward is governed by 

Cov y∼πθ

(

r(y), log πθ (y)

π(y)

)

.

This covariance measures how the student–teacher mismatch aligns with reward. Importantly, the covariance is not determined by the teacher’s average advantage ∆, defined in (3) . Instead, it depends on where the student and teacher differ. Reverse KL improves the student only when the trajectories over-weighted by the student relative to the teacher are, on average, low-reward. If the student over-weights trajectories that are actually high-reward, the same update may suppress good behavior and decrease expected reward. The failure can already occur in a three-action bandit. Imagine three trajectories: excellent ( r = 1 ), mediocre (r = 0 .5), and bad ( r = 0 ). The teacher may be better overall because it puts more probability on the excellent trajectory, but it also puts far less probability than the student on the mediocre trajectory. A reverse-KL update then treats the student’s extra mass on the mediocre trajectory as an error to be corrected; after normalization, this can increase probability on the bad trajectory even though it has zero reward. Thus, being better on average is not enough and the distillation direction must also be aligned with reward. The next proposition makes this construction concrete and formally proves the failure result for reverse-KL distillation. 

Proposition 2 (Reverse-KL distillation can decrease reward ). There exist universal constants c0, c 1 > 0

and a three-armed bandit with rewards in [0 , 1] , a fixed teacher policy πT , and a student policy πθ such that the teacher is better than the student by a constant margin ∆ ≥ c0 > 0 but the natural policy gradient step minimizing the reverse KL objective, decreases the student’s expected reward. In particular, for all sufficiently small η > 0, we have J(πθ′ ) ≤ J(πθ ) − c1η. 

The detailed construction is given in Appendix A.2. It uses a three-action bandit where the teacher has a constant reward advantage over the student. Nevertheless, due to the normalization in the reverse-KL NPG update, the update can increase probability on a low-reward action whose student–teacher log-ratio is below average. Thus, expected reward can decrease even though the teacher is better overall. Takeaway: Self-distillation with f -divergence does not guarantee monotonic policy improvement. For f -divergence distillation, policy improvement depends on whether the induced update direction is aligned with reward, not only on whether the teacher has higher expected reward. Thus, even when the teacher is strictly superior to the students, updates induced by reverse KL in SDPO and Jensen–Shannon divergence in OPSD can degrade the student. 

## 3.2 Local credit assignment leads to suboptimal policies 

Next, we examine the gradient approximations used in existing self-distillation methods such as SDPO and OPSD. In the self-distillation objective (2) , the student policy πθ appears in two places: inside the divergence, and in the trajectory distribution that determines which states are visited. Keeping the teacher πT fixed, the 5full gradient of this objective decomposes into a local term and a future-credit term: 

∇θ Lself-distill = E



> |y|

∑

> t=1

∇θ D(πθ (· | st)∥πT (· | st)) 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> := ∇local

+ E



> |y|

∑

> t=1

∇θ log πθ (yt | st)

∑ 

> τ≥t

D(πθ (· | sτ )∥πT (· | sτ )) 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> := ∇future

,

where st = ( x, y 1: t−1). The first term is the tokenwise distillation gradient, which updates the policy using only the local mismatch between the student and teacher at the current state. For example, under reverse KL, this term weights ∇θ log πθ (y | st) by the local log-ratio log πT (y|st)  

> πθ(y|st)

, yielding an implicit form of token-level credit assignment. SDPO and OPSD effectively approximate the full gradient by retaining only this local term, ∇θ Lself-distill ≈∇local . This drops the second term, which is precisely a credit-to-go term: it assigns credit to an action at step t according to the teacher–student mismatch that appears at future states reached after taking that action. Without this term, the update can miss delayed feedback entirely, assigning no credit to early choices whose consequences appear only downstream. The next proposition proves that this local approximation can lead to strictly suboptimal policies. 

Proposition 3 (Local credit assignment can be strictly suboptimal ). There exist a two-step contextual MDP with action space A = {a, b, c }, a parametric student policy class {πu,v }u,v ∈R, a teacher policy πT , and a reward function r such that, starting from initialization (u, v ) = (0 , 0) , the local credit assignment gradient converges to a policy πlocal with J(πlocal ) = 13 , whereas the full sequence-level gradient converges to a policy 

πseq with J(πseq ) = 25 . Consequently, J(πseq ) > J (πlocal ), and local credit assignment is strictly suboptimal. 

Proposition 3 highlights a fundamental limitation of local tokenwise updates: they may fail to assign credit to earlier decisions, leading to strictly suboptimal solutions. Consequently, methods such as SDPO and OPSD, which rely on such local gradient estimators, can fail to learn from delayed feedback. The construction in Appendix A.3 considers a two-step problem in which the teacher–student mismatch is encountered only along one branch of the decision tree. Under the local objective, the contribution of this mismatch is differentiated while treating the prefix distribution as fixed, giving zero gradient with respect to the first-step decision. As a result, optimization remains at the symmetric initialization and produces a policy with expected reward 1/3. In contrast, the full sequence-level objective accounts for how the first-step decision affects the distribution of future states. This induces a nonzero gradient on the first-step parameter, allowing optimization to change the first-step decision and shift probability mass toward higher-reward actions and attain expected reward 2/5. Thus, local credit assignment can converge to a strictly suboptimal policy even in a simple two-step problem. Takeaway: Tokenwise local gradient approximation can fail to credit early decisions. SDPO and OPSD apply a stop-gradient on the sampling process, so gradients pass only through the per-token divergence and may ignore how current token choices affect future token distributions. This can yield zero gradient for consequential early decisions while the full sequence-level gradient is nonzero, causing convergence to strictly suboptimal policies. Taken together, these results highlight two distinct limitations of existing self-distillation approaches: the objective may induce updates that are not monotonically reward-improving, and local tokenwise gradient approximations may miss the delayed consequences of early decisions. This suggests that learning from rich feedback requires both a more reward-aligned objective and a gradient estimator that preserves sequence-level credit assignment. We develop such an approach next. 

# 4 RL from Rich Feedback with Distributional Imitation Learning 

Distributional imitation learning formulation. We view self-distillation through the lens of on-policy imitation learning , in the spirit of DAgger (Ross et al., 2011): the learner trains on states induced by its own policy, while an expert provides guidance on those visited states. This perspective is especially natural for learning 6from rich feedback, where the student generates trajectories, and feedback induces a privileged teacher that can be queried on the states the student encounters. We develop a distributional variant of DAgger. In contrast to the standard setup where the expert supplies a single action at each visited state, we allow the supervision to take the form of a local teacher distribution: when available, we use πT (· | st); when only samples are available, we estimate the objective using one or more samples yt ∼ πT (· | st). Concretely, we propose the following distributional imitation-learning (DistIL) objective: 

LDistIL (θ) := Ex∼ρ, y ∼πθ (·| x)

[ H∑

> t=1

H×(πT (· | x, y 1: t−1), π θ (· | x, y 1: t−1)) 

]

(4) where we use πT (· | x, y 1: t−1) = sg (πθ (· | x, y 1: t−1, f )) . Importantly, this objective does not require access to the teacher probabilities. It admits unbiased sample-based estimates, while also allowing teacher probabilities to be used when available. This flexibility allows DistIL to accommodate both black-box teachers, such as external models or human experts, as well as feedback-conditioned privileged teachers. This gives DistIL a practical advantage over SDPO, whose objective requires access to teacher probabilities. 

Full gradients enabling future-aware credit assignment. Motivated by the failure of local gradient approx-imations established in Section 3.2, we optimize LDistIL (θ) defined in (4) using full gradients rather than treating the student-induced state distribution as frozen. In Appendix B.1, we show that the gradients of DistIL objectives are given by: 

∇θ LDistIL = Ex∼ρ,y ∼πθ (·| x)

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ H×(

πT (· | st), π θ (· | st)

)]︸ ︷︷ ︸

> local credit assignment

+ Ex∼ρ,y ∼πθ (·| x)

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ log πθ (at | st)

(∑

> τ >t

H×(

πT (· | sτ ), π θ (· | sτ )

))] ︸ ︷︷ ︸

> future-credit assignment

.

(5) The DistIL gradient decomposes into two complementary terms: a teacher-weighted local imitation term and a future-aware credit-assignment term. 

• The first term provides teacher-weighted local imitation . At each visited state st, its inner gradient is ∇θ H×(πT (· | st), π θ (· | st) ) = − ∑ 

> y

πT (y | st)∇θ log πθ (y | st), so the student increases token log-probabilities in proportion to the teacher’s probabilities. This teacher-weighted form is central to DistIL: unlike SDPO-style local updates, which weight student log-probabilities by a student–teacher mismatch 

log πT (y|st)  

> πθ(y|st)

, DistIL imitates the teacher distribution directly. This direct imitation is what yields the reward-aligned update direction behind DistIL’s monotonic-improvement guarantee (c.f. Proposition 4). The same design also allows the gradient to be estimated from teacher samples when only black-box access is available. 

• The second term provides future-aware credit assignment . It carries teacher–student disagreement at later prefixes, measured by cross-entropy, back through ∇θ log πθ (yt | st) to the earlier tokens that made those prefixes likely. 

DistIL algorithm. Algorithm 1 provides a practical variant of DistIL, used in our experiments. The algorithm instantiates the distributional imitation objective in (4) with the future-aware credit-assignment term in (5) .In practice, we normalize the cumulative future loss to avoid length bias in long generations (Gu et al., 2024; Rashidinejad and Tian, 2025). We optimize the objective with a PPO-style trust-region update. Following prior self-distillation methods, the teacher is obtained through an exponential moving average copy of the student (Hübotter et al., 2026) or fixed as the initial student parameters (Zhao et al., 2026), conditioned on the rich feedback. 7Algorithm 1 Distributional Imitation Learning (DistIL) with Rich Feedback 

Require: Student policy πθ1 , teacher policy πϕ with parameters initialized at ϕ := θ1, prompt distribution ρ,learning rate η, number of iterations N , group size G, update parameter β ∈ [0 , 1] . 

> 1:

for i = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 2:

Sample a prompt x ∼ ρ 

> 3:

for j = 1 , . . . , G do  

> 4:

Sample rollout yj ∼ πθi (· | x) and collect feedback fj . 

> 5:

Set state st ← (x, y j,<t ). 

> 6:

for t = 1 , . . . , |yj | do  

> 7:

Compute future credit Cfut  

> j,t

← 1 

> |yj|− t−1

∑ 

> τ >t

H×

(

sg (πϕ(· | sτ , f j )) , π θi (· | sτ )

) 

> 8:

Compute gradient 

∇θ LDistIL ← 1

G

> G

∑ 

> j=1
> |yj|

∑

> t=1

Cfut  

> j,t

· ∇ θ log πθi (yj,t | st) − ∑

> a

sg (πϕ(a | st, f j )) 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> =Local credit

·∇ θ log πθi (a | st) 

> 9:

Update θi using PPO-style to get θi+1  

> 10:

Update teacher parameters: ϕ ← βϕ + (1 − β)θi+1 . 

> 11:

return ˆπ = πθN +1 

# 5 Theoretical Properties of DistIL 

We now turn to the theoretical properties of DistIL. Our analysis shows that the same design choices that make DistIL natural for rich feedback also align it with reward improvement. The forward cross-entropy objective yields a monotonic policy-improvement guarantee; the resulting online imitation-learning procedure admits a sublinear regret bound; and the objective optimizes a teacher-weighted lower bound on the maximum likelihood of success, explaining why DistIL can improve pass@ n in practice. 

## 5.1 DistIL enjoys monotonic policy improvement 

Section 3.1 showed that distilling a better teacher via f -divergences is not enough to guarantee policy improvement and the surrogate objective must also point in a reward-improving direction. We now show that DistIL has precisely this property. Under a fixed state distribution and a mild local realizability condition, the natural-gradient step induced by the forward cross-entropy objective improves reward whenever the teacher is on average better than the student. The proof is deferred to Appendix B.3. 

Proposition 4 (DistIL enjoys monotonic policy improvement ). Assume the map θ 7 → πθ is twice continuously differentiable. Let ∆ denote the teacher–student gap as defined in (3) and assume teacher–student tangent space realizability: there exists u ∈ Rd such that for all states s and actions y, log πT (a | s) − log πθ (y | s) = 

u⊤∇θ log πθ (y | s). Then, under a fixed state distribution, the natural policy gradient step applied to DistIL 

θ′ = θ − η F (θ)−1∇θ H×(πT ∥πθ ) with sufficiently small η > 0 satisfies: 

J(πθ′ ) = J(πθ ) + η∆ + O(η2).

Consequently, if ∆ > 0, the update gives monotonic policy improvement. 

Proposition 4 explains why the forward cross-entropy objective is aligned with reward improvement. Under a fixed state distribution, DistIL’s natural-gradient update moves the student policy toward the teacher policy itself. In first order, πθ′ (· | s) becomes an interpolation between πθ (· | s) and πT (· | s). Thus, when the teacher has higher expected reward, small movement toward the teacher improves the updated policy. Reverse-KL objective in SDPO does not have this property. Its update is weighted by the log-ratio log (πθ /π T ),so student does not necessarily move toward the teacher. As Section 3.1 shows, this weighting can suppress actions that are good but overrepresented by the student relative to the teacher, and can even increase probability on worse actions after normalization. This distinction is not related to the usual mode-seeking 8versus mode-covering behavior of forward and reverse KL. The argument here is on first-order reward alignment: forward cross-entropy preserves the direction toward a better teacher, while reverse KL can distort it. 

Remark. The tangent-space realizability assumption in Proposition 4 requires the teacher direction to be locally representable by the student policy class. In other words, the mismatch from the student toward the teacher must lie in the span of the student’s score functions. This is a mild condition for expressive policy classes and holds exactly for tabular softmax policies; see Appendix B.2 for more details. Takeaway: DistIL’s update preserves the teacher direction Under the natural-gradient update, DistIL’s forward cross-entropy objective moves the student toward the teacher policy itself. This yields first-order policy improvement whenever the teacher is better on average. Reverse-KL objectives can distort this direction through log-ratio weighting, and therefore may not improve reward even when the teacher is better. 

## 5.2 DistIL regret guarantee 

We next analyze DistIL as an online learning algorithm. Unlike the monotonic-improvement result, which studies a single local update, the regret analysis accounts for the fact that each student update changes the state distribution on which the teacher is queried. The theorem below shows that the policy returned by DistIL achieves a decaying suboptimality gap in terms of the expected reward relative to the teacher policy. The proof can be found in Appendix B.4.3. 

Theorem 1 (DistIL regret guarantee ). Assume finite ratio-based concentrability coefficient C < ∞ (Def-inition 1) and finite KL concentrability coefficient C0 < ∞ (Definition 2). Let ¯σ2 

> πT

denote the worst-case teacher-policy variance (Definition 3) and let μT denote the signed teacher recoverability parameter (Def-inition 4). Then, the policy ˆπ returned by the NPG-DistIL Algorithm 2 with learning rate η = 1

> C

√ 2C0

> n

satisfies: 

J(πT ) − J(ˆ π) ≲

√

¯σ2

> πT

HC 

2

( 2C0

n

)1/4

+ μT HC 

2

√ 2C0

n .

Theorem 1 makes explicit what controls the difficulty of learning from a privileged teacher. The concentrability coefficients C and C0 reflect the student–teacher coverage. The regret bound also contains two quantities that reflect the problem-dependent difficulty of conducting imitation learning in the environment. The variance term ¯σ2 

> πT

measures the stochasticity of the teacher, i.e., how much the value of the teacher’s sampled actions can fluctuate. The recoverability parameter μT measures the worst-case value loss from taking one arbitrary action at a state and then following the teacher thereafter. When the teacher is nearly deterministic, the second term dominates and yields a faster O(n−1/2) rate. In contrast, for highly stochastic teachers, the variance term leads to a slower O(n−1/4) rate. 

Remark (Proof technique). The proof builds on the per-state mirror descent analysis of Chang et al. (2024), but requires a non-trivial extension to the online setting. In particular, their analysis relies on expectations with respect to a fixed distribution, which does not hold in our setting because the state distribution evolves after every student update. We handle this by deriving a recurrence relation for the intermediate error terms and showing that the KL divergence contracts as the student is updated, allowing us to extend the analysis to the online regime. See Appendix B.4 for further details. 

## 5.3 DistIL maximizes a teacher-weighted likelihood of success 

In this section, we show that DistIL can also be understood from a sequence-level success perspective. While the previous results explain why the forward cross-entropy objective induces reward-aligned updates and admits monotonic policy improvement and regret guarantees, they do not yet explain why the method is particularly effective in sampling-based test-time metrics such as Pass@ N and Majority@ N (c.f., Figure 1). In the proposition below, we show that when rewards are binary indicators of success, optimizing DistIL’s distributional imitation objective also maximizes a lower bound on a teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success. 9Proposition 5 (DistIL objective is a lower bound on the teacher-weighted likelihood of success ). For a fixed prompt x and any policy π, denote the success probability pπ (x) := Ey∼π(·| x)[r(x, y )] , where r(x, y ) ∈ { 0, 1}

indicates correctness. Then 

−H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) ≤ pπT (x) log pπθ (x).

In Proposition 5, the right-hand side is the student’s log probability of success on prompt x, weighted by the teacher’s probability of producing a successful response on the same prompt. Thus, minimizing forward cross-entropy maximizes a lower bound on a teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success, placing more weight on prompts where the feedback-conditioned teacher is likely to be correct. The proof, given in Appendix B.5.1, follows by decomposing the teacher cross-entropy into correct and incorrect responses and lower bounding the contribution of correct responses, while noting that the remaining terms are nonnegative. This connection is specific to the teacher-weighted forward cross-entropy structure of DistIL. In contrast, objectives such as SDPO need not yield the same lower bound on the student’s probability of success. See Appendix B.5.2 for a formal statement and analysis. Recent work on maximum-likelihood RL shows that maximizing the likelihood of successful trajectories improves Pass@ N for all N (Tajwar et al., 2026). Proposition 5 therefore provides a principled explanation for DistIL’s strong Pass@ N performance. 

# 6 Experimental results 

We evaluate our method across three representative settings that capture different feedback regimes and levels of supervision: (i) science reasoning benchmarks without rich environment feedback; (ii) coding tasks with rich execution-based feedback; and (iii) mathematical reasoning on challenging problems with access to ground-truth solutions. 

## 6.1 Bootstrapping on model generated correct responses as feedback 

We evaluate in the standard RLVR setting, where only a binary success signal is observed per rollout. Following SDPO, we sample multiple rollouts per input and use successful trajectories as feedback f , training the model to increase their likelihood and converting sparse rewards into a dense, self-supervised signal. 

Setup. We compare against SDPO, on-policy GRPO (trajectories from the current policy), and off-policy GRPO (past rollouts reweighted via importance sampling). For all baselines, we adopt the same hyperparameter settings as in SDPO. Scientific reasoning is assessed on undergraduate-level problems in chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science using the L3 reasoning subset of SciKnowEval (Feng et al., 2024), with a train–test split for in-domain generalization. We initialize from Qwen38B (Yang et al., 2025a) and Olmo3-7B-Instruct (Olmo et al., 2025), and report Best@16 and Maj@16 (Figure 1) and Avg@16 (Table 1) against wall-clock training time using the verl framework (Sheng et al., 2025). 

Empirical Findings. Table 1 and Figure 1 summarize our results. DistIL achieves the best avg@16 performance in the large majority of columns across both model families, with the largest gains in physics and chemistry domains; physics gains reach 8.1/9.6 points at 5h over next-best on Qwen3-8B/OLMo3. Beyond accuracy, DistIL’s lead emerges within ∼20 steps and is largely monotonically sustained (Proposition 4), while SDPO exhibits instability: Best@16 collapses on biology after step 100 and oscillates on chemistry and physics. DistIL’s Best@16 advantage is grounded in Proposition 5: our forward cross-entropy objective maximizes a teacher-weighted lower bound on success probability, implicitly optimizing Pass@N for all N (Tajwar et al., 2026). On-policy GRPO saturates within one hour; off-policy GRPO lags DistIL by 5 + points on reasoning-heavy domains at 5h. 

## 6.2 Learning with rich environment feedback 

We evaluate in environments with rich feedback, where signals go beyond binary success, such as execution errors, which standard RLVR cannot exploit. Following SDPO, we sample multiple rollouts per input and use execution-based feedback to construct supervision. Concretely, rollouts are evaluated against public unit tests, and feedback f is derived from the resulting code execution logs. 10 Table 1 Comparison on scientific reasoning benchmarks (SciKnowEval L3). We report best avg @16 within 1h and 5h of wall-clock training on 4× NVIDIA H200 GPUs. Average is computed over all four domains. Bold denotes the best result per column; underline denotes the second best.                                                                                                           

> Chemistry Physics Biology Materials Average Method 1h 5h 1h 5h 1h 5h 1h 5h 1h 5h
> Qwen3-8B 41 .259 .230 .858 .947 .5
> + GRPO (off-policy) 65 .974 .563 .872 .735 .159 .974 .377 .159 .871 .1
> + GRPO (on-policy) 63 .363 .463 .663 .649 .849 .873 .974 .162 .762 .7
> + SDPO 73 .080 .268 .072 .452 .963 .672 .275 .966 .573 .0
> + DistIL (Ours) 75 .880 .872 .780 .853 .366 .674 .976 .269 .276 .1
> Olmo3-7B-Instruct 22 .837 .716 .236 .728 .4
> + GRPO (off-policy) 39 .756 .755 .363 .335 .655 .870 .975 .050 .462 .7
> + GRPO (on-policy) 51 .457 .562 .762 .749 .849 .873 .373 .559 .360 .9
> + SDPO 70 .279 .259 .864 .949 .552 .971 .878 .162 .868 .8
> + DistIL (Ours) 72 .181 .067 .474 .547 .855 .373 .576 .965 .271 .9

Setup. We compare against SDPO and GRPO with identical hyperparameters as in SDPO on LiveCodeBench (LCBv6) (Jain et al., 2024), using public tests for training feedback and private tests for evaluation, initialized from Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025a). Following (Jain et al., 2024), we report exact correctness by determining whether all test cases are passed (Score/Avg@ k, Score/Maj@ k, Score/Best@ k) and partial correctness: fraction of test cases passed (Accuracy/Avg@ k, Accuracy/Maj@ k, Accuracy/Best@ k), at temperature 0.2, top_p 0.95 .

Empirical Findings. DistIL achieves Accuracy/Avg@16 = 0.656 and Score/Avg@16 = 0.482 , outperforming SDPO ( 0.643 , 0.467 ) and GRPO ( 0.600 , 0.405 ). The large gap over GRPO reflects its fundamental inability to exploit execution feedback. Figure 2 further shows consistent gains across all k on both Best@ k and Maj@ k

for score and accuracy, with the advantage most pronounced at small k. The gap between DistIL and SDPO could be attributed to our theoretically grounded-objective and squence-level credit assignment.            

> Figure 2 LCBv6 evaluation at τ=0.2for checkpoint at step-80 (following SDPO), reporting Score and Accuracy at Best@ kand Maj@ kfor k∈ { 2,4,8,16 }.

## 6.3 Learning to solve hard mathematical reasoning problems 

We evaluate with access to ground-truth solutions as feedback f on very hard mathematical reasoning problems, enabling learning on problems where the base model never produces a correct rollout. In this regime, RLVR methods such as GRPO receive zero advantage and cannot improve, while distillation-based approaches directly leverage ground-truth solutions to make progress. 

Setup. We construct a challenging training set of 738 hard mathematical problems sourced from (CMU AIRe Lab, 2026) and OmniMath (problems with pass@512 = 0 for Qwen3-4B-Instruct), following (Setlur et al., 2026; Qu et al., 2026). We compare against OPSD (forward-KL), SDPO (reverse-KL), GRPO, and SFT, initialized from Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 models. Evaluation covers AIME24, AIME25, HMMT25, AMC23, and Minerva. 

Empirical Findings. Table 2 summarizes results. GRPO exactly matches the base model on both scales, confirming the expected failure: zero pass rate yields zero advantage. SFT degrades below the base model on most benchmarks, indicating overfitting rather than generalizable reasoning. DistIL achieves the best results 11 across the large majority of columns at both model scales. Gains are most substantial on AIME25, where DistIL leads the next-best method on Avg@16 by 3.8 points on Qwen3-4B and 1.4 points on Qwen3-8B. On the stronger Qwen3-8B, where SDPO and OPSD are competitive, DistIL consistently ranks first or second, with no degradation relative to the base model. 

Table 2 Performance comparison on mathematical reasoning benchmarks for Qwen3 models. Sampling configuration is given in Appendix C.2. Bold denotes the best result per column; underline denotes the second best. Following OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026), we report the best checkpoint up to step 100 .                                                                                                                                                   

> AIME24 AIME25 HMMT25 AMC23 Minerva Model Method Avg Pass Avg Pass Avg Pass Avg Pass Avg Pass Qwen3-4B Base 61 .482 .050 .369 .530 .348 .893 .898 .843 .248 .6+SFT 55 .880 .943 .167 .429 .746 .091 .797 .041 .950 .4+GRPO 61 .482 .050 .369 .530 .348 .893 .898 .843 .248 .6+SDPO 60 .985 .449 .674 .132 .850 .993 .999 .843 .452 .0+OPSD 63 .285 .451 .576 .133 .054 .294 .599 .643 .451 .8+DistIL (Ours) 65 .387 .555 .377 .633 .056 .694 .8100 .044 .252 .9
> Qwen3-8B Base 75 .986 .866 .979 .644 .765 .695 .6100 .048 .956 .3+SFT 74 .285 .365 .380 .742 .264 .496 .3100 .048 .256 .2+GRPO 75 .986 .866 .979 .644 .765 .695 .6100 .048 .956 .3+SDPO 76 .989 .568 .384 .045 .671 .296 .5100 .049 .257 .7+OPSD 76 .591 .369 .783 .345 .568 .296 .2100 .049 .257 .8+DistIL (Ours) 76 .490 .771 .185 .046 .471 .496 .6100 .049 .558 .4

Result: DistIL outperforms RLVR and self-distillation baselines. 

On scientific reasoning, DistIL achieves the best Avg@16 on both model families, with gains up to 9.6 points. On coding, DistIL leads on all Best@ k and Maj@ k metrics; GRPO’s large gap reflects its inability to exploit execution feedback. On hard mathematical reasoning problems, where GRPO receives zero gradients and fails to improve the base model, DistIL surpasses on-policy distillation baselines in most settings, with gains up to 3.8 points on AIME25 Avg@16. These results verify the advantages of reward alignment (Proposition 4) and future-aware credit assignment of DistIL for learning from rich feedback. 

## 6.4 Ablation Study 

6.4.1 Credit Assignment 

We compare DistIL against a CE (cross-entropy) baseline that retains only the cross-entropy term of the gradient, performing local credit assignment analogous to SDPO and OPSD. Figure 3 shows results on the Material domain. DistIL consistently outperforms CE throughout training, demonstrating that the full credit assignment across the entire response distribution rather than assigning it locally, is the key driver of performance gains. The CE baseline exhibits higher variance and fails to improve to the level of DistIL’s performance, suggesting that local credit assignment is insufficient for learning robust scientific reasoning. Takeaway: Future credit assignment is advantageous in DistIL. Replacing full sequence-level credit assignment with local token-wise gradients (CE baseline) leads to higher variance and strictly worse performance, confirming Proposition 3. 

6.4.2 Top-1 v/s Top k v/s Full distribution 

We ablate the number of teacher tokens used in the distillation objective across K ∈ { 1, 100 , Full } on the Physics domain (Figure 4). Top-1 distillation, which aligns the student only to the single highest-probability teacher token, underperforms throughout training, reflecting insufficient signal from a single token. Top-100 achieves the best final performance and most stable training trajectory, outperforming both Top-1 and Full distillation. Full distillation, while competitive, introduces noise from low-probability tokens that are unlikely 12 Figure 3 Comparison between DistIL (Ours) and CE. The difference between these methods lies in the credit assignment. CE only does local token-wise creadit assign-ment similar to SDPO and OPSD, whereas DistIL does full credit assignment as given in Eq. (5).  

> Figure 4 omparison of Avg@16 between different number of top-k tokens used for training DistIL on Material bench-mark.

to be informative, slightly degrading performance relative to Top-100. Based on this analysis, we use K=100 in all experiments. 

# 7 Related Work 

Credit Assignment in RLVR. RLVR enables training from automatically verifiable outcomes without human preference annotations (Shao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025). However, supervision is applied at the trajectory level, assigning identical signals to all tokens despite their differing roles, making credit assignment especially challenging for long-horizon reasoning. One line of work addresses this by introducing intermediate supervision via process-reward models or step-wise evaluators (Lightman et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2026b; Luo et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025b; Dai et al., 2025; Cui et al., 2025). While effective, these approaches require additional annotation or auxiliary models. An alternative direction avoids explicit supervision by reweighting updates using internal signals such as entropy or uncertainty, but these rely on heuristic notions of token importance (Xie et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026c; Cheng et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025a; Sun et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025b). In our work, instead of estimating token importance heuristically or learning separate reward models, we construct token-level supervision directly through privileged feedback. This yields structured credit assignment while preserving the simplicity of the verifier-only training pipeline. 

On-Policy Distillation and On-Policy Self-Distillation. On-policy distillation trains a student on its own rollouts while a teacher provides token-level supervision via divergence-based objectives (Agarwal et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Lu and Lab, 2025; Xiao et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2025a). Aligning training with the student’s visitation distribution reduces the distribution mismatch inherent in off-policy approaches, but it typically relies on a stronger external teacher. Recent work extends this paradigm to self-distillation, where a single model provides both supervision and updates. OPSD (Zhao et al., 2026) formulates this as minimizing the divergence between a privileged teacher, which is conditioned on ground-truth reasoning traces, and a student, thereby improving token efficiency. SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026) generalizes this setup to incorporate arbitrary feedback signals (e.g., code execution error logs), while RLSD (Yang et al., 2026a) integrates self-distillation with the GRPO methodologically to stabilize training. However, self-distillation introduces new challenges. It can degrade reasoning by suppressing epistemic uncertainty (Kim et al., 2026), and its success depends critically on alignment between teacher and student distributions as well as the quality of self-generated targets (Li et al., 2026b). Recent methods address these issues through improved supervision and routing strategies, including competence-aware weighting (PACED), iterative self-revision (SD-Zero), and hybrid routing between distillation and RL updates (SRPO) (Xu et al., 2026; He et al., 2026; Li et al., 2026a). In contrast, our approach revisits the objective underlying self-distillation. We adopt a cross-entropy-based formulation with well-behaved optimization properties, resulting in more stable training dynamics and improved gradient estimation. This is related to methods such as DAgger (Ross et al., 2011) in imitation learning that query the expert for supervision on the learner’s induced state distribution. 13 8 Conclusion 

This work studies reinforcement learning from rich feedback. We connect learning from rich feedback via distilling a privileged feedback-conditioned teacher, to the standard expected-reward maximization objective in RL. This perspective raises a natural question: if the feedback-conditioned privileged teacher is better than the student on average, can we design a self-distillation algorithm whose updates monotonically improve the student toward the better teacher and admit regret guarantees? We show that existing self-distillation approaches can fail in two distinct ways: their objectives do not guarantee monotonic reward improvement and their local tokenwise gradient approximation can miss the delayed consequences of early decisions. In response, we introduce DistIL, a distributional variant of DAgger that optimizes a forward cross-entropy objective and performs future-aware credit assignment. We prove that DistIL enjoys monotonic policy improvement, admits a regret guarantee, and implicitly optimizes a teacher-weighted lower bound on the probability of success, explaining improvements in Pass@ N for every N . Empirically, we show that DistIL achieves strong performance across scientific reasoning, coding, and solving hard mathematical reasoning problems. 

# References 

Rishabh Agarwal, Nino Vieillard, Yongchao Zhou, Piotr Stanczyk, Sabela Ramos Garea, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Bachem. On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mistakes. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations , 2024. Arash Ahmadian, Chris Cremer, Matthias Gallé, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, Olivier Pietquin, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce-style optimization for learning from human feedback in llms. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 12248–12267, 2024. Jonathan D Chang, Wenhao Zhan, Owen Oertell, Kianté Brantley, Dipendra Misra, Jason D Lee, and Wen Sun. Dataset reset policy optimization for rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08495 , 2024. Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Chengxi Li, and Kai Fan. Step-level value preference optimization for mathematical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 7889–7903, 2024. Minghan Chen, Guikun Chen, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. Seed-grpo: Semantic entropy enhanced grpo for uncertainty-aware policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12346 , 2025a. Xinzhu Chen, Xuesheng Li, Zhongxiang Sun, and Weijie Yu. Beyond high-entropy exploration: Correctness-aware low-entropy segment-based advantage shaping for reasoning llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00908 , 2025b. Daixuan Cheng, Shaohan Huang, Xuekai Zhu, Bo Dai, Xin Zhao, Zhenliang Zhang, and Furu Wei. Reasoning with exploration: An entropy perspective. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 30377–30385, 2026. CMU AIRe Lab. Pope-hard-w-oracle-solution, 2026. https://huggingface.co/datasets/CMU-AIRe/ POPE-HARD-w-oracle-solution . Part of the POPE (Privileged On-Policy Exploration) dataset collection. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Zefan Wang, Hanbin Wang, Yuchen Zhang, Jiacheng Chen, Wendi Li, Bingxiang He, Yuchen Fan, Tianyu Yu, et al. Process reinforcement through implicit rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01456 , 2025. Muzhi Dai, Chenxu Yang, and Qingyi Si. S-grpo: Early exit via reinforcement learning in reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07686 , 2025. Kehua Feng, Xinyi Shen, Weijie Wang, Xiang Zhuang, Yuqi Tang, Qiang Zhang, and Keyan Ding. Sciknoweval: Evaluating multi-level scientific knowledge of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09098 , 2024. Dylan J Foster, Adam Block, and Dipendra Misra. Is behavior cloning all you need? understanding horizon in imitation learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=8KPyJm4gt5 .

14 Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. Minillm: Knowledge distillation of large language models. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations , 2024. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. Yinghui He, Simran Kaur, Adithya Bhaskar, Yongjin Yang, Jiarui Liu, Narutatsu Ri, Liam Fowl, Abhishek Panigrahi, Danqi Chen, and Sanjeev Arora. Self-distillation zero: Self-revision turns binary rewards into dense supervision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12002 , 2026. Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015. Jonas Hübotter, Frederike Lübeck, Lejs Behric, Anton Baumann, Marco Bagatella, Daniel Marta, Ido Hakimi, Idan Shenfeld, Thomas Kleine Buening, Carlos Guestrin, et al. Reinforcement learning via self-distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20802 , 2026. Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720 , 2024. Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 , 2024. Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In ICML , volume 2, pages 267–274, 2002. Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems , 14, 2001. Jeonghye Kim, Xufang Luo, Minbeom Kim, Sangmook Lee, Dohyung Kim, Jiwon Jeon, Dongsheng Li, and Yuqing Yang. Why does self-distillation (sometimes) degrade the reasoning capability of llms? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24472 ,2026. LAS Group, ETH Zurich. Sdpo: Reinforcement learning via self-distillation. https://github.com/lasgroup/SDPO ,2026. Gengsheng Li, Tianyu Yang, Junfeng Fang, Mingyang Song, Mao Zheng, Haiyun Guo, Dan Zhang, Jinqiao Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Unifying group-relative and self-distillation policy optimization via sample routing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02288 , 2026a. Yang Li, Zhichen Dong, Yuhan Sun, Weixun Wang, Shaopan Xiong, Yijia Luo, Jiashun Liu, Han Lu, Jiamang Wang, Wenbo Su, et al. Attention illuminates llm reasoning: The preplan-and-anchor rhythm enables fine-grained policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13554 , 2025. Yaxuan Li, Yuxin Zuo, Bingxiang He, Jinqian Zhang, Chaojun Xiao, Cheng Qian, Tianyu Yu, Huan-ang Gao, Wenkai Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, et al. Rethinking on-policy distillation of large language models: Phenomenology, mechanism, and recipe. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13016 , 2026b. Ziheng Li, Liu Kang, Feng Xiao, Luxi Xing, Qingyi Si, Zhuoran Li, Weikang Gong, Deqing Yang, Yanghua Xiao, and Hongcheng Guo. Outcome-grounded advantage reshaping for fine-grained credit assignment in mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07408 , 2026c. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations , 2023. Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin. Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783 , 2025. Kevin Lu and Thinking Machines Lab. On-policy distillation. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism , 2025. doi: 10.64434/tml.20251026. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/on-policy-distillation. Liangchen Luo, Yinxiao Liu, Rosanne Liu, Samrat Phatale, Meiqi Guo, Harsh Lara, Yunxuan Li, Lei Shu, Yun Zhu, Lei Meng, et al. Improve mathematical reasoning in language models by automated process supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06592 , 2024. 

15 Michael Luo, Sijun Tan, Roy Huang, Ameen Patel, Alpay Ariyak, Qingyang Wu, Xiaoxiang Shi, Rachel Xin, Colin Cai, Maurice Weber, et al. Deepcoder: A fully open-source 14b coder at o3-mini level, 2025. Notion Blog. Team Olmo, Allyson Ettinger, Amanda Bertsch, Bailey Kuehl, David Graham, David Heineman, Dirk Groeneveld, Faeze Brahman, Finbarr Timbers, Hamish Ivison, et al. Olmo 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13961 , 2025. Zhenyu Pan and Han Liu. Metaspatial: Reinforcing 3d spatial reasoning in vlms for the metaverse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18470 , 2025. Yuxiao Qu, Amrith Setlur, Virginia Smith, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Aviral Kumar. POPE: Learning to reason on hard problems via privileged on-policy exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18779 , 2026. Paria Rashidinejad and Yuandong Tian. Sail into the headwind: Alignment via robust rewards and dynamic labels against reward hacking. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 80338–80382, 2025. Paria Rashidinejad, Banghua Zhu, Cong Ma, Jiantao Jiao, and Stuart Russell. Bridging offline reinforcement learning and imitation learning: A tale of pessimism. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:11702–11716, 2021. Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011. John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1889–1897. PMLR, 2015. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. Amrith Setlur, Zijian Wang, Andrew Cohen, Paria Rashidinejad, and Sang Michael Xie. Reuse your FLOPs: Scaling RL on hard problems by conditioning on very off-policy prefixes. International Conference on Machine Learning ,2026. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems , pages 1279–1297, 2025. Wei Sun, Wen Yang, Pu Jian, Qianlong Du, Fuwei Cui, Shuo Ren, and Jiajun Zhang. Ktae: A model-free algorithm to key-tokens advantage estimation in mathematical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16826 , 2025. Fahim Tajwar, Guanning Zeng, Yueer Zhou, Yuda Song, Daman Arora, Yiding Jiang, Jeff Schneider, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Haiwen Feng, and Andrea Zanette. Maximum likelihood reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02710 , 2026. Sijun Tan, Michael Luo, Justin Wong, Colin Cai, Xiaoxiang Shi, William Yuan Tang, Manan Roongta, Tianjun Zhang, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, et al. Deepscaler: Effective rl scaling of reasoning models via iterative context lengthening. Notion Blog , 2025. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao, Runxin Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Yu Wu, and Zhifang Sui. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce llms step-by-step without human annotations. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9426–9439, 2024. Shenzhi Wang, Le Yu, Chang Gao, Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Rui Lu, Kai Dang, Xionghui Chen, Jianxin Yang, Zhenru Zhang, et al. Beyond the 80/20 rule: High-entropy minority tokens drive effective reinforcement learning for llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01939 , 2025. Bangjun Xiao, Bingquan Xia, Bo Yang, Bofei Gao, Bowen Shen, Chen Zhang, Chenhong He, Chiheng Lou, Fuli Luo, Gang Wang, et al. Mimo-v2-flash technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.02780 , 2026. Can Xie, Ruotong Pan, Xiangyu Wu, Yunfei Zhang, Jiayi Fu, Tingting Gao, and Guorui Zhou. Unlocking exploration in rlvr: Uncertainty-aware advantage shaping for deeper reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10649 , 2025. 

16 Wenda Xu, Rujun Han, Zifeng Wang, Long T Le, Dhruv Madeka, Lei Li, William Yang Wang, Rishabh Agarwal, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Speculative knowledge distillation: Bridging the teacher-student gap through interleaved sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11325 , 2024. Yuanda Xu, Hejian Sang, Zhengze Zhou, Ran He, and Zhipeng Wang. Paced: Distillation and on-policy self-distillation at the frontier of student competence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11178 , 2026. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025a. Chenxu Yang, Qingyi Si, Yongjie Duan, Zheliang Zhu, Chenyu Zhu, Qiaowei Li, Minghui Chen, Zheng Lin, and Weiping Wang. Dynamic early exit in reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15895 , 2025b. Chenxu Yang, Chuanyu Qin, Qingyi Si, Minghui Chen, Naibin Gu, Dingyu Yao, Zheng Lin, Weiping Wang, Jiaqi Wang, and Nan Duan. Self-distilled rlvr. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03128 , 2026a. Chenxu Yang, Qingyi Si, Mz Dai, Dingyu Yao, Mingyu Zheng, Minghui Chen, Zheng Lin, and Weiping Wang. Test-time prompt intervention. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 34223–34231, 2026b. Yu Yue, Yufeng Yuan, Qiying Yu, Xiaochen Zuo, Ruofei Zhu, Wenyuan Xu, Jiaze Chen, Chengyi Wang, TianTian Fan, Zhengyin Du, et al. Vapo: Efficient and reliable reinforcement learning for advanced reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05118 , 2025. Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Zhenyu Hou, Zhengxiao Du, Qinkai Zheng, Bin Chen, Da Yin, Chendi Ge, Chenghua Huang, Chengxing Xie, et al. Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763 , 2026. Weihao Zeng, Yuzhen Huang, Qian Liu, Wei Liu, Keqing He, Zejun Ma, and Junxian He. Simplerl-zoo: Investigating and taming zero reinforcement learning for open base models in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18892 , 2025. Lunjun Zhang, Arian Hosseini, Hritik Bansal, Mehran Kazemi, Aviral Kumar, and Rishabh Agarwal. Generative verifiers: Reward modeling as next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15240 , 2024. Zhenru Zhang, Chujie Zheng, Yangzhen Wu, Beichen Zhang, Runji Lin, Bowen Yu, Dayiheng Liu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. The lessons of developing process reward models in mathematical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 10495–10516, 2025. Siyan Zhao. Opsd: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. https://github.com/siyan-zhao/OPSD , 2026. Siyan Zhao, Zhihui Xie, Mengchen Liu, Jing Huang, Guan Pang, Feiyu Chen, and Aditya Grover. Self-distilled reasoner: On-policy self-distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18734 , 2026. 

17 Appendices 

A Proofs for theoretical limitations of prior work 19 

A.1 Proof of Proposition 1: f -divergence self-distillation does not guarantee monotonic policy improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 A.2 Proof of Proposition 2: Reverse-KL distillation can decrease reward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 A.3 Proof of Proposition 3: Local credit assignment can be strictly suboptimal . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

B Proofs for theoretical properties of DistIL 23 

B.1 Derivation for gradients of the DistIL objective (5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 B.2 Soft-max tabular classes satisfy tangent-space realizability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 B.3 Proof of Proposition 4: DistIL enjoys monotonic policy improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 B.4 DistIL regret analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 B.5 Connections with Max RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 B.6 Technical Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

C Experiment Details 33 

C.1 Hyperparameters for Science and Coding Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 C.2 Hyperparameters for Maths task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 

D Additional Results 34 

D.1 More results for Coding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 18 A Proofs for theoretical limitations of prior work 

## A.1 Proof of Proposition 1: f -divergence self-distillation does not guarantee monotonic policy improvement 

Let us define pa := πθ (a), qa := πT (a), and ua := qa 

> pa

. Then, we have 

L(θ) := Df (πT ∥πθ ) = ∑

> a∈A

pa f (ua).

Next, we compute the gradient of L(θ). By the chain rule, 

∂L (θ)

∂p a

= ∂∂p a

[

paf

( qa

pa

)] 

= f (ua) − uaf ′(ua) = g(a),

where we used the definition of g(a) from the statement in the Proposition. Next, we define the score vector 

sa := ∇θ log πθ (a). Using ∇θ pa = pasa and linearity, we have 

∇θ L(θ) = ∑

> b∈A

∂L(θ)

∂p b

∇θ pb = ∑

> b∈A

g(b) pb sb = Eb∼πθ [g(b)sb] .

Now, the natural gradient update is given as θ′ − θ = −ηF (θ)−1∇θ L(θ). Upon expanding the policy map to first order gives 

πθ′ (a) = πθ (a) + ∇θ πθ (a)⊤(θ′ − θ) + O(η2).

Since ∇θ πθ (a) = πθ (a)sa and using the gradient update, we get 

πθ′ (a) = πθ (a) − η π θ (a) s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1∇θ L(θ) + O(η2).

Now, we substitute the expression for ∇θ L(θ) to get s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1∇θ L(θ) = Eb∼πθ

[g(b) s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb

]. By Lemma 1, 

s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = 1{a = b}

πθ (b) − 1.

Therefore, 

s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1∇θ L(θ) = Eb∼πθ

[

g(b)

( 1{a = b}

πθ (b) − 1

)] 

= Eb∼πθ

[

g(b) 1{a = b}

πθ (b)

]

− Eb∼πθ [g(b)] = g(a) − Eb∼πθ [g(b)] .

Thus, we have 

πθ′ (a) = πθ (a) − η π θ (a)

(

g(a) − Eb∼πθ [g(b)] 

)

+ O(η2).

Next, we consider that change in value of the policy following gradient update. Upon using the definition of 

J(π), we have 

J(πθ′ ) − J(πθ ) = ∑

> a∈A

r(a)( πθ′ (a) − πθ (a)) = −η ∑

> a∈A

πθ (a) r(a)

(

g(a) − Eb∼πθ [g(b)] 

)

+ O(η2)= −η (Ea∼πθ [r(a)g(a)] − Ea∼πθ [r(a)] Ea∼πθ [g(a)]) + O(η2)= −η Cov a∼πθ(r(a), g (a)) + O(η2).

Hence, we have J(πθ′ ) − J(πθ ) = −η Cov y∼πθ(r(y), g (y)) + O(η2).

19 A.2 Proof of Proposition 2: Reverse-KL distillation can decrease reward 

We consider a single-context three-armed bandit with rewards 

r(y1) = 1 , r(y2) = 12 , r(y3) = 0 ,

and student and teacher policies 

πθ =

( 120 , 920 , 12

)

, πT =

( 310 , 120 , 13 20 

)

.

A direct calculation gives 

J(πθ ) = 120 · 1 + 920 · 12 = 11 40 = 0 .275 , J(πT ) = 310 · 1 + 120 · 12 = 13 40 = 0 .325 ,

so ∆ = J(πT ) − J(πθ ) = 120 > 0.The bad action probability increases: The reverse-KL NPG update takes the form 

π′ 

> θ

(y) = πθ (y) − η π θ (y)

(

log πθ (y)

πT (y) − DKL (πθ ∥πT )

)

.

We compute the individual log-ratios: 

log πθ (y1)

πT (y1) = log 16 ≈ − 1.792 , log πθ (y2)

πT (y2) = log 9 ≈ 2.197 , log πθ (y3)

πT (y3) = log 10 13 ≈ − 0.262 ,

and the KL divergence: 

DKL (πθ ∥πT ) = 120 log 16 + 920 log 9 + 12 log 10 13 ≈ 0.768 .

For the bad action y3, the update coefficient is 

log πθ (y3)

πT (y3) − DKL (πθ ∥πT ) ≈ − 0.262 − 0.768 = −1.030 < 0,

so π′ 

> θ

(y3) = 0 .50 + η · 0.515 > π θ (y3). Therefore, the probability of the suboptimal action increases after the update From Proposition 1, the first-order change in expected reward is J(π′ 

> θ

)−J(πθ ) = −η Cov y∼πθ (r(y), log (πθ (y)/π T (y)))+ 

O(η2). We compute: 

Cov y∼πθ

(

r(y), log πθ (y)

πT (y)

)

= Eπθ

[

r log πθ

πT

]

− Eπθ [r] · Eπθ

[

log πθ

πT

]

≈ 0.4048 − 0.275 × 0.768 ≈ 0.1936 > 0.

Therefore, for all sufficiently small η > 0,

J(π′ 

> θ

) ≤ J(πθ ).

Hence, even when ∆ > 0, reverse KL does not guarantee monotonic improvement. 

## A.3 Proof of Proposition 3: Local credit assignment can be strictly suboptimal 

Let A = {a, b, c } and consider a two-step decision process (y1, y 2) ∈ A 2. We define the student policy πu,v by 

πu,v (y1 = ·) = softmax( u, 0, 0) ,πu,v (y2 = · | y1 = a) = softmax( v, 0, 0) ,πu,v (y2 = · | y1 = b) = U, πu,v (y2 = · | y1 = c) = U, 

20 where U is the uniform distribution over actions. Let the teacher policy πT be 

πT (y1) = U, πT (· | y1 = a) = R, πT (· | y1 = b) = πT (· | y1 = c) = U, 

where 

R =

( 14 , 3 + 2 √28 , 3 − 2√28

)

.

Define the sequence-level objective 

Lseq (u, v ) = KL( πu,v (y1, y 2) ∥ πT (y1, y 2)) ,

and let Lcurr denote the tokenwise local approximation that sums per-step KL terms but treats the prefix distribution as fixed when differentiating (as in SDPO/OPSD). Define the reward by 

r1(x, y 1) = 1{y1 = b}, r2(x, y 1:2 ) = 0 .

Since the context is deterministic, we suppress x below. Write 

p(u) := Pr( y1 = a) = eu

eu + 2 , Pr( y1 = b) = Pr( y1 = c) = 1 − p(u)2 ,

and 

q(v) := Pr( y2 = a | y1 = a) = ev

ev + 2 .

By the chain rule for KL divergence, 

Lseq (u, v ) = KL( πu,v (y1)∥U ) + Pr( y1 = a) KL( πu,v (y2 | y1 = a)∥R).

The first term equals 

K(p(u)) , K(p) = p log(3 p) + (1 − p) log 

( 3(1 − p)2

)

.

Now define 

D(v) := KL( πu,v (y2 | y1 = a)∥R)= q(v) log q(v)1/4 + 1 − q(v)2 log (1 − q(v)) /2(3 + 2 √2) /8 + 1 − q(v)2 log (1 − q(v)) /2(3 − 2√2) /8 .

Since ( 3 + 2 √28

) ( 3 − 2√28

)

= 164 ,

the last two terms combine to 

(1 − q(v)) log (1 − q(v)) /21/8 .

Hence 

D(v) = q(v) log(4 q(v)) + (1 − q(v)) log(4(1 − q(v))) .

Differentiating with respect to q gives 

dD (v)

dq = log q

1 − q ,

so the unique minimizer is q = 12 , i.e. v = log 2 , and at this point 

inf  

> v

D(v) = log 2 .

21 Substituting this into the sequence-level loss yields the effective one-dimensional objective 

F (p) = K(p) + p log 2 .

Now 

K′(p) = log 2p

1 − p ,

so 

F ′(p) = K′(p) + log 2 = log 2p

1 − p + log 2 = log 4p

1 − p .

Also, 

F ′′ (p) = 1

p + 11 − p > 0,

so F is strictly convex and has a unique minimizer at 

F ′(p) = 0 ⇐⇒ 4p

1 − p = 1 ⇐⇒ p = 15 .

Since p(u) = eu/(eu + 2) , this corresponds to u = − log 2 .We now compare the local and full gradients at the initialization (u, v ) = (0 , 0) . Since 

p(0) = q(0) = 13 , K′

( 13

)

= 0 ,

the local approximation gives ∂Lcurr 

∂u (u, v ) = ddu K(p(u)) ,

and therefore ∂Lcurr 

∂u (0 , 0) = 0 .

Hence local updates do not move u, so the resulting policy satisfies p = 13 and 

J(πlocal ) = Pr( y1 = b) = 1 − p

2 = 13 .

For the full sequence-level objective, 

Lseq (u, v ) = K(p(u)) + p(u)D(v),

so ∂Lseq 

∂u (u, v ) = p′(u)( K′(p(u)) + D(v)) , p′(u) = 2eu

(eu + 2) 2 .

At (u, v ) = (0 , 0) , the term K′(p(0)) vanishes and D(0) > 0, so 

∂Lseq 

∂u (0 , 0) = p′(0) D(0) = 29 D(0) > 0.

Thus the full sequence-level gradient gives a strict update signal on the first-step parameter, while the local approximation does not. Finally, since the unique minimizer of F is at p = 15 , the full sequence-level optimization converges to a policy with 

J(πseq ) = Pr( y1 = b) = 1 − 15

2 = 25 .

Therefore, 

J(πseq ) = 25 > 13 = J(πlocal ),

which proves the claim in Proposition 3. 22 B Proofs for theoretical properties of DistIL 

## B.1 Derivation for gradients of the DistIL objective (5) 

We start by defining the per-step loss 

ℓt(y, θ ) := H×(

sg (πθ (· | x, y 1: t−1, f )) , π θ (· | x, y 1: t−1)

)

,

so that 

LDistIL (θ) = Ey∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

ℓt(y, θ )

]

.

By Lemma 2, applied to the trajectory distribution y ∼ πθ , we have 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = Ey∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ ℓt(y, θ )

]

+ Eτ ∼πθ

[( H∑

> t=1

ℓt(τ, θ )

)

∇θ log πθ (τ )

]

. (6) Since the policy is autoregressive, we have log πθ (τ ) = ∑Ht=1 log πθ (at | st) and ∇θ log πθ (τ ) = ∑Ht=1 ∇θ log πθ (at |

st). Upon using this in Eq. 6 gives 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ ℓt(τ, θ )

]

+ Eτ ∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1
> H

∑

> i=1

ℓi(τ, θ ) ∇θ log πθ (at | st)

]

.

We now show that only future terms i > t survive in the second expectation. Let us fix t and consider any 

i ≤ t. The quantity ℓi(τ, θ ) depends only on the prefix up to time i, and therefore is independent of the sampled action at once the state st is fixed. Consequently, 

Eat∼πθ (·| st)

[

∇θ log πθ (at | st) ℓi(τ, θ )

]

= ℓi(τ, θ ) Eat∼πθ (·| st)

[

∇θ log πθ (at | st)

]

.

By Lemma 2, 

Eat∼πθ (·| st)

[

∇θ log πθ (at | st)

]

= 0 ,

so the contribution from all i ≤ t vanishes. Therefore, 

Eτ ∼πθ

[( H∑

> t=1

ℓt(τ, θ )

)

∇θ log πθ (τ )

]

= Eτ ∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ log πθ (at | st)

(∑

> i>t

ℓi(τ, θ )

)] 

.

Substituting back the definition of ℓi gives 

∇θ LDistIL =Eτ ∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ H×(

sg (πθ (· | st, f )) , π θ (· | st)

)]

+ Eτ ∼πθ

[ H∑

> t=1

∇θ log πθ (at | st)

(∑

> i>t

H×(

sg (πθ (· | si, f )) , π θ (· | si)

))] 

.

## B.2 Soft-max tabular classes satisfy tangent-space realizability 

Proposition 6. Let S and A be finite sets, and consider a tabular softmax policy 

πθ (a | s) = exp( θ(s, a )) 

∑ 

> a′∈A

exp( θ(s, a ′)) .

Then, for any fixed θ and any teacher policy πT , there exists a vector u : S × A → R such that for all s ∈ S 

and a ∈ A ,

πT (a | s) − πθ (a | s) = πθ (a | s) ∇θ log πθ (a | s)⊤u. 

23 Proof. We start by fixing s ∈ S . Since πθ (· | s) is a softmax distribution, πθ (a | s) > 0 for all a ∈ A , so the ratio πT (a | s)/π θ (a | s) is well-defined. For tabular softmax, the score function satisfies 

∂ log πθ (a | s)

∂θ (s, a ′) = 1{a′ = a} − πθ (a′ | s).

Thus, for any vector u, we have 

∇θ log πθ (a | s)⊤u = u(s, a ) − ∑

> a′∈A

πθ (a′ | s) u(s, a ′).

Now, let us define 

u(s, a ) := πT (a | s)

πθ (a | s) .

Then, we have ∑

> a′

πθ (a′ | s) u(s, a ′) = ∑

> a′

πT (a′ | s) = 1 .

Hence, 

∇θ log πθ (a | s)⊤u = πT (a | s)

πθ (a | s) − 1.

Multiplying both sides by πθ (a | s) gives 

πθ (a | s) ∇θ log πθ (a | s)⊤u = πT (a | s) − πθ (a | s).

## B.3 Proof of Proposition 4: DistIL enjoys monotonic policy improvement 

Under the frozen state distribution, the gradient of LDistIL simplifies to 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = −Ex∼ρ, y ∼πT (·| x) [∇θ log πθ (y | x)] .

From Lemma 2, Ey∼πθ (·| x)[∇θ log πθ (y | x)] = 0 . Therefore, the gradient can also be written as 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = −Ex∼ρ

[∑

> y

(πT (y | x) − πθ (y | x)) ∇ log πθ (y | x)

]

.

Next, we apply the tangent assumption πT (y | x) − πθ (y | x) = πθ (y | x) ∇θ log πθ (y | x)⊤u to obtain 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = −Ex∼ρ

[∑

> y

πθ (y | x)∇θ log πθ (y | x)∇θ log πθ (y | x)⊤

]

u. 

We now recognize the Fisher information matrix, 

F (θ) = Ex∼ρ, y ∼πθ (·| x)

[∇θ log πθ (y | x)∇θ log πθ (y | x)⊤]

to conclude 

∇θ LDistIL (θ) = −F (θ)u. 

Thus, the natural gradient update becomes 

θ′ = θ + ηu. 

We now analyze the change in the policy using a first-order Taylor expansion 

πθ′ (y | x) = πθ (y | x) + ∇θ πθ (y | x)⊤(θ′ − θ) + O(η2).

24 Substituting θ′ − θ = ηu gives 

πθ′ (y | x) = πθ (y | x) + η∇θ πθ (y | x)⊤u + O(η2).

Using ∇θ πθ (y | x) = πθ (y | x)∇θ log πθ (y | x), we obtain 

πθ′ (y | x) = πθ (y | x) + ηπ θ (y | x)∇θ log πθ (y | x)⊤u + O(η2).

Next, we again apply the tangent assumption to obtain 

πθ′ (y | x) = πθ (y | x) + η(πT (y | x) − πθ (y | x)) + O(η2).

Multiplying by r(x, y ), summing over y, and taking expectation over x ∼ ρ, we obtain 

Ex,y ∼πθ′ [r(x, y )] = Ex,y ∼πθ [r(x, y )] + η (Ex,y ∼πT [r(x, y )] − Ex,y ∼πθ [r(x, y )]) + O(η2).

Finally, using the definition of ∆ and J(π), this becomes 

J(πθ′ ) = J(πθ ) + η∆ + O(η2),

Since ∆ > 0, for sufficiently small η > 0, the update gives strict improvement. 

## B.4 DistIL regret analysis 

This section proves the regret guarantee for DistIL. We begin by stating a natural-policy-gradient variant of DistIL in Algorithm 2. We then provide definitions for quantities that appear in the analysis: ratio-based and KL-based concentrability (coverage) coefficients between the teacher and student policies (Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2024) as well as two imitation-learning quantities that measure the difficulty of matching the teacher, namely teacher-policy variance and teacher recoverability parameter (Foster et al., 2024). With these definitions in place, Appendix B.4.3 proves the regret bound for DistIL. 

B.4.1 Natural-policy gradient variant of DistIL 

NPG-DistIL instantiates DistIL with a natural policy gradient update rule. Rather than applying a single global gradient step, the algorithm performs a per-state mirror descent update following (Chang et al., 2024), where the mirror map is chosen to be the negative entropy, yielding the KL divergence as the associated Bregman divergence. Concretely, at each round i, the algorithm rolls out trajectories under the current student policy πθi , collects the set of visited state-action prefixes, and for each visited state s minimizes a linearization of the statewise cross-entropy loss ℓs subject to a KL proximity penalty to the previous iterate 

πθi (· | s). The full procedure is detailed in Algorithm 2. 

B.4.2 Concentrability, variance, and recoverability coefficients 

We begin by defining the ratio-based and KL-based concentrability coefficients used in our analysis, which are standard definitions in reinforcement learning (Rashidinejad et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2024). 

Definition 1 (Ratio-based concentrability coefficient ). Let {πθi }i≥1 denote the sequence of student policies generated by DistIL, and let πT denote the teacher policy. The concentrability coefficient is 

C := sup 

> i≥1

sup 

> s∈S , a ∈A

πT (a | s)

πθi (a | s) .

Definition 2 (Initial teacher–student KL concentrability coefficient ). Let πθ1 denote the initial student policy and let πT denote the teacher policy. The initial KL concentrability coefficient is 

C0 := sup 

> s∈S

DKL (πT (· | s)|| πθ1 (· | s)) .

25 Algorithm 2 NPG-DistIL 

Require: Initial student policy πθ1 , teacher policy πT , prompt distribution ρ, step size η, number of rounds n 

> 1:

for i = 1 , . . . , n do  

> 2:

Sample a prompt batch Bi ∼ ρ 

> 3:

Roll out trajectories Yi(x) ∼ πθi (· | x) for each x ∈ B i 

> 4:

Collect the visited prefixes Si ← { (x, y 1: t−1) : x ∈ B i, y ∈ Y i(x), t = 1 , . . . , |y|} . 

> 5:

for each s ∈ S i do  

> 6:

Define ℓs(πθi ) ← − ∑ 

> a∈A

πT (a | s) log πθi (a | s) 

> 7:

Update the local policy by mirror descent 

πθi+1 (· | s) ← arg min 

> q∈∆( A)

{

⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), q ⟩ + 1

η DKL (q∥πθi (· | s)) 

}

(7)  

> 8:

return ˆπ = πθn+1 

Assuming finite concentrability coefficients C, C 0 < ∞ is natural in our setting. The teacher is typically a feedback-conditioned variant of the student policy, often obtained from the initial student or from an exponential-moving-average copy of the student (Hübotter et al., 2026). Thus, the teacher and student are expected to have substantial support overlap at the start of training. Moreover, natural policy gradient and trust-region methods such as PPO constrain successive policy changes and help preserve this overlap across iterates. We next introduce two problem-dependent quantities, following Foster et al. (2024), that capture the difficulty of imitating a stochastic teacher. 

Definition 3 (Worst-case teacher variance ). For any policy π, let P π◦hπT denote the trajectory distribution that follows π up to time h − 1 and then follows πT from time h onward. Let QπT 

> h

(s, a ) be the teacher reward-to-go after taking action a at state s and then following πT , and let V πT 

> h

(s) = Ea∼πT (·| s)[QπT 

> h

(s, a )] .The teacher variance of πT under prefixes induced by π is 

¯σ2  

> πT|π

:= 

> H

∑

> h=1

E(sh,a h)∼P π◦hπT

[

(QπT 

> h

(sh, a h) − V πT 

> h

(sh)) 2]

.

The worst-case teacher variance is ¯σ2 

> πT

:= sup π ¯σ2  

> πT|π

.

Definition 4 (Signed teacher recoverability parameter ). The teacher recoverability coefficient is 

μT := sup 

> h∈[H]

sup 

> s∈S ,,a ∈A

|V πT 

> h

(s) − QπT 

> h

(s, a )| .

The quantity ¯σ2 

> πT

characterizes the stochasticity of the teacher policy, and in particular, ¯σ2 

> πT

= 0 when πT is deterministic. The constant μT measures recoverability: the largest value loss caused by taking an arbitrary action at a state and then returning to the teacher thereafter. Thus, small μT corresponds to forgiving environments where deviations from the teacher can be corrected, while large μT captures settings where a single early mistake can have substantial long-term consequences. The recoverability parameter satisfies 

0 ≤ μT ≤ R when rewards are bounded by R. Together, these quantities describe the difficulty of imitation: the learner must cope both with stochastic teacher guidance and with the cost of deviating from it. Moreover, the two quantities are related via the bound ¯σ2 

> πT

≤ μ2 

> T

H, which implies that the stochasticity of the teacher is controlled by the recoverability of the environment. 

B.4.3 Proof of Theorem 1: DistIL regret guarantee 

We prove the regret bound in three steps. First, we establish an auxiliary result (Theorem 2) below, which bounds the averaged cross-entropy suboptimality of the NPG-DistIL iterates via a mirror descent analysis. Next, we convert this cross-entropy bound into an averaged Hellinger error using the standard KL-to-Hellinger 26 inequality. Finally, we invoke Proposition C.1 of (Foster et al., 2024) to lift the Hellinger error into a policy suboptimality bound in terms of the teacher variance and recoverability parameters. We begin by stating the key auxiliary result and provide its detailed analysis in Appendix B.4.4. 

Theorem 2 (Averaged cross-entropy suboptimality of NPG-DistIL ). Assume finite ratio-based concentrability coefficient C < ∞ (Definition 1) and finite KL concentrability coefficient C0 < ∞ (Definition 2). Let {πθi }n+1 

> i=1

be the iterates generated by Eq. 7 in NPG-DistIL (Algorithm 2). Defining ℓi(π) = ∑Ht=1 Est∼dπθit

[ℓst (π)] ,where ℓs(π) is as given in Algorithm 2, the following bound holds upon choosing η =

√ 2C0 

> C2n

:

1

n

> n

∑

> i=1

(ℓi(πθi ) − ℓi(πT )) ≤ HC 

√ 2C0

n .

We now prove Theorem 1 using the suboptimality established in Theorem 2. For a fixed state st, using the definition of ℓst (π) from Algorithm 2, a direct computation gives 

ℓst (π) − ℓst (πT ) = DKL (πT (· | st) ∥ π(· | st)) .

Summing over the horizon, taking expectations over st ∼ dπθi 

> t

, and averaging over i = 1 , . . . , n gives 

ϵn := 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1

(ℓi(πθi ) − ℓi(πT )) = 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1
> H

∑

> t=1

Est∼dπθit

[

DKL (πT (· | st) ∥ πθi (· | st)) 

]

.

Next, for any pair of distributions (p, q ), the standard inequality D2H(p, q ) ≤ 12 DKL (p∥q) holds. Applying this point-wise with p = πT (· | st) and q = πθi (· | st), then again taking expectations, summing over t, and averaging over i gives 

En := 1

n

> n

∑

> i=1
> H

∑

> t=1

Est∼dπθit

[

D2H(πT (· | st), π θi (· | st)) 

]

≤ ϵn

2 .

Now, we apply Proposition C.1 of Foster et al. (2024), which is valid in our online setting and bounds regret by a variance term and a recoverability term 

J(πT ) − J(ˆ π) ≲

√

¯σ2 

> πT

En + μT En

≤

√ ¯σ2

> πT

2 ϵn + μT

2 ϵn,

(

∵ En ≤ ϵn

2

)

.

Finally, substituting the bound ϵn ≤ HC √2C0/n from Theorem 2 with η = √2C0/(C2n) gives 

J(πT ) − J(ˆ π) ≲

√

¯σ2

> πT

HC 

2

( 2C0

n

)1/4

+ μT HC 

2

√ 2C0

n .

B.4.4 Proof of Theorem 2: Averaged cross-entropy suboptimality of NPG-DistIL 

Let us consider the loss difference 

ℓs(π) − ℓs(πT ) = − ∑

> a∈A

πT (a | s) log π(a | s) + ∑

> a∈A

πT (a | s) log πT (a | s) = DKL (πT (· | s) ∥ π(· | s)) .

Thus, 

ℓi(π) − ℓi(πT ) = 

> H

∑

> t=1

Est∼dπθit

[

DKL (πT (· | st) ∥ π(· | st)) 

]

. (8) 27 We use shorthand πθi (s) := πθi (· | s) and Di(s) := DKL (πT (· | s) ∥ πθi (· | s)) . Let us now consider the mirror map to be the negative entropy, so that the associated Bregman divergence is the KL divergence. We run the state-conditioned mirror descent update: 

πθi+1 (s) ∈ arg min 

> q∈∆( A)

{

⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), q ⟩ + 1

η DKL (q∥πθi (s)) 

}

.

From Lemma 3, we have 

⟨η∇ℓs(πθi ) + ∇Φ( πθi+1 (s)) − ∇ Φ( πθi (s)) , π T (s) − πθi+1 (s)⟩ ≥ 0.

Upon rearranging, we have 

η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi+1 (s) − πT (s)⟩ ≤ ⟨∇ Φ( πθi+1 (s)) − ∇ Φ( πθi (s)) , π T (s) − πθi+1 (s)⟩.

Next, we use Lemma 4 to obtain 

η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi+1 (s) − πT (s)⟩ ≤ Di(s) − Di+1 (s) − DKL (πθi+1 (s)∥πθi (s)) . (9) Now, from assumption, we have, ∣∣∣∣

∂ℓ s(πθi )

∂π (a | s)

∣∣∣∣ =

∣∣∣∣

πT (a|s)

πθi (a|s)

∣∣∣∣ ≤ C. 

Next, we define 

∆i(s) := πθi (s) − πθi+1 (s).

Then 

η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi − πθi+1 ⟩ ≤ ηC ∥∆i(s)∥1.

Upon applying Young’s inequality (ab ≤ a2 

> 2

+ b2 

> 2

), with a = ηC and b = ∆ i(s), we get 

η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi − πθi+1 ⟩ ≤ η2C2

2 + 12 ∥∆i(s)∥21.

Using Pinsker’s inequality, 12 ∥∆i(s)∥21≤ DKL (πθi+1 (s)∥πθi (s)) .

Thus, 

η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi (s) − πθi+1 (s)⟩ ≤ η2C2

2 + DKL (πθi+1 (s)∥πθi (s)) . (10) Now, from convexity of ℓs, we have, 

η(ℓs(πθi ) − ℓs(πT )) ≤ η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi (s) − πθi+1 (s)⟩ + η⟨∇ ℓs(πθi ), π θi+1 (s) − πT (s)⟩.

Upon combining Equations 9 and 10, we obtain 

η(ℓs(πθi ) − ℓs(πT )) ≤ η2C2

2 + Di(s) − Di+1 (s).

Now, we reuse the definition of Di(s) = ℓs(πθi ) − ℓs(πT ), this gives 

ηD i(s) ≤ η2C2

2 + Di(s) − Di+1 (s).

Thus, 

Di+1 (s) ≤ (1 − η)Di(s) + η2C2

2 . (11) Next, we simplify this recursion. In particular, for a given state s, let us define 

ai := Di(s), b := η2C2

2 .

28 Therefore, Equation 11 can be re-written as 

ai+1 ≤ (1 − η)ai + b. 

Using Lemma 5, we get 

Di(s) ≤ (1 − η)i−1D1(s) + η2C2

2

> i−2

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k, ∀i ≥ 1.

Next, we bound the geometric sum: 

> i−2

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k ≤

> ∞

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k = 1

η .

Therefore, 

Di(s) ≤ (1 − η)i−1D1(s) + η2C2

2 · 1

η = (1 − η)i−1D1(s) + ηC 2

2 .

Using D1(s) ≤ C0, we obtain 

Di(s) ≤ (1 − η)i−1C0 + ηC 2

2 .

Now, considering Eq. 8, we have 

ℓi(πθi ) − ℓi(πT ) = 

> H

∑

> t=1

Est∼dπθit

[Di(st)] ≤ H(1 − η)i−1C0 + H ηC 2

2 .

Upon summing from i = 1 to n gives 

> n

∑

> i=1

(ℓi(πθi ) − ℓi(πT )) ≤ H

> n

∑

> i=1

(

(1 − η)i−1C0 + ηC 2

2

)

= nηHC 2

2 + HC 0

> n

∑

> i=1

(1 − η)i−1

≤ nηHC 2

2 + HC 0

η

(

∵

> n

∑

> i=1

(1 − η)i−1 ≤ 1

η

)

Upon dividing by n gives ∑ni=1 (ℓi(πθi ) − ℓi(πT )) 

n ≤ ηHC 2

2 + HC 0

ηn 

Finally, choosing η =

√ 2C0 

> C2n

completes the proof. 

## B.5 Connections with Max RL 

B.5.1 Proof of Proposition 5: DistIL objective is a lower bound on the teacher-weighted likelihood of success 

We begin with the definition of forward cross-entropy: 

H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) = ∑

> y

πT (y | x)[ − log πθ (y | x)] .

Next, we partition the sum into correct and incorrect responses: 

H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) = ∑

> y:r(x,y )=1

πT (y | x)[ − log πθ (y | x)] + ∑

> y:r(x,y )=0

πT (y | x)[ − log πθ (y | x)] .

29 For any y such that r(x, y ) = 1 , we can write 

πθ (y | x) = pπθ (x) πθ (y | x, r = 1) ,

where 

pπθ (x) = Py∼πθ (·| x)[r(x, y ) = 1] .

Thus, 

− log πθ (y | x) = − log pπθ (x) − log πθ (y | x, r = 1) .

Substituting this into the first term, we get 

H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) = −pπT (x) log pπθ (x) + pπT (x) H×(πT (· | x, r = 1) , π θ (· | x, r = 1)) + (1 − pπT (x)) Ey∼πT (·| x,r =0) [− log πθ (y | x)] .

Next, we define 

R(x) := pπT (x) H×(πT (· | x, r = 1) , π θ (· | x, r = 1)) + (1 − pπT (x)) Ey∼πT (·| x,r =0) [− log πθ (y | x)] .

Since both terms are nonnegative, we have R(x) ≥ 0. Therefore, 

H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) = −pπT (x) log pπθ (x) + R(x) ≥ − pπT (x) log pπθ (x).

Rearranging gives 

−H×(πT (· | x), π θ (· | x)) ≤ pπT (x) log pπθ (x).

B.5.2 Reverse KL need not lower bound teacher-weighted likelihood of success 

In Proposition 5, we derived that DistIL objective is a lower bound on the teacher-weighted likelihood of success and therefore achieves better Pass@N. Next, we show that this need not hold true for SDPO. Proposition 7 formalizes this distinction by providing a counterexample in which the reverse-KL objective fails to provide such a lower bound. The construction considers a two-action setting in which the teacher assigns twice as much probability mass ( 2δ) to the correct response as the student ( δ). As the teacher and student success probabilities simultaneously approach zero, the reverse-KL divergence scales as O(δ), whereas the magnitude of the teacher-weighted log-likelihood term, |pπT (x) log pπθ (x)|, scales as Θ(δ log (1 /δ )). Since 

δ log (1 /δ ) dominates δ as δ → 0, the reverse-KL term becomes asymptotically negligible relative to the teacher-weighted log-likelihood term. Consequently, the reverse-KL objective need not provide a lower bound on the teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success. 

Proposition 7 (Reverse KL need not lower bound teacher-weighted likelihood of success ). There exists a prompt x, a teacher policy πT , and a student policy πθ with pπT (x) > p πθ (x), i.e., the teacher is strictly better than the student, such that 

−DKL (πθ (· | x) ∥ πT (· | x)) > p πT (x) log pπθ (x),

and hence minimizing the reverse KL does not maximize a lower bound on the teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success. 

Now, we provide a detailed analysis of Proposition 7. Consider a two-response setting Y = {y+, y −} with 

r(x, y +) = 1 and r(x, y −) = 0 . For δ ∈

(

0, 12

)

, set 

πT (y+ | x) = 2 δ, πθ (y+ | x) = δ, 

so that pπT (x) = 2 δ > δ = pπθ (x). The reverse KL divergence evaluates to 

DKL (πθ ∥πT ) = δ log δ

2δ + (1 − δ) log 1 − δ

1 − 2δ = −δ log 2 + (1 − δ) log 1 − δ

1 − 2δ ≈ δ(1 − log 2) as δ → 0,

30 where we used the Taylor expansion (1 − δ) log 1−δ 

> 1−2δ

≈ δ as δ → 0. Meanwhile, the teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success satisfies 

pπT (x) log pπθ (x) = 2 δ log δ, 

so −pπT (x) log pπθ (x) = −2δ log δ. Since −2δ log δ ≫ δ(1 − log 2) as δ → 0, we conclude that for all sufficiently small δ > 0,

DKL (πθ (· | x) ∥ πT (· | x)) < −pπT (x) log pπθ (x),

which is equivalent to 

−DKL (πθ (· | x) ∥ πT (· | x)) > p πT (x) log pπθ (x).

Thus, unlike the forward cross-entropy of DistIL, the negative reverse KL cannot serve as a lower bound on the teacher-weighted log-likelihood of success, even when the teacher is strictly better than the student. 

## B.6 Technical Lemmas 

Lemma 1 (Fisher identity for softmax policies ). Let πθ be a softmax policy over a finite action set A, with 

πθ (a) = eθa

∑ 

> b∈A

eθb

.

Define the score vector sa := ∇θ log πθ (a), and the Fisher information matrix F (θ) = Ea∼πθ

[sas⊤

> a

]. Then, for any a, b ∈ A ,

s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = 1{a = b}

πθ (b) − 1.

Equivalently, πθ (a) s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = 1{a = b} − πθ (a).Proof. Let m := |A| and we write pa := πθ (a). Let ea ∈ Rm denote the a-th standard basis vector, and let 

1 ∈ Rm denote the all-ones vector. Then, for the softmax parameterization, we have 

∂ log πθ (a)

∂θ c

= 1{a = c} − pc.

Hence, sa = ea − p, where p = ( p1, . . . , p m)⊤.Now, by definition, F (θ) = Ea∼p

[(ea − p)( ea − p)⊤]. Upon expanding, we get F (θ) = Ea∼p[eae⊤ 

> a

] − pp ⊤.Since Ea∼p[eae⊤ 

> a

] = diag( p), we obtain 

F (θ) = diag( p) − pp ⊤.

Next, we fix b ∈ A , and define v := eb 

> pb

− 1. We claim that F (θ)v = sb. For this, we note that p⊤v =

∑ 

> a∈A

pa

( 1{a=b} 

> pb

− 1

)

= 1 − 1 = 0 . Therefore, 

F (θ)v = (diag( p) − pp ⊤)v = diag( p)v − p(p⊤v) = diag( p)v. 

Now, 

diag( p)v = diag( p)

( eb

pb

− 1

)

= eb − p = sb.

Thus, F (θ)v = sb. Now, assuming that inverse of F (θ) exists, we have 

F (θ)−1sb = v = eb

pb

− 1.

Finally, using (sa = ea − p), we have s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = s⊤

> a

( eb 

> pb

− 1

)

. Since s⊤ 

> a

1 = 0 , this simplifies to 

s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = s⊤ 

> a

eb

pb

= 1{a = b} − pb

pb

= 1{a = b}

pb

− 1.

31 Moreover, multiplying both sides by (pa) gives the equivalent form 

pa s⊤ 

> a

F (θ)−1sb = 1{a = b} − pa.

Lemma 2 (Trajectory score-function identity ). Let τ ∼ pθ (τ ) be a differentiable trajectory distribution, and let f (τ, θ ) be any differentiable function. Then 

∇θ Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ, θ )] = Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ, θ )∇θ log pθ (τ ) + ∇θ f (τ, θ )] .

In particular, if f does not depend on θ, then ∇θ Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ )] = Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ )∇θ log pθ (τ )] . Moreover, 

Eτ ∼pθ [∇θ log pθ (τ )] = 0 .

Proof. Using the definition of expectation and differentiating it gives, 

∇θ Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ, θ )] = ∇θ

∑

> τ

pθ (τ )f (τ, θ ) = ∑

> τ

∇θ pθ (τ ) f (τ, θ ) + ∑

> τ

pθ (τ )∇θ f (τ, θ ).

Next, we use ∇θ pθ (τ ) = pθ (τ )∇θ log pθ (τ ), to get 

∇θ Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ, θ )] = ∑

> τ

pθ (τ )f (τ, θ )∇θ log pθ (τ ) + ∑

> τ

pθ (τ )∇θ f (τ, θ )= Eτ ∼pθ [f (τ, θ )∇θ log pθ (τ ) + ∇θ f (τ, θ )] ,

Now, if f does not depend on θ, the second term vanishes. Finally, 

Eτ ∼pθ [∇θ log pθ (τ )] = ∑

> τ

pθ (τ )∇θ log pθ (τ ) = ∑

> τ

∇θ pθ (τ ) = ∇θ

∑

> τ

pθ (τ ) = ∇θ 1 = 0 .

Lemma 3. Let Φ : Π → R be a differentiable strictly convex function, and let 

DΦ(π∥ρ) := Φ( π) − Φ( ρ) − ⟨∇ Φ( ρ), π − ρ⟩

denote the Bregman divergence induced by Φ. For the following mirror-descent trust-region update: 

πi+1 ∈ arg min 

> π∈Π

{

⟨∇ ℓi(πi), π ⟩ + 1

η DΦ(π∥πi)

}

,

we have, for all π ∈ Π,

⟨η∇ℓi(πi) + ∇Φ( πi+1 ) − ∇ Φ( πi), π − πi+1 ⟩ ≥ 0.

Proof. The objective is convex in π, and πi+1 is a minimizer over the convex set Π. Therefore, the standard first-order optimality condition gives 

⟨∇ ℓi(πi) + 1

η (∇Φ( πi+1 ) − ∇ Φ( πi)) , π − πi+1 ⟩ ≥ 0,

for all π ∈ Π. Multiplying by η gives the final inequality. 

Lemma 4. For any differentiable strictly convex Φ and any u, v, w in its domain, 

⟨∇ Φ( u) − ∇ Φ( v), w − u⟩ = DΦ(w, v ) − DΦ(w, u ) − DΦ(u, v ).

32 Proof. By definition, 

DΦ(x, y ) = Φ( x) − Φ( y) − ⟨∇ Φ( y), x − y⟩.

Upon expanding DΦ(w, v ) − DΦ(w, u ) − DΦ(u, v ) and rearranging terms gives 

Φ( w) − Φ( v) − ⟨∇ Φ( v), w − v⟩ − Φ( w) + Φ( u) + ⟨∇ Φ( u), w − u⟩ − Φ( u) + Φ( v) + ⟨∇ Φ( v), u − v⟩,

which simplifies to 

⟨∇ Φ( u) − ∇ Φ( v), w − u⟩.

Lemma 5. Let {ai}i≥1 be a sequence satisfying ai+1 ≤ (1 − η)ai + b, where η ∈ (0 , 1) . Then, for all i ≥ 1,

ai ≤ (1 − η)i−1a1 + b

> i−2

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k.

Proof. We prove by induction on i. For i = 1 , the bound reduces to a1 ≤ a1, which holds trivially. Next, assume the statement holds for some i ≥ 1. Using the recursion and the induction hypothesis, 

ai+1 ≤ (1 − η)

[

(1 − η)i−1a1 + b

> i−2

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k

]

+ b

= (1 − η)ia1 + b

> i−2

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k+1 + b

= (1 − η)ia1 + b

> i−1

∑

> k=0

(1 − η)k.

This establishes the claim for i + 1 and completes the proof. 

# C Experiment Details 

We use 4 H200 GPUs for all our experiments. For prompts and implementation, we use SDPO’s codebase (LAS Group, ETH Zurich, 2026) on Science and Coding benchmarks whereas OPSD’s codebase (Zhao, 2026) on Mathematics benchmarks. For DistIL, we observe performance degradation for longer sequences y ∼ πθ (· | x), as the cumulative future loss ∑ 

> i>t

H×(·) grows with sequence length, leading to disproportionately large gradient magnitudes. To mitigate this effect, we apply length normalization, similar to Gu et al. (2024). Specifically, we replace the cumulative loss in future-credit assignment in Eq. (5) with 

˜Lt+1 = 1

T − t − 1

∑

> i>t

H×(stopgrad (πθ (· | x, y 1: i−1, f )) ∥ πθ (· | si)) .

## C.1 Hyperparameters for Science and Coding Benchmark 

For Science and Coding benchmarks, we follow the implementation of SDPO and use their reported hyperpa-rameters for baselines. The hyperparameters for SDPO, DistIL (Ours), and GRPO with its off-policy and on-policy variants are provided in Table 3, 4, and 5 respectively. 33 Figure 5 LCBv6 evaluation at τ =0.2 (checkpoint-step 80), reporting Score and Accuracy at Best@ k and Maj@ k for     

> k∈ { 2,4,8,16 }.

## C.2 Hyperparameters for Maths task 

For Mathematics benchmarks, we follow the implementation of OPSD and use their reported hyperparameters for baselines. The hyperparameters for SDPO, OPSD, DistIL (Ours), and GRPO are provided in Table 6 and that for SFT in Table 7. Evaluation hyperparameters are provided in Table 8 for Qwen3-4B-2507-Instruct model and Table 9 for Qwen3-8B model. The only difference between OPSD and SDPO in this scenario is that OPSD uses Forward-KL divergence whereas SDPO uses reverse-KL divergence in these mathematics experiments. 

# D Additional Results 

## D.1 More results for Coding. 

SDPO evaluated their coding experiment at temperature = 0.6. We include results for that scenario in here. DistIL achieves Acc/Mean@16 = 0.660 and Score/Mean@16 = 0.482 , outperforming SDPO ( 0.643 , 0.467 )and GRPO ( 0.639 , 0.411 ). The large gap over GRPO reflects its fundamental inability to exploit execution feedback. Figure 5 notice that the same trend follows as that for temperature= 0.2, except that GRPO becomes slightly better on Accuracy/Best@k for k=16. 34 Table 3 Hyperparameters used for SDPO for each experimental setup. 

Parameters Science Coding General 

Model Qwen/Qwen3-8B allenai/Olmo3-7B-Instruct Qwen/Qwen3-8B Thinking False False 

Data 

Max. prompt length 2048 2048 Max. response length 8192 8192 

Batching 

Question batch size 32 32 Mini batch size 32 1Number of rollouts 8 8

Rollout 

Inference engine vllm vllm Temperature 1.0 1.0 

Validation 

Number of rollouts 16 4Temperature 0.6 0.6 Top-p 0.95 0.95 

SDPO Loss 

Top-K distillation 100 20 Distillation divergence Jensen–Shannon Reverse-KL Clip advantages – –Teacher-EMA update rate 0.05 0.01 Rollout importance sampling clip 2 2

Training 

Optimizer AdamW AdamW Learning rate 1 × 10 −5 (constant) 1 × 10 −6 (constant) Warmup steps 10 0Weight decay 0.01 0.01 Gradient clip norm 1.0 1.0 

35 Table 4 Hyperparameters used for DistIL for each experimental setup. 

Parameters Science Coding General 

Model Qwen/Qwen3-8B allenai/Olmo3-7B-Instruct Qwen/Qwen3-8B Thinking False False 

Data 

Max. prompt length 2048 2048 Max. response length 8192 8192 

Batching 

Question batch size 32 32 Mini batch size 32 1Number of rollouts 8 8

Rollout 

Inference engine vllm vllm Temperature 1.0 1.0 

Validation 

Number of rollouts 16 4Temperature 0.6 0.6 Top-p 0.95 0.95 

SDPO Loss 

Top-K distillation 100 20 Distillation divergence Jensen–Shannon Reverse-KL Clip advantages – –Teacher-EMA update rate 0.01 0.01 Rollout importance sampling clip 2 2

Training 

Optimizer AdamW AdamW Learning rate 5 × 10 −5 (constant) 1 × 10 −6 (constant) Warmup steps 10 0Weight decay 0.01 0.01 Gradient clip norm 1.0 1.0 

36 Table 5 Hyperparameters used for GRPO (On-Policy) and (Off-Policy) for Science and Coding. 

Parameters Value General 

Model Qwen/Qwen3-8B allenai/Olmo3-7B-Instruct Thinking False 

Data 

Max. prompt length 2048 Max. response length 8192 

Batching 

Question batch size 32 Mini batch size 8 (default) / 32 (on-policy) Number of rollouts 8

Rollout 

Inference engine vllm Temperature 1.0 

Validation 

Temperature 0.6 Top-p 0.95 Number of rollouts 16 

Loss 

ϵ-high 0.28 Rollout importance sampling clip 2KL coefficient ( λ) 0.0 

Training 

Optimizer AdamW Learning rate 1 × 10 −6 (default) / 1 × 10 −5 (on-policy) Warmup steps 10 Weight decay 0.01 Gradient clip norm 1.0 

Table 6 Training configuration for GRPO, OPSD, SDPO, DistIL on Mathematics benchmarks. 

Parameter GRPO OPSD/SDPO/DistIL 

Learning Rate 5 × 10 −6 5 × 10 −6

Effective Batch Size 32 32 LoRA Rank ( r) 64 64 LoRA Alpha ( α) 128 128 LoRA Target Modules q_proj, k_proj, v_proj, o_proj, gate_proj, up_proj, down_proj 

Max Completion Length 16,000 16,384 Number of Generations per Prompt 8 1Sampling Temperature 0.7 0.7 KL Coefficient ( β) 0.0 –Training Steps 500 100 

37 Table 7 Training configuration for SFT on Mathematics benchmarks. 

Parameter SFT 

Learning Rate 5 × 10 −6

Effective Batch Size 32 LoRA Rank ( r) 64 LoRA Alpha ( α) 128 LoRA Target Modules q_proj, k_proj, v_proj, o_proj, gate_proj, up_proj, down_proj 

Max Sequence Length 16,000 Number of Training Steps 100 

Table 8 Evaluation parameters for Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 Model on Maths Task. 

Parameter Value 

Max New Tokens 16,384 Thinking Mode Enabled Top-p 0.95 Top-k 20 

Min-p 0.0 Presence Penalty 0.0 Samples per Prompt 64 Temperature 0.7 

Table 9 Evaluation parameters for Qwen3-8B Model on Maths Task. 

Parameter Value 

Max New Tokens 38,912 Thinking Mode Enabled Top-p 1.0 Top-k −1

Min-p 0.0 Presence Penalty 0.0 Samples per Prompt 64 Temperature 1.0 

38