Title: Point of View: How Perspective Affects Perceived Robot Sociability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28272v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:36:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Point of View: How Perspective Affects Perceived Robot Sociability 

Subham Agrawal Aftab Akthar Nils Dengler Maren Bennewitz 

Abstract — Ensuring that robot navigation is safe and socially acceptable is crucial for comfortable human-robot interaction in shared environments. However, existing validation methods often rely on a bird’s-eye (allocentric) perspective, which fails to capture the subjective first-person experience of pedestrians encountering robots in the real world. In this paper, we address the perceptual gap between allocentric validation and egocentric experience by investigating how different perspectives affect the perceived sociability and disturbance of robot trajectories. Our approach uses an immersive VR environment to evalu-ate identical robot trajectories across allocentric, egocentric-proximal, and egocentric-distal viewpoints in a user study. We perform this analysis for trajectories generated from two different navigation policies to understand if the observed differences are unique to a single type of trajectory or more generalizable. We further examine whether augmenting atrajectory with a head-nod gesture can bridge the perceptual gap and improve human comfort. Our experiments suggest that trajectories rated as sociable from an allocentric view may be perceived as significantly more disturbing when experienced from a first-person perspective in close proximity. Our results also demonstrate that while passing distance affects perceived disturbance, communicative social signaling, such as a head-nod, can effectively enhance the perceived sociability of the robot’s behavior. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

As robots increasingly operate in indoor and outdoor environments shared with humans, ensuring that their navi-gation behavior is not only safe but also socially acceptable is crucial for comfortable human-robot interaction [1]. To achieve this, research in the domain of social robotics often considers the humans’ subjective perception of the robot’s sociability [2]. Most studies evaluating perceived sociability use observations of robot behavior and interactions from a bird’s-eye (allocentric) perspective [3] using simplified meth-ods, e.g., videos of the interactions [4]. However, this does not reflect real-world human experience. People naturally interact from a first-person (egocentric) perspective, yet this viewpoint is rarely used to validate navigation algorithms due to practical constraints associated with live unstructured human-robot experiments [5], [6]. Furthermore, existing research involving human partici-pants often relies on comparative assessments of sociabil-ity [7], [8]. This approach biases the user’s opinion by offer-ing a comparative choice between two trajectories rather than explicitly quantifying whether either of them is inherently sociable. These create a misalignment between validation and          

> All authors are with the Humanoid Robots Lab, University of Bonn, Germany. M. Bennewitz is additionally with the Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence and the Center for Robotics, Bonn, Germany. This work has partially been funded by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) under the Robotics Institute Germany (RIG).

Fig. 1: Example robot trajectory from different perspectives as evaluated in our user study. The allocentric perspective is rated as socially acceptable robot behavior. The egocentric-proximal 

perspective experienced by the person closest to the robot results in high perceived discomfort, whereas the egocentric-distal perspec-tive experienced by the person farthest away from the robot shows the robot at a comfortable distance. Based on these findings, we provide design insights for navigation strategies. 

deployment: a trajectory rated as sociable from an allocentric perspective may be perceived as uncomfortable or threaten-ing by a pedestrian experiencing it from an egocentric per-spective. Research suggests that augmenting robot behavior by integrating multi-modal signals can clarify robot intent and improve human comfort, e.g., by incorporating social gestures such as a head-nod [2], [9]. However, there is a lack of empirical evidence both to quantify the perceptual bias on robot behavior and to determine whether a communicative augmentation is effective in closing it. To address the perceptual gap between allocentric vali-dation and egocentric deployment, and the lack of empirical evidence for communicative augmentation, we conduct a user study in a virtual environment. In this study, the participants evaluate identical robot trajectories with respect to sociability and disturbance metrics from the Human-Robot Interaction Evaluation Scale (HRIES) [10]. Two trajectories generated under different navigation policies are used to assess whether the observed metrics are specific to certain policy types or generalizable. The user study questions are presented for all three perspectives: allocentric (2D overhead), egocentric-proximal (close proximity), and egocentric-distal (farther proximity), as shown in Fig. 1. We further examine the effect of communicative head-nod gesture-based augmentation on perceived sociability in egocentric conditions, where bare trajectories are rated poorly. Our results show that perceived sociability is lowest in the egocentric-proximal perspective, whereas perceived disturbance is highest from the same per-

> arXiv:2603.28272v1 [cs.RO] 30 Mar 2026

spective. Furthermore, we found that augmenting the robot’s trajectory with head-nodding behavior improves participants’ perceived sociability, particularly in egocentric conditions, where the robot’s presence is more prominent. Together, these findings provide guidance for designing socially aware navigation algorithms that enhance user experience and re-duce perceived disturbance in close-proximity scenarios. To summarize, the contributions of our work are:  

> •

A user study showing that perceived sociability and disturbance differ significantly across viewpoints.  

> •

An analysis demonstrating that communicative head-nod gestures improve sociability ratings across view-points.  

> •

Design insights for navigation strategies, such as appro-priate passing distances to reduce perceived disturbance and the integration of social gestures to enhance socia-bility. II. R ELATED WORK 

While social navigation demands efficient and safe robot motion in human environments, the field often overempha-sizes objective metrics, i.e., navigation efficiency, success, collision avoidance, and proxemics [3], [6], [11], often over-looking the importance of subjective human feedback. The metrics offer reproducibility but fail to capture the subjective quality of a robot’s trajectory in shared space, leaving a gap between objective performance and human experience. Metrics such as sociability, defined as how well the robot follows the social norms expected by surrounding pedestrians [12], are harder to operationalize. Field stud-ies provide opportunities to collect natural interaction data between humans and robots without any bias from in-structions; however, individual encounters are not directly reproducible [3]. Additionally, large-scale field studies are resource-intensive, complex, and may expose participants to safety risks [3]. This leads to either most studies skipping subjective user ratings entirely or to testing in a scripted lab environment with a small number of participants, which limits the ecological validity of the study, as discussed by Sabanovic et al. [13]. Thus, there is fragmentation in social navigation evaluation methodologies without a consensus about the optimal option [11]. A viable middle ground to bridge the gap between fully controlled experiments and unstructured field observations is to use intercept studies, which is a methodology from survey research. In this method, participants are stopped in public settings after a naturalistic encounter and asked questions about their experience [14]. This approach has been applied in human-robot interaction to study reactions to robots in real-world deployments. For example, Babel et al. [15] deployed a cleaning robot at a train station and assessed pedestrians’ trust and acceptance of the robot via questionnaires. Such studies demonstrate the viability of this method for immediate, context-grounded reactions to robot behaviour. However, such intercept-based studies do not yet evaluate trajectories specifically or compare sociability across different navigation strategies, which is the focus of the present study. In this work, we use a virtual-reality-based environment to conduct a similar intercept-based study, thereby making it repeatable and facilitating comparison of multiple navigation strategies. A substantial portion of HRI user studies examines in-teraction from the user’s perspective. However, many of these studies are based on static robots executing simple pre-defined movements [16]. These studies effectively isolate proximity and approach direction as variables, but do not account for the dynamic, trajectory-level decisions a mobile robot makes in real time. Thus, the results from these studies provide limited insights into how users perceive a robot executing a navigation strategy around them. Other studies, such as those by De Heuvel et al. [17], use both VR and 2D interfaces to examine how user preferences for robot naviga-tion vary with immersion level, particularly highlighting the advantages of VR in improving user engagement and spatial awareness. Similarly, Wozniak et al. [18] and LeMasurier 

et al. [4] demonstrate that VR interfaces enable a richer, more intuitive understanding of robot motion and decision-making, particularly in complex, dynamic environments. Our work takes inspiration to set up a similar VR interface to safely investigate perception-based effects of the perceived sociability of robot navigation strategies. Additionally, several studies also look at expressive social gestures and the reaction of humans to these gestures [19]. Mutlu et al. [20], Baraka et al. [21], and Scales et al. [22] have explored LED displays, head motion, and speed mod-ulation as communication signals. However, the potential of these modules and gestures to modulate users’ perception of robot navigation has not been investigated in depth [23]. Our work aims to look into this gap, as expressive behaviour may serve as a mechanism to compensate for navigation strategies that are technically efficient but socially ambiguous. III. M ETHOD 

A. Problem Statement 

Our work analyzes differences in perceived sociability and disturbance of robot navigation trajectories as expe-rienced by pedestrians from different perspectives. Specif-ically, we consider three different perspectives: Allocen-tric (2D) , Egocentric-Proximal (3D Near) , and Egocentric-Distal (3D Far) . The primary objective of our research is to address the following questions:  

> •

RQ1: Does the perceived sociability of a robot tra-jectory differ across different perspectives: allocen-tric (2D), egocentric-proximal, and egocentric-distal?  

> •

RQ2: Does modifying robot behavior by adding a social gesture improve the sociability of the trajectory?  

> •

RQ3: Can social navigation-based sociability thresholds derived using evaluations in simulation be valid for egocentric settings? 

B. Virtual Reality Interface 

To ensure experimental control and reproducibility, we develop an immersive virtual reality (VR) interface using (a) Allocentric (b) Egocentric-Proximal (c) Egocentric-Distal 

> Fig. 2: The different perspectives of the same trajectory presented to participants: (a) allocentric perspective showing the bird’s-eye view of the trajectories representative of simulation environments, (b) egocentric-proximal perspective of the pedestrian P3 from (a), and (c) egocentric-distal perspective of the pedestrian P5 from (a).

the Unity game engine for the Meta Quest 3. This setup en-ables controlled, repeatable human-robot experiments with-out robot platform errors, safety concerns, or environmental disturbances inherent to real-world deployments. It also allows isolating the effect of perspective on subjective socia-bility and disturbance ratings. The VR scene depicts a shared walking space in which two pedestrian groups approach one another from opposite lanes. Each group consists of three individuals arranged in a V-shaped formation, reflecting the most commonly observed configuration in naturally occur-ring pedestrian groups [24]. The groups walk toward each other at a speed of 0.85 m/s to reduce motion sickness in VR [25], consistent with the lower limit of the range of average pedestrian walking speeds reported in literature [26]. 

C. Perspectives 

A key contribution of this study is the systematic compar-ison of how the same robot navigation behavior is perceived from different viewpoints. We consider three perspective conditions, as shown in Fig. 2:  

> •

Allocentric (2D) : The participant observes a top-down view of the entire interaction. This perspective is rep-resentative of simulation-based navigation evaluations and reflects the viewpoint most commonly used for de-signing and tuning navigation policies. It also provides a baseline for sociability and disturbance ratings in the current evaluation methodology.  

> •

Egocentric-Proximal : The participant views the inter-action from the perspective of the pedestrian walking closest to the robot’s movement trajectory. This condi-tion captures the most immediate and spatially closest experience of the robot’s trajectory.  

> •

Egocentric-Distal : The participant views the interaction from the perspective of the pedestrian positioned fur-thest from the robot within the group. This condition re-flects a more peripheral, but still embodied, experience of the navigation event. Within the egocentric subcondi-tion, this perspective allows isolation of passing distance as a variable and helps answer the question of how far a robot should pass for minimal disturbance.   

> Fig. 3: DWA and RL-based trajectories used for the user study. The DWA trajectory (green) is smooth, whereas the RL-based trajectory (blue) changes lane early. Both trajectories have similar passing distances ( 0.95 m) to the closest pedestrian. The passing distance from the farthest pedestrian ( 2.53 m) is also similar.

D. Robot and Navigation Trajectories 

We use the Toyota Human Support Robot (HSR) [27] to navigate through the group of pedestrians. It is a mobile robot designed to assist people in everyday environments and has been used in multiple studies on human–robot interaction and social navigation [28]–[30]. The HSR follows predefined trajectories generated by two distinct navigation policies: the classical Dynamic Window Approach (DWA) [31], and a Reinforcement Learning (RL) based social navigation pol-icy [28]. These policies produce two distinct robot trajecto-ries, as shown in Fig. 3, enabling a direct comparison of their perceived sociability across perspectives. Using two naviga-tion policies was essential to determine whether the observed differences in sociability and disturbance are specific to one trajectory type or also apply to other types, thereby making these observations more generalizable. Additionally, we evaluate in the study an augmented RL policy-based trajectory with a comforting social gesture to investigate whether this improves the perceived sociability. To keep the overall time of the user study within a reasonable limit for participants, only the RL-based trajectory was augmented. In the following, we introduce the three navigation policies in more detail. 

1) DWA: We use a standard DWA local planner, fine-tuned with a 9-second future-planning window. This time-frame allows the robot to account for pedestrian motion further in advance, resulting in more proactive path planning. Fig. 3 shows the DWA-based trajectory demonstrating a smooth trajectory behavior due to the selected timeframe. This policy serves as a well-established baseline representa-tive of conventional navigation approaches. 

2) RL based Policy: The RL-based social navigation pol-icy generates trajectories learned by the robot in a simulation environment [28]. This policy serves as a representative of machine-learning-based policies in the literature. Fig. 3 shows that the RL-based trajectory adjusts its lane at an earlier point than the DWA-based trajectory. Both trajectories have a minimum passing distance of 0.95 m to the closest pedestrian. 

3) RL-based Policy (Augmented): This condition uses an identical trajectory to the RL-based policy but augments the robot’s motion with a communicative head-nod social gesture. This gesture is directed specifically at the participant from whose perspective the scene is viewed. Such behavior ensures that, under both egocentric conditions, the robot maintains an explicit social acknowledgment of the user. By keeping the underlying path constant while varying only the expressive behavior, we isolate the specific effect of social signaling on the perceived sociability of the trajectory across different perspectives. The gesture is triggered as the robot approaches and is about 2.5 m away from the participant’s position. The head-nod consists of a pitch rotation of 45 ◦.To ensure the gesture is perceptible and socially appropriate, the robot reduces its velocity to 60% of its normal navigation speed during execution. Once the head returns to its neutral orientation, the robot resumes its predefined velocity and continues along its path. 

E. Experimental Design 

We employ a within-subjects design to evaluate the impact of navigation policies and viewing perspectives on perceived social acceptability. The experiment follows a 3 × 3 factorial design with two independent variables:  

> •

Navigation Condition : DWA, RL-based Policy, and RL-based Policy (Augmented).  

> •

Viewpoint : Allocentric, Egocentric-Proximal, and Egocentric-Distal. This produces 9 unique experimental conditions per par-ticipant. An a priori power analysis conducted in G*Power for a repeated-measures ANOVA with medium effect size 

f = 0 .22 , α = 0 .05 , and power 0.80 across 9 measurements indicates a minimum required sample size of 19 participants. To mitigate carryover effects and ensure balanced condition orderings, trial sequences are randomized per participant using a Williams Latin Square design [32]. 

F. User Study 

At the start of the study, participants receive an infor-mation sheet and provide written informed consent. Demo-graphic data are collected alongside a baseline assessment of attitudes toward robots using the Negative Attitudes toward Robots Scale (NARS) [33]. The experimental procedure then proceeds as follows:  

> •

Familiarization : Participants complete one introductory trial to get familiar with the Meta Quest 3 and the virtual environment. They also complete questionnaires to gain experience with the interface used to collect responses during the trials.  

> •

Experimental Trials : Participants observe the robot nav-igating across all 9 counterbalanced conditions. After each trial, a 7-point Likert scale questionnaire (“Totally Agree” to “Not at All”) appears within the VR interface, capturing subjective ratings of sociability and distur-bance across 8 questions. To evaluate the overall social comfort of the robot’s navigation behavior, we selected two distinct subscales from the HRIES questionnaire to be presented as questions to the participants - So-ciability (positive valence: warm, trustworthy, likeable, and friendly) and Disturbance (negative valence: scary, creepy, uncanny, and weird). This dual-scale approach mitigates acquiescence bias and allows independent evaluation of whether specific navigation trajectories and views enhance social presence, mitigate disturbing responses, or both.  

> •

Post-Study Evaluation : After the completion of the trials, participants complete a final questionnaire on behavioral preferences and provide qualitative feedback. We recruited a total of 24 participants ( Mage = 27 .3 years, 

SD = 3 .6) for the user study. Participants reported moderate prior experience with mobile robots and exhibited a neutral baseline attitude toward robots as measured by the NARS. All participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vi-sion. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A. Scale Reliability and Statistical Tests 

Before conducting the primary analysis of the results, the internal consistency of the sociability and disturbance scales is assessed. Both scales demonstrate excellent consis-tency and reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha for sociability (α = 0 .915 ) and disturbance ( α = 0 .91 ) above the accept-able threshold of 0.7. To determine the appropriate statistical tests, the data was analyzed for normality using Shapiro-Wilk tests [34] and for sphericity using Mauchly’s test [35]. Preliminary results revealed that sociability data was normally distributed, thus the parametric One-Way Repeated Measures (RM) ANOVA was used for statistical significance. Additionally, sociability data significantly violated the sphericity assumption, thus the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied to the degrees of freedom. The disturbance data did not meet the normality and sphericity thresholds in the results, and thus, the non-parametric Friedman test was used to analyze this category. 

B. Main Effects and Post-Hoc Comparisons 

The Greenhouse-Geisser corrected RM ANOVA results showed a statistically significant main effect of condition on perceived sociability ( η2 

> p

= 0 .094 , p = 0 .0007 ). The Fried-man test results indicated a statistically significant difference in perceived disturbance across the 9 experimental conditions (a) Sociability Ratings (b) Disturbance Ratings 

Fig. 4: The sociability and disturbance rating results from 24 participants. a) Sociability ratings show the highest sociability for the egocentric-distal case, but the differences amongst viewpoints are not significant. In all cases, the RL-based trajectory augmented with head-nodding received the highest sociability score. b) Disturbance ratings show the highest disturbance for the egocentric-proximal case, which has a significant difference compared to the other two viewpoints. The augmentation did not cause any significant effects on these ratings across viewpoints.                                                                  

> Construct Comparison Test Statistic p-value Effect Size ( g)1. Omnibus Tests (Overall Main Effects)
> Sociability Main Effect of Condition (9 levels) F(8 ,184) = 5 .57 0.0007 η2
> p= 0 .094
> Disturbance Main Effect of Condition (9 levels) χ2(8) = 20 .49 0.0086 –
> 2. Main Effects of Viewpoint (FDR Corrected)
> Sociability Egocentric-Distal vs. Egocentric-Proximal t= 4 .40 0.0006 0.44
> Allocentric vs. Egocentric-Proximal t= 1 .50 0.2136 0.23
> Allocentric vs. Egocentric-Distal t=−1.28 0.2136 −0.22
> Disturbance Egocentric-Distal vs. Egocentric-Proximal W= 34 .00.0084 −0.48
> Allocentric vs. Egocentric-Proximal W= 56 .50.0359 −0.45
> Allocentric vs. Egocentric-Distal W= 98 .00.8082 0.03
> 3. Targeted Simple Effects (Uncorrected)
> Sociability RL + Head Nod vs. RL (Proximal) t= 2 .44 0.0228 0.66
> RL + Head Nod vs. RL (Distal) t= 2 .10 0.0465 0.46
> DWA vs. RL (Proximal) t=−2.86 0.0089 −0.27
> Disturbance RL + Head Nod vs. RL (Proximal) W= 91 .50.4134 0.26
> RL + Head Nod vs. RL (Distal) W= 63 .50.1238 0.42
> DWA vs. RL (Proximal) W= 52 .00.2548 0.21

TABLE I: Statistical Analyses for Sociability and Disturbance. Significant p-values ( < 0.05 ) are presented in bold. Sociability omnibus test uses Greenhouse-Geisser corrected p-value. Results show that viewpoint significantly affects both perceived sociability and disturbance, whereas behavioral enhancements, such as head nodding, increase sociability without significantly affecting disturbance levels. 

of navigation and viewpoints ( χ2 = 20 .49 , p = 0 .0086 ). Together, these omnibus results indicate that the combination of the robot’s navigational trajectory and the user’s viewing perspective significantly affects both perceived sociability and disturbance. Given these significant overall effects, tar-geted post-hoc comparisons were conducted to isolate the specific impacts of viewpoint and trajectory design. To evaluate the main effects of viewing perspective, pair-wise comparisons were conducted across the three view-points. The sociability and disturbance ratings are shown in Tab. II and Fig. 4, and the associated statistical analyses are shown in Tab. I. The p-values of these tests were adjusted using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction to account for multiple comparisons. For sociability, paired t-tests revealed that the egocentric-distal viewpoint was rated as significantly more sociable than the egocentric-proximal viewpoint (p < 0.01 ). However, there were no significant differences in sociability ratings between the allocentric viewpoint and either of the egocentric viewpoints. For disturbance, Wilcoxon signed-rank tests showed that the egocentric-proximal viewpoint was significantly more disturbing than both the allocentric (p < 0.05 ) and egocentric-distal (p < 0.01 ) viewpoints . These results show that users generally experience a significant decrease in social comfort when a robot operates in close physical proximity. While positive sociability feelings do not show a significant difference, negative disturbance feelings are perceived more strongly by users in closer proximity. Sociability Disturbance Perspective Trajectory Mean SD Mean SD                                     

> Allocentric DWA 3.90 1.17 2.39 1.14 RL-based 3.99 1.26 2.31 1.25 RL-based + Head Nod 3.99 1.36 2.07 1.11 Egocentric-Distal DWA 3.96 1.42 2.29 1.21 RL-based 4.00 1.45 1.92 0.82 RL-based + Head Nod 4.71 1.57 2.47 1.65 Egocentric-Proximal DWA 3.15 1.22 2.80 1.36 RL-based 3.50 1.33 2.51 1.35 RL-based + Head Nod 4.48 1.59 2.91 1.68

TABLE II: Sociability and Disturbance across Perspective and Trajectory conditions. Means and Standard Deviations are reported. Results indicate that the RL-based trajectory with a head nod achieves the highest sociability ratings across all perspectives. The egocentric-proximal condition is the least sociable and most disturbing perspective, regardless of the trajectory used. 

C. Impact of Head-Nod and Trajectory Design 

Because the egocentric-proximal perspective exhibited the worst sociability and the highest disturbance, targeted simple-effects testing was conducted to determine whether specific strategies could mitigate this issue. To this end, we evaluated the ratings for the RL-based policy and the augmented RL-based policy. In the egocentric-proximal con-dition, augmenting the trajectory with head-nod signifi-cantly increased sociability compared to the standard RL-based policy (p < 0.05 ). In the egocentric-distal condition, although sociability improved, the difference was not sta-tistically significant. Interestingly, head-nod-based augmen-tation of the trajectory did not significantly alter perceived disturbance in either egocentric-proximal or egocentric-distal conditions. This shows that while augmenting the trajectory with a socially communicative gesture could improve the perceived sociability of the robot’s behavior, it does little to mitigate the uneasiness associated with the passing distance. Furthermore, different navigation algorithms without head-nod augmentation were also compared to understand the effect of the timing of lane change on sociability and disturbance For the egocentric-proximal condition, the RL-based trajectory was rated as significantly more sociable than the traditional DWA trajectory ( p < 0.05 ). However, there was no significant difference in perceived disturbance between the two trajectories. This suggests that the distur-bance rating is more likely to be influenced by the distance at which the robot passes the user, whereas the perceived sociability is influenced by the timing of the lane change in this case. Further studies are required to isolate and verify this finding across different scenarios. 

D. NARS Subscale Effects 

The NARS responses from participants were collected to assess whether they held preconceived opinions about robots and to analyze the effect these might have on their ratings. The regression analyses, as shown in Tab. III, revealed that, among the three subscales of the NARS questionnaire, only the Negative Attitudes toward Situations of Interaction (S1) subscale significantly predicted sociability in human-robot interaction.                                 

> Predictor Outcome b (Slope) rR² p-value
> S1 Sociability -0.1527 -0.6226 0.3877 0.0012
> Disturbance 0.0174 0.0876 0.0077 0.6840 S2 Sociability -0.0829 -0.3208 0.1029 0.1264 Disturbance 0.0082 0.0393 0.0015 0.8553 S3 Sociability -0.1573 -0.3135 0.0983 0.1357 Disturbance 0.0546 0.1344 0.0181 0.5314

TABLE III: Regression Analysis for Sociability and Disturbance across NARS Subscales. Only the S1 subscale explains the Socia-bility scores, which means if participants had situational anxiety about robots, then they rated the interaction with the robot as less sociable. 

Results explain 39% of the variance (R² = 0.388 , p = 0.001), indicating that participants who expressed greater anxiety about robot interactions rated the robot as significantly less sociable . In contrast, no significant relationships were found between the subscales and disturbance, suggesting that perceived disturbance was not influenced by pre-existing attitudes toward robots. The subscale S2 (Negative Attitudes toward Social Influence of Robots) and S3 (Negative Attitudes toward Emotions in Interaction) were not significant predictors for either sociability or disturbance. The results indicate that perceived sociability is primarily shaped by situational anxiety (S1), whereas disturbance is driven by the robot’s behavior rather than individual attitudes. 

E. Summary 

In summary, the results from the user study answer our re-search questions and indicate that perceived sociability is not significantly different between the allocentric and egocentric-proximal perspectives. However, the perceived disturbance differs significantly, with the allocentric perspective yield-ing a lower disturbance rating than the egocentric-proximal perspective. Our user study suggests that sociability metrics from allocentric perspective-based simulations are not valid in egocentric settings, as they lead to greater perceived disturbance, especially in close-proximity situations. Finally, modifying robot behavior by augmenting the trajectory with a head-nod gesture improves the perceived sociability. Thus, future work should adopt a dual strategy that uses social gestures to make the robot’s behavior appear more social while maintaining as large a passing distance as possible to minimize inherent discomfort from the robot’s physical presence. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we present a novel VR-based user study to explore the impact of different perspectives: allocen-tric (2D overhead), egocentric-proximal (close proximity), and egocentric-distal (farther proximity), on the perceived sociability and disturbance caused by robot navigation behav-ior. By comparing across all three perspectives, we identified where allocentric evaluations differ from paths considered sociable from a first-person perspective, and whether distance influences perceived sociability from an egocentric view-point. The results of our user study indicate that perceived socia-bility is lowest in the egocentric-proximal perspective, while perceived disturbance is highest for the same viewpoint. This shows that trajectories that appear sociable under the allocentric conditions used to design and validate navigation algorithms may be perceived as significantly more disturbing when experienced from a first-person perspective. Addi-tionally, using the head-nod gesture significantly improved sociability ratings, highlighting the importance of social signaling in close-proximity navigation. Thus, while the passing distance primarily drives disturbance, sociability can be actively improved through communicative behavior. Com-parisons between different robot trajectories also indicate that perceived sociability may be higher for navigation behavior that leads to an earlier lane change, whereas perceived dis-turbance may be affected by the distance between the robot and the pedestrian. These findings provide valuable insights for improving the sociability of human aware navigation strategies. REFERENCES [1] A. Vega-Magro, L. Manso, P. Bustos, P. N´ u˜ nez, and D. G. Macharet, “Socially acceptable robot navigation over groups of people,” in 2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) , 2017. [2] S. Guill´ en-Ruiz, J. P. Bandera, A. Hidalgo-Paniagua, and A. Bandera, “Evolution of socially-aware robot navigation,” Electronics , 2023. [3] Y. Gao and C.-M. Huang, “Evaluation of socially-aware robot navi-gation,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 2022. [4] G. LeMasurier, J. Tukpah, M. Wonsick, J. Allspaw, B. Hertel, J. Ep-stein, R. Azadeh, T. Padir, H. A. Yanco, and E. Phillips, “Comparing a 2d keyboard and mouse interface to virtual reality for human-in-the-loop robot planning for mobile manipulation,” in 2024 33rd IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (ROMAN) , 2024. [5] C. Mavrogiannis, A. M. Hutchinson, J. Macdonald, P. Alves-Oliveira, and R. A. Knepper, “Effects of distinct robot navigation strategies on human behavior in a crowded environment,” in 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) , 2019. [6] C. Mavrogiannis, F. Baldini, A. Wang, D. Zhao, P. Trautman, A. Stein-feld, and J. Oh, “Core challenges of social robot navigation: A survey,” 

ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction , 2023. [7] A. Bera, T. Randhavane, E. Kubin, A. Wang, K. Gray, and D. Manocha, “The socially invisible robot navigation in the social world using robot entitativity,” in 2018 ieee/rsj international confer-ence on intelligent robots and systems (iros) , 2018. [8] Y. Wen, X. Wu, K. Yamane, and S. Iba, “Socially-aware mobile robot trajectories for face-to-face interactions,” in International Conference on Social Robotics , 2022. [9] M. Heerink, B. Krose, V. Evers, and B. Wielinga, “The influence of a robot’s social abilities on acceptance by elderly users,” in ROMAN 2006-The 15th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , 2006. [10] N. Spatola, B. K¨ uhnlenz, and G. Cheng, “Perception and evaluation in human–robot interaction: The human–robot interaction evaluation scale (hries)—a multicomponent approach of anthropomorphism,” 

International Journal of Social Robotics , 2021. [11] A. Francis, C. P´ erez-d’Arpino, C. Li, F. Xia, A. Alahi, R. Alami, A. Bera, A. Biswas, J. Biswas, R. Chandra, et al. , “Principles and guidelines for evaluating social robot navigation algorithms,” ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction , 2025. [12] M. Luber, L. Spinello, J. Silva, and K. O. Arras, “Socially-aware robot navigation: A learning approach,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2012. [13] S. ˇ Sabanovi´ c, “Robots in society, society in robots: Mutual shaping of society and technology as a framework for social robot design,” 

International Journal of Social Robotics , 2010. [14] S. Sudman, “Improving the quality of shopping center sampling,” 

Journal of Marketing research , 1980. [15] F. Babel, J. Kraus, and M. Baumann, “Findings from a qualitative field study with an autonomous robot in public: exploration of user reactions and conflicts,” International Journal of Social Robotics , 2022. [16] M. L. Walters, K. Dautenhahn, S. N. Woods, K. L. Koay, R. Te Boekhorst, and D. Lee, “Exploratory studies on social spaces be-tween humans and a mechanical-looking robot,” Connection Science ,2006. [17] J. De Heuvel, D. Marta, S. Holk, I. Leite, and M. Bennewitz, “The impact of vr and 2d interfaces on human feedback in preference-based robot learning,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025. [18] M. K. Wozniak, R. Stower, P. Jensfelt, and A. Pereira, “Happily error after: Framework development and user study for correcting robot perception errors in virtual reality,” in 2023 32nd IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) , 2023. [19] J. De Wit, P. Vogt, and E. Krahmer, “The design and observed effects of robot-performed manual gestures: A systematic review,” 

ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction , 2023. [20] B. Mutlu, T. Shiwa, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, and N. Hagita, “Footing in human-robot conversations: how robots might shape participant roles using gaze cues,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference on Human robot interaction , 2009. [21] K. Baraka, S. Rosenthal, and M. Veloso, “Enhancing human under-standing of a mobile robot’s state and actions using expressive lights,” in 2016 25th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication (RO-MAN) , 2016. [22] P. Scales, O. Aycard, and V. Auberg´ e, “Planning socially expressive mobile robot trajectories,” Sensors , 2024. [23] M. Pascher, U. Gruenefeld, S. Schneegass, and J. Gerken, “How to communicate robot motion intent: A scoping review,” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,2023. [24] M. Moussa¨ ıd, N. Perozo, S. Garnier, D. Helbing, and G. Theraulaz, “The walking behaviour of pedestrian social groups and its impact on crowd dynamics,” PloS one , 2010. [25] D. Page, R. W. Lindeman, and S. Lukosch, “Identifying strategies to mitigate cybersickness in virtual reality induced by flying with an interactive travel interface,” Multimodal Technologies and Interaction ,2023. [26] R. L. Knoblauch, M. T. Pietrucha, and M. Nitzburg, “Field studies of pedestrian walking speed and start-up time,” Transportation research record , 1996. [27] T. Yamamoto, K. Terada, A. Ochiai, F. Saito, Y. Asahara, and K. Murase, “Development of human support robot as the research platform of a domestic mobile manipulator,” ROBOMECH journal ,2019. [28] S. Agrawal, N. Dengler, and M. Bennewitz, “Evaluating robot in-fluence on pedestrian behavior models for crowd simulation and benchmarking,” in International Conference on Social Robotics , 2024. [29] S. Agrawal, N. Ostermann-Myrau, N. Dengler, and M. Bennewitz, “Peroi: A pedestrian-robot interaction dataset for learning avoidance, neutrality, and attraction behaviors in social navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16481 , 2025. [30] M. Kim, J. Lee, S. J. Jorgensen, and L. Sentis, “Social navigation planning based on people’s awareness of robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.08780 , 2018. [31] D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, “The dynamic window approach to collision avoidance,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine , 2002. [32] E. J. Williams, “Experimental designs balanced for the estimation of residual effects of treatments,” Australian Journal of Scientific Research Series A: Physical Sciences , 1949. [33] T. Nomura, T. Suzuki, T. Kanda, and K. Kato, “Measurement of neg-ative attitudes toward robots,” Interaction Studies. Social Behaviour and Communication in Biological and Artificial Systems , 2006. [34] S. S. Shapiro and M. B. Wilk, “An analysis of variance test for normality (complete samples),” Biometrika , 1965. [35] J. W. Mauchly, “Significance test for sphericity of a normal n-variate distribution,” The annals of mathematical statistics , 1940.