Title: See Something, Say Something: Context-Criticality-Aware Mobile Robot Communication for Hazard Mitigations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28901v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:09:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# See Something, Say Something: Context-Criticality-Aware Mobile Robot Communication for Hazard Mitigations 

Bhavya Oza 2, Devam Shah 2, Ghanashyama Prabhu 2, Devika Kodi 2,and Aliasghar Arab 1,2∗

Abstract — The proverb “see something, say something” cap-tures a core responsibility of autonomous mobile robots in safety-critical situations: when they detect a hazard, they must communicate—and do so quickly. In emergency scenarios, delayed or miscalibrated responses directly increase the time to action and the risk of damage. We argue that a system-atic context-sensitive assessment of the criticality level, time sensitivity, and feasibility of mitigation is necessary for AMRs to reduce time to action and respond effectively. This paper presents a framework in which VLM/LLM-based perception drives adaptive message generation, for example, a knife in a kitchen produces a calm acknowledgment; the same object in a corridor triggers an urgent coordinated alert. Validation in 60+ runs using a patrolling mobile robot not only empowers faster response, but also brings user trusts to 82% compared to fixed-priority baselines, validating that structured critical-ity assessment improves both response speed and mitigation effectiveness. 

I. INTRODUCTION Mobile robots are increasingly deployed across public spaces, healthcare facilities, industrial sites, and emergency response environments [1]–[3]—and their scale and auton-omy will only grow. As they operate alongside people, AMRs have a unique opportunity to act as proactive safety agents: detecting risks before they escalate and coordi-nating mitigation with nearby individuals, responders, and infrastructure. The proverb “see something, say something” captures this responsibility precisely—but in safety-critical situations, how and what the robot says matters as much as whether it speaks at all. A knife in a kitchen and a knife in a corridor are the same object; the response must not be. Without a systematic framework to assess a situation’s criticality—how dangerous it is, how urgent the response must be, and who can best act on it—robots default to fixed, context-free alerts that cause alarm fatigue, erode trust, and increase time to action [4]–[6]. Crisis management research establishes that effective emergency response depends on four sequential stages: de-tection of risk, recognition and interpretation of that risk in context, communication of risk to the relevant parties, and           

> This work was supported by the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, New York University Tandon School of Engineer-ing, and a Nokia Bell Labs Research Award.
> 1Aliasghar Arab is with The City College of New York, Grove School of Engineering, New York, NY 10031, USA.

aarab@ccny.cuny.edu                  

> 2Bhavya, Devam, Ghanashyama, Devika, and Aliasghar are with ASAS LABS, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Tan-don School of Engineering, New York University, 6MetroTech Cen-ter, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.

{bpo7912, ds7855, ip2499, dak9250, aliasghar.arab }@nyu.edu 

Fig. 1: A patrolling AMR detecting a fallen person, corre-lating a nearby knife with heightened risk, and triggering a context-aware mitigation response. mobilization of a coordinated collective response [7]. Criti-cally, communication at the wrong register—too alarming for a low-risk event, or too muted for a high-risk one—induces unnecessary panic, erodes responder trust, and delays the mobilization of the right mitigation resources [7]–[9]. Recent Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language Mod-els (LLMs) make context-sensitive communication possible for embodied robots: VLMs interpret scenes by combining visual perception with semantic understanding [10]–[12], while LLMs generate context-aware, human-readable guid-ance calibrated to assessed risk [13], [14]. Notably, these foundational models can distinguish a low-risk situation from a high-risk one involving the same object, going well be-yond classical object-level approaches [15]–[17]. Yet existing robot communication systems remain largely rule-based and non-adaptive, lacking a principled mapping from context to mitigation action [18]–[20]. This paper proposes a systematic framework in which an AMR assesses each situation through three formally defined factors—criticality level, time sensitivity, and feasibility of mitigation—and uses foundational models to select the best mitigation response within its capabilities. Building on prior work on social navigation [21], [22], proactive safety [23], and collaborative robot safety [24], the framework adjusts message tone, character, and content to the computed crit-icality: a calm inquiry for low-risk situations, an urgent coordinated alert for high-risk ones. Implemented on a pa-trolling mobile robot with VLM-based scene understanding 

> arXiv:2603.28901v1 [cs.RO] 30 Mar 2026

and LLM-based reasoning [12], [14], validation across 60+ runs demonstrates 82% user trust, a 10% gain in detection ac-curacy, and strict compliance with escalation constraints [4], [25]—validating that systematic, context-sensitive criticality assessment empowers faster hazard mitigation and improves mitigation effectiveness. II. PROBLEM FORMULATION We formalize context-criticality-aware robot communica-tion as a four-step sequential decision problem, grounded in the crisis management framework of [7]: (i) detect a hazard from the robot’s observation, (ii) recognize and interpret 

the risk by extracting three contextual factors capturing how dangerous the situation is, how urgent the response must be, and who can best mitigate it, (iii) communicate risk through a message whose tone and character are calibrated to avoid panic while conveying the correct level of urgency, and (iv) 

mobilize the appropriate responders by routing the message to the right recipients. Section III describes how foundational models realize each step. 

A. Step 1 — Hazard Detection 

Let Ot denote the robot’s multimodal observation at time t (RGB image, visual attention map, spatial context). Perception maps this observation to a hazard label: 

Definition 1 (Hazard Detection) .

at = fhazard (Ot), at ∈ A (1) where A is the discrete set of hazard categories (e.g., sharp object, person down, unattended item). 

Remark 1 (Detection is Not Enough) . Knowing what was detected ( at) is necessary but not sufficient to determine the right response. The same object detected in different environments requires a fundamentally different communi-cation action. The three contextual factors below resolve this ambiguity. 

B. Step 2 — Contextual Factors 

Definition 2 (Contextual Factors) . Given at and Ot, context understanding extracts the triple: 

θt = ( dt, τ t, ϕ t) ∈ Θ (2) The three factors are defined as follows. 

Criticality Level dt ∈ {Low , Medium , High } reflects the inherent severity of the detected hazard within its en-vironmental context. The same object may carry a different severity depending on location and surrounding activity. 

Time Sensitivity τt ∈ { Immediate , Soon , Near Future }

captures urgency. Immediate indicates imminent harm requir-ing instant action; Soon denotes a risk likely to materialize within a short window; Near Future indicates a potential risk that is not yet pressing but should be logged. 

Feasibility of Mitigation ϕt ∈{Robot , PoC , Help Needed } identifies who is best positioned to resolve the hazard: the robot itself, anearby Person of Contact (PoC), or external emergency responders when the situation exceeds local capacity. 

C. Step 3 — Risk Assessment 

The three contextual factors, together with broader envi-ronmental context θenv (location type, crowd density, pres-ence of vulnerable individuals), determine the overall criti-cality: 

Definition 3 (Risk of Loss Criticality) .

kt = fcriticality (dt, τ t, ϕ t, θ env ) (3) 

Remark 2 (Context-Dependence of Criticality) . The same physical hazard at yields a different criticality kt depending on the context; for example, a knife during the preparation of food in a kitchen yields dt = Low, τt = Near Future, 

ϕt = Robot, and thus kt = Low; the same knife in a public corridor yields dt = High, τt = Immediate, ϕt =

Help Needed, and thus kt = High. Section III shows how an LLM realizes fcriticality from scene context. 

D. Step 4 — Criticality-Aware Communication 

Definition 4 (Communication Tuple) . A robot-to-human message at time t is a structured tuple: 

Mt = ( mt, γ t, χ t) ∈ C (4) where mt is the message text (clear, precise, and instructive), 

γt ∈ [0 , 10] is the tone (communication intensity, scaled by 

kt), and χt ∈ { inquiry , alert , urgent } is the character type 

(matched to kt). Section III specifies the exact mapping from 

kt to each component. The complete communication output pairs the message tu-ple with a recipient set rt ⊂ { nearby , remote , coordination },also determined by kt:

ct = ( Mt, r t) (5) 

E. Objective 

The robot selects a communication policy π over the hori-zon [0 , T ] to minimize expected hazard loss while penalizing alarm fatigue: 

min  

> π

E

" TX

> t=0



Lhazard (St, c t) + λ L fatigue (c0: t)

#

(6) where St = ( at, θ t, k t) is the system state at time t, Lhazard 

captures residual risk or mitigation failure when the message fails to prompt timely action, Lfatigue penalizes excessive or repeated alerts that erode human trust, and λ > 0 balances safety urgency against communication fatigue. 

Assumption 1 (Communication Effectiveness) . Policy per-formance is quantified by a scalar ε ∈ [0 , 1] defined as the weighted combination of four sub-metrics: 

ε = w1 εdet + w2 εmsg + w3 εcoord + w4 εlat , wi = 0 .25 ∀i

(7) 

where εdet is detection accuracy, εmsg is criticality-message alignment, εcoord is coordination success rate, and εlat = 1 −

Ttotal /T max is latency compliance. Equal weights ( wi = 0 .25 )are used in the current implementation, treating each sub-metric as equally important; domain-specific weighting is a direction for future work. The system is inactive when ε =0. A higher ε indicates better alignment between criticality 

kt and communication impact. Section IV reports ε as the primary evaluation metric. 

III. METHODOLOGY The objective is to realize the mapping (at, θ t) 7 → (kt, c t)

via foundational models while enforcing the alarm constraint Eq. (13) and maximizing ε Eq. (7). The system consists of five components: (1) multimodal hazard detection; (2) context-aware risk assessment; (3) criticality-driven message generation; (4) multi-party communication; and (5) integra-tion with the autonomous navigation stack. 

A. Hazard Detection Model 

Let X ∈ Rm×n×3 denote the raw image. A heatmap 

H = g(X) highlights salient regions via Grad-CAM, and a scene caption L = f (X, H ) is generated by Bootstrapped Language-Image Pre-training (BLIP). The LLM fuses both to infer the hazard: 

at = LLM (ψ(H, X )) , at ∈ A (8) where ψ(H, X ) fuses visual saliency and scene context. The same LLM call also extracts the contextual factors 

θt = (dt, τ t, ϕ t) as structured outputs: the prompt (Sec-tion IV) instructs the model to jointly infer hazard category, criticality level dt, time sensitivity τt, and feasibility of mitigation ϕt from the fused visual-linguistic context. This realizes Step 2 of the Problem Formulation (Section II) within a single inference pass. 

Remark 3 (Context Disambiguation) . By conditioning on both the visual heatmap H and the scene caption L (Eq. (8)), the LLM can disambiguate objects that are superficially identical but contextually different—e.g., a knife in a kitchen versus a knife in a corridor—yielding different at classifi-cations and different θt extractions, which in turn produce different kt values via Eq. (3). 

B. Criticality-Driven Message Generation 

Given at and θt = (dt, τ t, ϕ t) (Section II), the LLM returns a continuous risk score ρt ∈ [0 , 10] , which is thresholded to obtain the discrete criticality kt:

kt =



Low , ρt ∈ [0 , 4] 

Medium , ρt ∈ [5 , 7] 

High , ρt ∈ [8 , 10] 

(9) realizing fcriticality from Eq. (3). The three-band thresholds 

[0 –4] , [5 –7] , [8 –10] are consistent with standard three-tier risk severity classifications used in occupational safety frameworks and were empirically validated across the five experimental scenarios. Tone intensity is set to γt = ρt,directly coupling communication urgency to the numerical risk score. 

Remark 4 (LLM Consistency and Opacity) . Because fcriticality 

is realized by a prompted LLM, the mapping is not analyt-ically inspectable. Across repeated runs on identical inputs, the system produced consistent kt classifications; however, determinism is not guaranteed across API versions. This is a known limitation: the formal framework provides struc-tural guarantees (alarm constraint Eq. (13), recipient routing Eq. (14)), while LLM reliability remains an empirical prop-erty. Ablation studies isolating the individual contribution of 

dt, τt, and ϕt to ρt, and formal analysis of edge-case failure modes, are planned as future work. The message text is generated by the LLM conditioned on the detected hazard, criticality, and environment: 

mt = LLM comm (at, k t, θ env ) (10) The tone γt and character χt are then set according to kt

by 

γt =



[0 , 4] , kt = Low 

[5 , 7] , kt = Medium 

[8 , 10] , kt = High (11) and 

χt =



inquiry , kt = Low alert , kt = Medium urgent , kt = High (12) yielding the communication tuple Mt Eq. (4). The audible alarm signal aalarm  

> t

∈ { 0, 1} is activated only for non-Low criticality: 

aalarm  

> t

=

(

1, kt ∈ { Medium , High }

0, kt = Low (13) preventing unnecessary escalation and alarm fatigue. Recip-ient selection follows criticality: 

rt =



{nearby }, kt = Low 

{nearby, remote }, kt = Medium 

{nearby, remote, coordination }, kt = High (14) 

C. Latency and Time-to-Communication 

Total communication latency is: 

Ttotal = Tcamera + Theatmap + TLLM + Tcomm ≤ Tmax (15) Higher-criticality messages are prioritized in scheduling to minimize P 

> i

Ti and maximize mitigation effectiveness; this priority scheduling directly reduces the time to first alert for urgent events compared to FIFO processing. In our exper-imental implementation, Ttotal (Eq. (15)) averaged approxi-mately 12 seconds with the BLIP + ChatGPT-4.0 pipeline. Onboard tasks ( Tcamera , Theatmap via Grad-CAM) completed within ∼2.5 s on the Jetson Nano; the remaining ∼9.5 swere attributed to cloud LLM/VLM API round-trips ( TLLM ). The observed worst-case latency across all 60+ runs was below Tmax = 20 s. To manage API variability, a fallback rule-based policy activates when Ttotal > Tmax : the last known kt classification is used to dispatch a conservative pre-formulated alert, ensuring communication is never fully blocked by cloud latency. Algorithm 1: Context-Aware Criticality and Alarm-Constrained Communication  

> 1

Initialize VLM, LLM, Context Module, Communication Module;  

> 2

Initialize alarm state aalarm  

> t

← 0;

while robot navigating do  

> 3

Capture observation Ot = ( X, H ); 

> 4

Detect hazard at;

if at detected then  

> 5

Extract θt = ( dt, τ t, ϕ t); 

> 6

Compute criticality kt via Eq. (3);  

> 7

Generate mt, set γt, χt, aalarm  

> t

, rt; 

> 8

Deliver ct = ( Mt, r t); 

> 9

Update navigation policy to avoid hazard; 

end else  

> 10

Reset aalarm  

> t

← 0; // clear alarm when no hazard present 

end  

> 11

Execute navigation step; 

end Deployment Tradeoff. Table I shows that Gemini 2.0 Flash achieves ∼5 s latency, which may be preferable for High-criticality scenarios (e.g., person down) where the ∼12 

s GPT-4.0 pipeline is safety-marginal. However, Gemini 2.0 Flash exhibited weaker visual-grounded reasoning in am-biguous cases (e.g., toy vs. real gun), where the BLIP + GPT-4.0 pipeline outperformed. A hybrid policy—using Gemini for initial fast triage and GPT-4.0 for disambiguation—is a promising direction for future work. 

D. System Implementation and Hardware Architecture 

The proposed context-aware framework is realized through a modular hardware-software stack designed for real-time edge-to-cloud processing, building upon established mobile robot control and safety standards. 

Hardware Configuration: The system is deployed on a custom patrolling mobile robot centered around an NVIDIA Jetson Nano compute module. Primary sensing is provided by an Intel RealSense RGB-D camera for visual perception and a LiDAR for spatial mapping and navigation . Human-robot interaction is enabled via a high-gain microphone and a localized speaker system to facilitate proactive intent communication. 

Software Pipeline: Operating on ROS 1 Melodic (note: ROS 1 reached end-of-life in May 2025; migration to ROS 2 is planned for future deployment), the software architecture consists of four primary layers:  

> •

Processing Pipeline: Manages raw sensor streams to produce the multimodal observations Ot and visual at-tention maps H using localized gradient-based methods.  

> •

Cloud Integration Layer: Acts as a secure gateway to route processed image features and captions to re-mote model endpoints, ensuring efficient management of computational loads.  

> •

LLM/VLM Processing Engine: Employs BLIP-base [10] (no task-specific fine-tuning) for visual-language grounding and the ChatGPT-4.0 API (gpt-4-0613 snap-shot) for high-level reasoning and risk assessment. The system depends on the commercial OpenAI API, which is subject to version changes and rate limits; repro-ducibility is mitigated by pinning the model snapshot and providing the full prompt in supplementary mate-rial.  

> •

Response Generation: A prompt engineering layer for-mats the resulting criticality kt into the communication tuple Mt. The final output is converted to speech to improve user understanding and assistance during potential hazards. 

E. Multi-Party Coordination 

Communication is transmitted across three channels based on rt: speech and visual alerts for nearby individuals, net-work messaging for remote responders, and API calls to the system for maintenance coordination. The complete pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS We validate the core claim: when a robot sees something, what and how it says it must be adjusted to the criticality level dt, time sensitivity τt, and feasibility of mitigation ϕt

to have maximum impact on hazard mitigation. Experiments were conducted on a patrolling mobile robot running Robot Operating System (ROS) 1 Melodic with multimodal percep-tion and LLM-driven communication, over 60+ runs in build-ing corridors and a kitchen setting. The robot detects hazards via Eq. (1), extracts contextual factors Eq. (2), computes criticality Eq. (3), and delivers a structured communication output Eq. (5). 

Baseline. An object-level baseline uses the same percep-tion pipeline but assigns a fixed criticality by object identity alone (e.g., “knife detected” → High, regardless of con-text), without LLM-based context reasoning. The complete pipeline reasons over the context of the scene to compute θt

and kt, producing differentiated responses to the same object. We acknowledge that this baseline is intentionally simple; a stronger rule-based contextual baseline using predefined location-to-criticality mappings (e.g., kitchen → Low, corri-dor → High) without LLM reasoning would better isolate the contribution of semantic understanding, and is planned for future evaluation. 

Scope. The five scenarios cover a controlled but represen-tative slice of indoor single-hazard situations. Simultaneous or cascading hazards, crowded multi-agent environments, and temporally escalating risks are not evaluated in this work and represent important directions for future empirical expansion. Fig. 2: Workflow of hazard detection, communication strategy generation, and multi-party coordination. TABLE I: Comparison of LLM Communication Models                   

> Evaluation Criteria Gemini 2.0 Flash BLIP + ChatGPT-3.5 BLIP + ChatGPT-4.0
> Tone Direct, fast Balanced, adaptive Calm, safety-oriented Structure Concise Well-structured Explicit hazard reasoning Clarity High (simple tasks) Very high Scenario-specific clarity Context Handling Moderate continuity Strong reasoning Visual-grounded reasoning Latency ∼5 s ∼14 s ∼12 s

LLM Hazard Detection and Communication Prompt 

”You are an indoor patrolling mobile robot per-forming context-aware hazard assessment. Given an image caption and a visual attention summary, in-fer the hazard category, contextual risk level, and appropriate mitigation action. Estimate a risk score (0–10) based on environmental context and human activity. Generate a decision containing hazard type, risk assessment, time sensitivity, feasibility of inter-vention, and a concise human-readable instruction. Risk evaluation must be context-sensitive: the same object may be low risk in a safe context and high risk when associated with unsafe behavior or vulnerable individuals.” 

A. Scenarios: Context Determines What Gets Said 

Five scenarios directly test whether the three risk factors— 

dt, τt, ϕt—correctly determine the message content and delivery channel (Table II):  

> •

S1 – Knife in unsafe area (High): High dt, Immediate 

τt, Help Needed ϕt ⇒ kt = High, urgent alert, alarm activation, email to authorities.  

> •

S2 – Knife in kitchen (Low): Low dt, Near Future τt,Robot ϕt ⇒ kt = Low, inquiry message, no alarm.  

> •

S3 – Person down (High): High dt, Immediate τt, Help Needed ϕt ⇒ kt = High, urgent alert, remote responder notification.  

> •

S4 – Toy / Fake gun (Low): LLM disambiguates context ⇒ kt = Low, cautionary alert, no alarm escalation.  

> •

S5 – Cleaning / Trash (Low): Low dt ⇒ kt = Low, maintenance notification only. 

B. Context Improves What the Robot Detects 

Compared to the object-level baseline (70% detection ac-curacy), the context-aware pipeline achieved 80% accuracy 

(+10%) by reasoning about dt, τt, and ϕt rather than object identity alone. Among the evaluated models detailed in Table I, the BLIP + ChatGPT-4.0 pipeline was selected for deploy-ment. Although ChatGPT-4.0 demonstrated strong linguistic performance, the BLIP-integrated approach provided more reliable vision-grounded reasoning and structured hazard-aware explanations. This multimodal reasoning capability resulted in improved contextual disambiguation and safer communication outputs in ambiguous scenarios. This im-provement is most evident in visually ambiguous cases (e.g., toy gun vs. real gun), where contextual grounding Eq. (3) prevents false escalations and reduces misclassifications. 

Fig. 3: User Evaluation Breakdown (Trust, Understanding, Preference) for different scenarios 

C. Context Determines How the Robot Responds 

Risk scores ρt ∈ [0 , 10] (Eq. (9)) were correctly banded across all scenarios (Fig. 4), and the alarm constraint Eq. (13) TABLE II: Context- and Criticality-Aware Communication Strategies               

> Scenario Context Interpretation Risk Level Communication Strategy
> Knife in Unsafe Sur-rounding Sharp object detected near a person in a public or restricted area High Immediate voice alert, alarm activation, and automated email notification to authorities Knife in Kitchen (Proper Use) Knife identified in a designated kitchen area during food preparation Low No alarm triggered; contextual acknowledg-ment with optional safety reminder Person Lying Down Human detected in abnormal posture on the floor, possibly requiring assistance High Voice alert to nearby individuals and emer-gency notification with location details People in Distress Signs of panic or abnormal human activity detected in the environment High Clear assistance instructions via speech and urgent responder alert with contextual sum-mary Trash / Cleaning Activity Garbage detected without immediate threat or hazardous context Low No alarm; maintenance notification sent as a non-urgent message

was strictly satisfied in every run—alarms activated only for ρt ≥ 5 (i.e., kt ∈ { Medium, High }), preventing un-necessary escalation in Low-criticality scenarios such as kitchen activity or garbage detection. Message generation Eq. (10) and tone/character assignment Eq. (11) matched expected values in 82% of cases : High-criticality events pro-duced urgent, high-intensity guidance; Low-criticality events produced calm, inquiry-level responses. Recipient selection Eq. (14) correctly routed alerts in all runs. This confirms that 

γt and χt effectively operationalize the criticality function and that context changes not just what is said, but how it is said. 

Fig. 4: Scenario-wise risk scores ρt (Eq. (9)): Low [0 –4] ,Medium [5 –7] , High [8 –10] . Alarm activation occurs only for ρt ≥ 5.

D. Human Impact: Trust, Understanding, and Effectiveness 

Study Protocol. The evaluation employed a within-subjects design in which participants were recruited from a university environment with varying levels of prior robot exposure (ranging from none to regular interaction). Each participant experienced both the proposed context-aware sys-tem and the fixed-priority baseline across four representative scenarios. Trust was assessed using 7-point Likert items adapted from the Jian et al. trust-in-automation scale; com-mand understanding was measured via post-scenario com-prehension questions; and preference was elicited through a direct forced-choice comparative rating after paired ex-posure. Participants acted as bystander observers and were not required to take physical mitigation action, consistent with the target deployment role of the robot as a proactive communicator in public environments. User evaluation through structured sessions (Fig. 3) yielded 82% trust , 85% command understanding , and 

78% preference over fixed-priority systems. Compared to a static-priority baseline, the framework reduced unnecessary alarms and improved classification robustness by 10%. The aggregated communication effectiveness factor ε = 0.81 

reflects combined performance in detection accuracy, crit-icality correctness, message appropriateness, coordination success, and latency. Together, these results address both terms of the objective Eq. (6): the 10% accuracy gain and 82% criticality-message alignment reduce Lhazard by ensuring timely, appropriate mitigation; strict alarm constraint com-pliance and reduced unnecessary escalation reduce Lfatigue ,directly preserving human trust. V. CONCLUSIONS This paper formalizes context-criticality-aware communi-cation for hazard mitigation as a sequential decision prob-lem and implements it on a patrolling mobile robot using VLM/LLM-based foundational models. Without a principled mapping from context to communication, robots either over-escalate (causing alarm fatigue) or under-escalate (allowing preventable damage); the proposed framework avoids both failure modes through systematic assessment of criticality level dt, time sensitivity τt, and feasibility of mitigation 

ϕt. Validation across 60+ runs yields ε = 0 .81 , 82% user trust, a 10% accuracy gain over fixed-priority baselines, and strict alarm constraint compliance in every run—confirming that context-sensitive criticality assessment empowers faster hazard mitigation. Future work will pursue factor ablation, broader scenario evaluation, formal verification of fcriticality ,Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP)-based policies, and migration to ROS 2. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors thank Nokia Bell Labs and Mike Coss for their invaluable feedback. The authors appreciate the support and encouragement of our colleagues in the Department of Me-chanical & Aerospace Engineering at New York University. REFERENCES [1] M. Fateh and A. Arab. Robust control of a wheeled mobile robot by voltage control strategy. Nonlinear Dyn. , 79(1):335–348, 2015. [2] A. Urbanelli, A. Frisiello, L. Bruno, and C. Rossi. The ermes chat-bot: A conversational communication tool for improved emergency management and disaster risk reduction. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. ,112:104153, 2024. [3] V. Cohen, J. X. Liu, R. Mooney, S. Tellex, and D. Watkins. Asurvey of robotic language grounding: Tradeoffs between symbols and embeddings. In Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) , pages 7983–7991, 2024. [4] L. Bello, S. Chernova, and A. D. Dragan. Safety perception and trust in human-robot interaction: A comprehensive review. Front. Robot. AI , 11:1245678, 2024. [5] H. Kim et al. The power of intent communication in warehouse robotics. Appl. Ergon. , 113:104084, 2024. [6] G. Campagna and M. Rehm. A systematic review of trust assess-ments in human–robot interaction. ACM Trans. Hum.-Robot Interact. ,14(2):1–35, 2025. [7] Louise K Comfort. Crisis management in hindsight: Cognition, communication, coordination, and control. Public Adm. Rev. , 67:189– 197, 2007. [8] Francesco Branda, Massimo Stella, Cecilia Ceccarelli, Federico Cab-itza, Giancarlo Ceccarelli, Antonello Maruotti, Massimo Ciccozzi, and Fabio Scarpa. The role of AI-based chatbots in public health emergencies: A narrative review. Future Internet , 17(4):145, 2025. [9] Y. Chen et al. Should voice agents be polite during emergency evacuations? In Proc. ACM CHI , 2025. [10] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , pages 12888– 12900. PMLR, 2022. [11] J. Li et al. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597 , 2023. [12] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. Sajjadi, et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. [13] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conf. Robot Learn. (CoRL) , pages 287–318. PMLR, 2022. [14] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conf. Robot Learn. (CoRL) , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. [15] Amine Elhafsi, Rohan Sinha, Christopher Agia, Edward Schmerling, Issa AD Nesnas, and Marco Pavone. Semantic anomaly detection with large language models. Auton. Robot. , 47(8):1035–1055, 2023. [16] Tianchen Ji, Arun Narenthiran Sivakumar, Girish Chowdhary, and Katherine Driggs-Campbell. Proactive anomaly detection for robot navigation with multi-sensor fusion. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. ,7(2):4975–4982, 2022. [17] Taewook Kang, Bum-Jae You, Juyoun Park, and Yisoo Lee. A real-time anomaly detection method for robots based on a flexible and sparse latent space. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. , 158:111310, 2025. [18] W. Hunt, S. D. Ramchurn, and M. D. Soorati. A survey of language-based communication in robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04086 ,2024. [19] Y. Kim, D. Kim, J. Choi, J. Park, N. Oh, and D. Park. Integration of large language models with robotics: Challenges and opportunities. 

Intell. Serv. Robot. , 17(5):1091–1107, 2024. [20] R. Singh et al. Vision-language-action models: Concepts, progress, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.04769 , 2025. [21] O. Sotomi, D. Kodi, and A. Arab. Transparent social navigation for autonomous mobile robots via vision-language models. In IEEE Int. Conf. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (RO-MAN) , pages 1646–1651. IEEE, 2025. [22] A. Arab, K. C. Shekar, C. Prashanth, P. Doma, V. Subramaniam, K. Kurabayashi, O. Sotomi, and D. Kodi. Trust through transparency: explainable social navigation for autonomous mobile robots via vision-language models, November 2025. US Patent App. 19/199,877. [23] P. Maithani, A. Arab, F. Khorrami, and P. Krishnamurthy. Proactive hierarchical control barrier function-based constraint prioritization to enhance safety in human-robot interaction. Control Eng. Pract. ,166:106624, 2026. [24] V. R. P. Badguna, A. Arab, D. A. Kodavalla, R. Li, and K. Kurabayashi. Virtual fencing for safer cobots. In IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng. (CASE) , pages 989–994. IEEE, 2025. [25] L. Cominelli, F. Feri, R. Garofalo, et al. Promises and trust in human-robot interaction. Sci. Rep. , 11:8816, 2021.