Title: Multi-View Video Diffusion Policy: A 3D Spatio-Temporal-Aware Video Action Model

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03181v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 01:01:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Multi-View Video Diffusion Policy: A 3D Spatio-Temporal-Aware Video Action Model 

Peiyan Li 1,2,∗

, Yixiang Chen 1,2,∗

, Yuan Xu 1,2, Jiabing Yang 1,2, Xiangnan Wu 1,2,Jun Guo 4, Nan Sun 4, Long Qian 5, Xinghang Li 4, Xin Xiao 6, Jing Liu 3,

Nianfeng Liu 3, Tao Kong 4,†

, Yan Huang 1,2,3,†

, Liang Wang 1,2,, Tieniu Tan 1,2,71New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

> 2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 

> 3

FiveAges 4Tsinghua University 5Xi’an Jiaotong University 

> 6

Wuhan University 7Nanjing University 

https://lpy1219.github.io/MV-VDP-Web/ 

## Abstract 

Robotic manipulation requires understanding both the 3D spatial structure of the environment and its temporal evolution, yet most existing policies overlook one or both. They typically rely on 2D visual observations and backbones pretrained on static image–text pairs, resulting in high data requirements and limited un-derstanding of environment dynamics. To address this, we introduce MV-VDP, a multi-view video diffusion policy that jointly models the 3D spatio-temporal state of the environment. The core idea is to simultaneously predict multi-view heatmap videos and RGB videos, which 1) align the representation format of video pretraining with action finetuning, and 2) specify not only what actions the robot should take, but also how the environment is expected to evolve in response to those actions. Extensive experiments show that MV-VDP enables data-efficient, robust, generalizable, and interpretable manipulation. With only ten demonstration trajectories and without additional pretraining, MV-VDP successfully performs complex real-world tasks, demonstrates strong robustness across a range of model hyperparameters, generalizes to out-of-distribution settings, and predicts realis-tic future videos. Experiments on Meta-World and real-world robotic platforms demonstrate that MV-VDP consistently outperforms video-prediction–based, 3D-based, and vision–language–action models, establishing a new state of the art in data-efficient multi-task manipulation. 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in robotics driven by large-scale representation learning, including behavioral cloning, diffusion-based policies, and, most prominently, Vision– Language–Action (VLA) models [ 1 –6 ]. While these approaches demonstrate impressive performance across a wide range of tasks and embodiments, they largely lack a unified understanding of the environment’s 3D spatio-temporal state —namely, the underlying 3D structure of the world and how it evolves over time. We attribute this limitation to two common design choices adopted by many contemporary manipu-lation policies. First, most methods [ 7 –12 ] rely predominantly on 2D visual observations, lacking the modeling of 3D geometric structure, while actions are executed in a 3D physical space. This      

> ∗Equal contribution
> †Corresponding author Preprint.
> arXiv:2604.03181v1 [cs.RO] 3 Apr 2026 Deployment
> DreamZero
> 𝜋 0.5 BridgeVLA Ours
> +16%
> Track2Act Ours
> +22%
> Meta -World
> Real -World
> Previous Manipulation Policy
> Vision -
> Language
> Foundation
> Model
> Images
> Text
> Action
> Head
> Action
> State
> Back
> Projection
> Our Multi -View Video Diffusion Policy
> State
> Point cloud
> Multi -View
> Video Sequences
> Multi -View
> Heatmap Sequences
> Video
> Foundation
> Model
> Multi -View
> Projection
> Action
> Multi -View
> Images
> Text
> Multi -View
> Heatmaps

Figure 1: Overview. We introduce MV-VDP, a multi-view video diffusion policy that jointly models the spatio-temporal state of the environment. Compared to prior manipulation policies, our approach: (1) processes 3D-aware multi-view images rather than independent multiple 2D views; (2) represents robot states and actions as multi-view heatmaps , aligning the action space with the representation used in video pretraining; (3) leverages a video foundation model , instead of a traditional vision– language backbone, to jointly model future RGB sequences and heatmap sequences. As a result, MV-VDP achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the Meta-World and real-world benchmarks, outperforming video-prediction–based, 3D-based, and vision–language–action models. observation–action mismatch introduces a substantial learning gap that must be compensated by large amounts of training data. Consequently, under limited demonstration regimes (e.g., fewer than ten trajectories), even state-of-the-art VLA models often fail to generalize. Second, many approaches, including VLAs, adopt backbones pretrained on static image–text pairs [ 13 –16 ]. Such pretraining is not designed to capture how scenes evolve over time, which limits a policy’s ability to anticipate future environmental states. This design choice contrasts with insights from cognitive science, which suggest that effective action selection relies on anticipating how the environment will change in response to actions, rather than merely reacting to instantaneous observations [17]. These observations motivate the following question: 

How can we design a spatio-temporal-aware manipulation policy that encodes 3D structural priors while explicitly modeling environmental dynamics? 

To this end, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we propose M ulti-V iew V ideo D iffusion P olicy (MV-VDP). Our key insight is that spatio-temporal state modeling can be achieved by aligning the representation format of video pretraining with action finetuning . Specifically, MV-VDP: (1) adopts 3D-aware multi-view projections to implicitly encode spatial structure; (2) uses these projections to transform colored point clouds into multi-view RGB images, and to represent robot states and actions as multi-view heatmaps; (3) leverages a unified video foundation model to jointly predict future videos and heatmap sequences, which are subsequently decoded into continuous action chunks. By unifying video prediction and action finetuning within a shared representation space, MV-VDP substantially reduces the gap between perception and control, leading to strong empirical performance. Extensive experiments on the simulation benchmark [ 18 ] and real-world robotic platforms show that MV-VDP consistently outperforms state-of-the-art video-prediction-based, 3D-based, and VLA baselines, exhibiting four distinct advantages: Data-Efficient : MV-VDP successfully acquires challenging manipulation skills and achieves a 100% success rate on a simple pick-and-place task using only ten demonstration trajectories, without any additional robotic pretraining; Robust : MV-VDP is robust to a wide range of training and inference hyperparameters, including the number of diffusion steps and the RGB loss weight. Remarkably, even when the number of diffusion steps is reduced to 1, MV-VDP still maintains strong performance, enabling significantly faster inference than conventional video-action models; Generalizable : MV-VDP generalizes effectively to a variety of unseen settings, including changes in background, object category, height, and lighting conditions; 

Interpretable : MV-VDP provides an interpretable preview of action consequences by predicting future videos alongside actions, thereby enabling safer and more reliable execution. 2Our contributions are summarized as follows: • Concept and insight. We analyze key limitations of existing manipulation policies and, to the best of our knowledge, are the first to leverage video foundation models to construct 3D Video-Action-model (3D VAM). 

• Method. We introduce MV-VDP, a multi-view video diffusion policy that jointly captures spatial structure and temporal dynamics, translating spatio-temporal predictions into executable robot actions. • Experiments. We perform extensive simulations and real-world evaluations, showcasing MV-VDP’s remarkable data efficiency, robustness, generalization, and interpretability. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Vision–Language–Action Models 

Vision–Language–Action (VLA) models have recently emerged as a dominant paradigm for robot manipulation [ 1 –4 , 19 , 5, 11 , 10 , 12 , 20 , 21 ]. These models typically condition on 2D visual observa-tions and language instructions, leverage large Vision–Language Models (VLMs) for representation learning, and decode continuous actions using techniques such as flow matching [ 22 ], diffusion [ 7 ], or fast tokenization [23]. While VLAs demonstrate strong generalization across tasks and embodiments [ 3, 2, 1 ], they often require large-scale robot datasets and primarily emphasize action imitation, with limited explicit modeling of environment dynamics. Our approach addresses these limitations by implicitly encoding 3D-related information and integrating environmental dynamics modeling, ultimately achieving significantly higher data efficiency. 

2.2 Video Prediction for Manipulation 

Video prediction has been widely explored as a mechanism for anticipatory control in robotic manipulation. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into those that train video prediction and action generation separately, and those that train them jointly. 

Separate training. Many methods adopt a two-stage pipeline, first learning to predict future visual observations and then mapping visual representations to actions [ 24 – 27 ]. Variants differ in the intermediate representations used, including RGB videos [ 24 , 25 ], human demonstration videos [ 28 ], optical flow [29], and 2D point trajectories [30]. 

Joint training. More recent work jointly predicts future videos and actions within a unified frame-work [ 9, 31 –37 ], enabling tighter coupling between perception and control. Our method also follows this paradigm, but differs by implicitly incorporating 3D structural priors, aligning the fintuning with the video pretraining and leveraging internet-scale pretrained video foundation models. 

2.3 3D Structural Priors for Manipulation 

Incorporating 3D structural priors into manipulation policies has been studied through several representations. Point-cloud-based methods directly encode 3D geometry for action prediction [38– 41 ], while other approaches use the knowledge in 3D foundation models as an implicit 3D proxy [ 42 ,43 ]. More recently, multi-view image representations, combined with known camera transformations, have emerged as another effective form of 3D priors [44, 45]. Our work also builds on this multi-view paradigm but differs in two key aspects. First, existing approaches typically rely on Vision–Language Models or task-specific networks, whereas MV-VDP employs a video foundation model to jointly capture spatial structure and temporal dynamics. Second, many prior 3D-aware methods focus on predicting key poses or waypoints, while MV-VDP directly predicts continuous actions together with future visual observations, potentially enabling more general manipulation skills. 

## 3 Method 

As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), our MV-VDP consists of three main components, which we introduce sequentially in this section. In Sec. 3.1, we present the multi-view projection module that transforms colored point clouds into multi-view images and heatmap representations. In Sec. 3.2, we describe 3(a) Pipeline of our Multi -View Video Diffusion Policy               

> (c) Architecture of Rotation and Gripper Predictor (b) Architecture of Multi -View Video Diffusion Transformer
> Noised
> Latent
> x N
> Projection Multi -View Video Diffusion Action Decoding
> End -Effector pose
> Multi -View
> Projection
> VAE Encode & Add Noise Text VAE Decode
> Rotation & Gripper
> Predictor
> Back Projection
> Multi -View
> Video
> Diffusion
> Transformer
> x N
> Denoised Latent
> Time Upsample
> Global Feature Extractor Local Feature Extractor
> Fusion
> View Attention
> Cross Attention
> Transformer Encoder
> Rotation
> Rotation
> Head Gripper
> Gripper
> Head
> Norm & Modulate
> Self -Attention
> Norm & Modulate & Reshape
> View -Attention
> Reshape & Norm
> Cross -Attention
> Norm  & Modulate
> FFN
> Time Time Text Time
> ++++
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> （𝐵 , 𝑉 , 𝑇  ∗ 𝐻  ∗ 𝑊 , 𝐶 )
> Ry
> yzx
> Rx
> Rz

Figure 2: Overview of MV-VDP’s pipeline . (a) Point clouds and the current end-effector pose are projected into spatial-aware multi-view RGB images and heatmaps, which are encoded and used to jointly predict future multi-view RGB videos and heatmap videos via a video diffusion model. Predicted heatmaps are back-projected to recover 3D end-effector positions. (b) The multi-view video diffusion transformer augments a pretrained video diffusion backbone with view-attention to enable cross-view interaction. (c) A lightweight action decoder predicts end-effector rotation and gripper states from the denoised video latents. Final action chunks are formed by combining the predicted positions, rotations, and gripper states. the multi-view video diffusion formulation and the corresponding model architecture. In Sec. 3.3, we detail the action decoding procedure, explaining how final actions are recovered from the predicted heatmap sequences and latent representations. Finally, in Sec. 3.4, we introduce the training and inference procedures of MV-VDP. 

3.1 Multi-View Projection 

MV-VDP takes point clouds and the robot end-effector pose as raw inputs. Since redundant point cloud information can negatively affect subsequent model training [ 39 ], we first crop the input point clouds to the workspace boundaries, defined as a cubic volume of 1 m 3.Instead of directly processing the cropped point clouds, we project them onto three fixed views via orthographic projection [ 44 , 45 ]. The projection planes can be flexibly chosen, with the only principle being that the target regions should be observed as clearly as possible. Although adaptively selecting projection planes is a promising direction [ 46 ], we leave this exploration to future work, as it is not the main focus of this paper. For the end-effector pose, rather than encoding it with a separate module, we transform it into multiple heatmaps corresponding to the projection views. After colorization, these heatmaps can be directly processed by the VAE encoder of the Video Foundation Model (VFM). Our intuition is that leveraging off-the-shelf components of pretrained models can reduce the representation gap and better exploit pretrained knowledge. To construct the heatmaps, we first identify the end-effector’s corresponding pixel locations on each projection view. Centered at these pixels, we generate Gaussian heatmaps Hti with spatial truncation: 

Hti (x) = 

pti(x), if pti(x) ≥ τ, 

0, otherwise , (1) 4where t denotes the timestep, i ∈ { 1, 2, ..., n } indexes the view, and x = ( u, v ) denotes the pixel location. The untruncated Gaussian distribution is defined as 

pti(x) = exp 



− ∥x − bxti∥2

2σ2



, (2) where bxti is the projected pixel location of the end effector at timestep t on view i, σ controls the spatial spread of the heatmap, and τ is a probability threshold. At this stage, we obtain the current multi-view RGB images and the corresponding multi-view heatmap images, which are fed into the multi-view video diffusion transformer to predict future multi-view videos and heatmap sequences. 

3.2 Multi-View Video Diffusion 

Our multi-view video diffusion transformer is built upon Wan2.2 [ 47 ], a 5B-parameter video founda-tion model originally pretrained on single-view video datasets. To extend it to the multi-view setting, we augment each Diffusion Transformer (DiT) block [ 48 ] with a view-attention module [ 49 ], as illustrated in Fig. 2 (b). During the forward pass, the input multi-view RGB images and multi-view heatmap images are encoded into latent representations using the pretrained VAE encoder. These latents are then con-catenated along the view dimension, followed by patchifying and flattening across the spatial and temporal dimensions. This process results in token sequences of shape (B, V, T × H × W, C ), where 

B represents the batch size, V denotes the number of views, T is the time length, H is the height, W

is the width, and C is the number of channels. To accommodate the view-attention module, the token sequences are reshaped to (B, T, V ×H×W, C ),enabling explicit interactions across views at each timestep. After applying view attention, the tokens are reshaped back to their original layout and processed by the remaining transformer layers. All other components are kept consistent with the original Wan2.2 architecture to minimize disruption to the pretrained knowledge. The transformer is trained to predict the added noise, enabling multi-step denoising to recover clean latent representations. The resulting latents are decoded by the VAE decoder to generate future multi-view RGB videos and heatmap videos, which are subsequently used for action decoding. Due to space limitations, we provide the full formulation and additional details of the diffusion process in Appendix A. 

3.3 Action Decoding 

After obtaining the predicted heatmap sequences, we back-project the peak locations of the three heatmaps at each timestep into a 3D position in the workspace using known camera parameters. Details of the projection and back-projection procedures are provided in Appendix B. By back-projecting heatmaps across all predicted timesteps, we recover a continuous 3D end-effector trajectory. For rotation and gripper prediction, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (c), we take the denoised latent represen-tations as input. Since the latents are temporally compressed by the VAE, we first upsample them along the temporal dimension. We then employ two convolutional networks to extract global features from the entire latent representation and local features centered around heatmap peak locations, respectively. These features are fused and further aggregated along the view dimension. The latent corresponding to the first frame serves as the conditioning latent. We apply cross-attention between the predicted latents and the conditioning latent to incorporate conditioning information. The resulting representations are encoded by a lightweight four-layer transformer, followed by two separate MLP heads to predict rotation and gripper actions. Rotation and gripper states are discretized, and we predict their changes at each future timestep relative to the conditioning frame. 

3.4 Training & Inference 

Our MV-VDP consists of two trainable modules: (i) a 5B multi-view video diffusion transformer for predicting end-effector positions, and (ii) a lightweight 170M rotation & gripper predictor for estimating rotation and gripper states. 5Training. During training, we apply SE(3) augmentations to the input point clouds and end-effector poses before projecting them into multi-view RGB images and heatmaps. These representations are encoded by a shared VAE encoder and concatenated along the view dimension. To train the multi-view video diffusion transformer, Gaussian noise is added to the latent representa-tions of future frames, with the noise magnitude determined by randomly sampled diffusion timesteps. The model is then trained to predict this injected noise using an MSE loss. Since we predict both videos and heatmap sequences, the total training loss for the multi-view video diffusion transformer consists of two components: 

Ldif f = λL vid + (1 − λ)Lheat , (3) where Lvid is the diffusion loss for the video sequences, Lheat is the diffusion loss for the heatmap sequences, and λ is the weight applied to the video diffusion loss (see Sec. 4.3 for an analysis of key parameters’ robustness). To reduce computational cost, we adopt LoRA fine-tuning. While we also experimented with full fine-tuning (see Sec. 4.4), we observed no performance gains. For training the rotation and gripper predictor, we use ground-truth video latents and heatmap latents as inputs. To enhance robustness, we inject a small amount of random noise into the ground-truth latents. The training targets include the end-effector’s rotation and gripper state. Rotation is represented using Euler angles, discretized into 72 bins (corresponding to a 5◦ resolution), while the gripper state is modeled as a binary variable. The module is trained using cross-entropy loss, formulated as: 

Lpred = Lrol + Lpit + Lyaw + Lgri , (4) where Lrol , Lpit , and Lyaw represent the losses for predicting the three Euler angles, and Lgri 

corresponds to the loss for gripper state prediction. 

Inference. During inference, we take the point cloud and end-effector pose at the current timestep as input and project them into multi-view RGB images and heatmaps, which are encoded to obtain the conditioning latent. Latents for future frames are initialized with random noise. We iteratively denoise the future latents using the multi-view diffusion transformer, while keeping the conditioning latent fixed. After obtaining the predicted clean latents, we decode them through two parallel branches. One branch decodes the latents into multi-view heatmap sequences, which are back-projected to recover 3D position predictions. The other branch feeds the latents into the rotation & gripper predictor to estimate rotation and gripper states. By combining the predicted positions, rotations, and gripper states, we obtain action chunks that are subsequently executed by the robot controller. Additional implementation details and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C. 

## 4 Experiments 

We conduct extensive experiments in both simulation and real-world settings to evaluate the effective-ness of MV-VDP. Our experiments are designed to answer the following questions: Q1: Does MV-VDP outperform state-of-the-art video-prediction–based methods that jointly model future videos and actions? Q2: Does MV-VDP outperform state-of-the-art 3D-based methods that use 3D representations as input? Q3: Does MV-VDP outperform state-of-the-art Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models built on vision–language foundation models? Q4: Can MV-VDP generalize to unseen scenarios, such as novel backgrounds, object heights, lighting conditions, and object categories? Q5: Is MV-VDP robust to different hyperparameter settings, such as the number of diffusion steps? Q6: Are the proposed architectural designs essential to the performance of MV-VDP? Q7: Do the videos predicted by MV-VDP faithfully capture the actual outcomes of executed actions? 

4.1 Meta-World Experiments Setup. Meta-World [ 18 ] is a standardized simulation benchmark consisting of diverse tabletop manipulation tasks with randomized object and goal configurations. All tasks are performed using a 6Table 1: Success rates on seven Meta-World tasks under a low-data regime (5 demonstrations per task). Each entry reports the number of successful rollouts out of 25 trials. Our method (MV-VDP) achieves the highest average success rate and consistently outperforms prior video-prediction and behavior-cloning baselines.                                                                          

> Method Meta-World Tasks Avg. Succ. (%) ↑
> D-Open D-Close Btn Btn-Top Fct-Cls Fct-Open Handle UniPi [26] 0/25 9/25 3/25 0/25 1/25 3/25 4/25 11 .40
> BC-Scratch [50] 6/25 9/25 9/25 3/25 5/25 5/25 9/25 26 .20
> BC-R3M [50] 1/25 15/25 9/25 1/25 6/25 17/25 13/25 35 .40
> DP [7] 12/25 12/25 10/25 5/25 6/25 15/25 6/25 37 .70
> AVDC [29] 18/25 23/25 15/25 6/25 14/25 6/25 21/25 58 .90
> DreamZero [37] 0/25 11/25 23/25 3/25 20/25 25/25 25/25 61 .10
> Track2Act [30] 22/25 19/25 14/25 10/25 12/25 22/25 19/25 67 .40
> MV-VDP (Ours) 25/25 25/25 25/25 24/25 8/25 24/25 25/25 89 .10

simulated Sawyer robot arm with a fixed downward-facing gripper, resulting in a four-dimensional action space (end-effector displacement and gripper open/close). We totally evaluate MV-VDP on seven Meta-World tasks, using five video demonstrations per task (35 demonstrations total). Each policy is evaluated over 25 trials per task with random initializations, and success is defined as achieving the task-specific goal within 600 steps. 

Baselines. We compare our method against standard behavioral cloning and video-prediction-based baselines. BC-Scratch and BC-R3M [ 50 ] are multi-task behavioral cloning baselines built on a ResNet-18 visual encoder and a CLIP text encoder, where BC-R3M is initialized with R3M-pretrained weights. Diffusion Policy (DP) [ 7] models action sequences using a diffusion-based formulation. Our video-prediction-based baselines include UniPi [ 26 ], AVDC [ 29 ], Track2Act [ 30 ], and DreamZero [ 37 ]. UniPi, AVDC, and Track2Act predict future RGB frames, optical flow, and 2D point trajectories, respectively, and then infer actions from these predicted visual representations. DreamZero is a state-of-the-art video-action-model that also adopts Wan [ 47 ] as its backbone, jointly predicting future RGB videos and the corresponding actions. Additional details on these baselines are provided in Appendix E. 

Results. As shown in Tab. 1, standard behavioral cloning methods perform poorly in the low-data regime, achieving only 26.2%, 35.4%, and 37.7% success rates for BC-Scratch, BC-R3M, and DP, respectively. In contrast, video-prediction-based methods yield substantially stronger performance, with AVDC, Track2Act, and DreamZero reaching 58.9%, 67.4%, and 61.1%, respectively. MV-VDP outperforms all baselines on five out of seven tasks and achieves the best overall average success rate of 89.1% using only 5 demonstrations per task. These results suggest three main conclusions. First, video prediction is highly beneficial for data-efficient manipulation learning. Second, our multi-view video diffusion formulation built on a video foundation model is more effective than prior video-prediction-based approaches. Third, 3D-aware multi-view prediction plays a critical role: although DreamZero uses the same video foundation model as our method, it performs substantially worse. Together, these findings provide a direct answer to Q1 .

4.2 Real-World Experiments Setup. As shown in Fig. 3, we evaluate MV-VDP on real-world tabletop manipulation tasks using a Franka Research 3 arm equipped with a parallel-jaw gripper and three static ZED 2i depth cameras for capturing colored point clouds. We evaluate MV-VDP on three base manipulation tasks: (i) a simple pick-and-place task ( Put Lion ), (ii) a complex pushing T-shaped block task ( Push-T ), and (iii) a contact-rich scooping task ( Scoop Tortilla ). To assess generalization, we introduce variations to the original task settings, resulting in four unseen tasks: (1) Put-B : a visually distinct cloth is placed on the table in the Put Lion task; (2) 

Put-H : the target lion is placed on a 5.5 cm -high box in the Put Lion task; (3) Push-L : the ambient 7Background Category     

> Height Lighting
> Put the lion on the shelf
> Push the T Block into the target region
> Scoop the tortilla into the plastic plate
> Zed2i Zed2i
> Zed2i
> Franka Research 3
> Workspace Rollout Process Generalization Settings

Figure 3: Real-world experimental setup and tasks. We evaluate MV-VDP on three manipulation tasks using a Franka Research 3 robot with three ZED2i cameras. We further assess generalization under variations in background, object height, lighting, and object category. Table 2: Real-world manipulation results under limited demonstrations. We report success rates over 10 trials per task on three basic tasks and four unseen tasks. All methods are trained with 10 expert trajectories.                                                  

> Method Basic Tasks Unseen Tasks Avg. Succ. (%) Put Lion Push-T Scoop Tort. Put-B Put-H Push-L Scoop-C DP3 [39] 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0.00
> π0.5[2] 1/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 1.40 UVA [31] 2/10 0/10 0/10 1/10 1/10 0/10 0/10 5.70 BridgeVLA [45] 9/10 0/10 4/10 8/10 7/10 0/10 1/10 41.42
> MV-VDP (Ours) 10/10 4/10 7/10 5/10 6/10 3/10 5/10 57.10

lighting is turned off in the Push-T task; (4) Scoop-C : the tortilla is replaced with plastic noodles, representing an unseen object category. Fig. 3 provides visual illustrations of all tasks. To demonstrate data efficiency, we collect about ten expert trajectories per task using a SpaceMouse for teleoperation and frankapy [ 51 ] as the robot control interface. Each task is evaluated for ten trials. For fair comparison, we photograph each test scene and manually align the environment setup across all evaluated methods. 

Baselines. We compare our method with representative approaches, including 3D-based policies, video-prediction–based methods, and VLA models. A brief overview is provided here, with a more detailed description in Appendix F. • DP3 [39 ]: a state-of-the-art 3D visuomotor policy that encodes point clouds using an MLP and predicts actions via a diffusion-based policy head. • π0.5 [ 2 ]: a large-scale vision-language-action model pretrained on diverse data and decoding actions using flow matching. • UVA [31 ]: a video-prediction–based policy that jointly predicts future videos and actions using unified representations and dual diffusion heads. • BridgeVLA [45 ]: a 3D vision-language-action model that projects point clouds into 3D-aware multi-view images and predicts heatmaps for action decoding. 

Results. The quantitative results are reported in Tab. 2. Performance on basic tasks. On the basic tasks, only BridgeVLA [ 45 ] and our MV-VDP achieve reasonable success rates, while all other baselines fail under the extremely limited data regime. DP3 severely overfits to the training set. On the Put Lion task, despite its training loss decreasing from 10 −1 to 10 −8, the policy fails to approach the target object, instead directly moving toward target regions (the shelf). This failure is attributed to DP3’s simple MLP-based point cloud encoder, which struggles with sensor noise and real-world variability, addressing Q2 .8For π0.5, spatial generalization is limited. On Put Lion , it can only approach the target within the training distribution; otherwise, it fails. On Push T , it completely fails, showing no success tendency. On Scoop Tortilla , it scoops the tortilla reliably but fails to place it on the plate, likely due to plate placement variations in the training data, These results answer Q3 .UVA exhibits reasonable action tendencies across all tasks, but its execution accuracy is insufficient. On the Put Lion task, it frequently closes the gripper prematurely. On the Push T task, it tends to over-push the object, entering out-of-distribution states. On the Scoop Tortilla task, the dominant failure mode is inaccurate pouring, where the tortilla often falls outside the plate. These results address Q1 .BridgeVLA is the strongest competing baseline. Similar to our approach, it projects 3D point clouds into multi-view images and predicts heatmaps before decoding actions. However, it is based on a vision-language model (PaliGemma [ 13 ]) pretrained on static image-text pairs, which cannot predict continuous video or heatmap sequences. As a result, it predicts only a single key pose, requiring an external motion planner for actions between poses. This works for the Put Lion task, but fails for the 

Push T task, where defining key poses is difficult. In contrast, MV-VDP uses a video foundation model that predicts future video frames and heatmap sequences, which can be decoded into continuous action chunks. This allows MV-VDP to solve the 

Push T task successfully. For contact-rich tasks like Scoop Tortilla , intermediate actions are crucial for success, and predicting only a final key pose is insufficient. We observe that BridgeVLA often fails in the Scoop Tortilla task, even with a reasonable key pose. These comparisons highlight the advantages of video foundation models over vision-language models, addressing Q2 and Q3 .

Failure analysis. The primary failure mode of MV-VDP stems from inaccurate action decoding. For example, on the Scoop Tortilla task, the policy occasionally scrapes across the top surface instead of lifting the tortilla from underneath. We attribute this limitation to the finite resolution of the heatmaps (256 × 256 ), where each pixel corresponds to approximately 4 mm . We suppose increasing the heatmap resolution may further improve the performance. 

Generalization to unseen tasks. On unseen tasks, MV-VDP demonstrates strong generalization ability, achieving the best performance on the Push-L and Scoop-C settings, which answers Q4 . On 

Put-B and Put-H , MV-VDP slightly underperforms BridgeVLA. We hypothesize that this gap arises from BridgeVLA’s vision–language backbone, which is pretrained on larger-scale image–text pairs and therefore better captures certain visual variations. We further conjecture that scaling up the training data for the video foundation model could similarly improve the generalization ability of our approach. 

4.3 Robustness Analysis 

We emphasize that the high success rates of MV-VDP stems from our novel and rational design, rather than from an exhaustive hyperparameter grid search. To validate this, we conduct experiments on the Meta-World benchmark and test three key hyperparameters: the RGB loss weight λ, heatmap standard deviation σ, and inference denoising steps N . For each hyperparameter, we vary its value individually, retrain the model, and re-evaluate it on the Meta-World benchmark. To ensure a fair comparison, all other parameters are kept fixed for each experiment. The results for λ and σ are summarized in Tab. 6. As shown, varying the λ parameter by 80% results in only a 3.3% change in the success rate, while varying the σ parameter by 133% leads to a mere 2.5% change. These findings underscore the robustness of our model to variations in these hyperparameters. For the inference denoising steps N , we vary it from 1 to 50. The results are presented in Fig. 4. Surprisingly, in contrast to typical video diffusion processes [ 52 , 47 ], which require around 50 denoising steps, MV-VDP achieves a comparable success rate with just a single denoising step. We believe the main reason for this is that heatmaps have relatively simple distribution modes and lack the high-frequency details present in regular images. Furthermore, our action prediction relies solely on the peak locations of the heatmaps, meaning that the overall quality of the heatmaps is less critical, and thus fewer denoising steps are required. For better visualization, we present example prediction results with different inference denoising steps in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. As shown, when the denoising step is set to 1, the visual quality of the RGB prediction is somewhat lower, but the predicted heatmaps still provide meaningful information. To balance performance with computational efficiency, we 91 2 3 4 5 10 25 40 50 

> Diffusion Steps
> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Average Success Rate  85.7%
> 87.4%
> 88.0%
> 88.6%
> 89.1%
> 88.0%
> 88.6%
> 91.4%
> 87.4%
> Average Success Rate vs. Diffusion Steps

Figure 4: Average success rates for different inference denoising steps. The experiments are conducted on the Meta-World benchmark. MV-VDP demonstrates high robustness to varying diffusion steps, achieving strong performance even when the denoising step is set to 1. recommend setting the denoising step to 5, which allows for 5Hz inference frequency on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU server (see Appendix C). 

4.4 Ablation Studies 

We conduct extensive ablation studies on the Meta-World benchmark to validate the effectiveness of the key design choices in MV-VDP. The results are summarized in Tab. 3. Model #2, which applies full fine-tuning instead of LoRA, achieves 87.4%, comparable to LoRA fine-tuning, but with significantly higher computational and memory overhead. Therefore, we adopt LoRA fine-tuning for all experiments unless otherwise specified. Model #3, which concatenates heatmap and image sequences along the channel dimension instead of the view dimension, introduces an additional convolutional adaptation to match the channel dimensions of the DiT. This creates an information bottleneck that degrades performance. The drop from 86.9% to 81.1% demonstrates that concatenation along the view dimension more effectively preserves the information from the multi-view RGB images and heatmaps. Model #4, which is trained to predict only future heatmap sequences without joint video prediction, shows a significant performance drop from 89.1% to 61.1%, emphasizing the importance of modeling the temporal evolution of the environment through video prediction. Finally, Model #5, which removes the pretrained weights from the video foundation model, almost completely fails. We observe that the model cannot even fit the training dataset well, highlighting the crucial role of leveraging large-scale video pretraining for data-efficient manipulation learning. All the above results validate the effectiveness of our design choices, answering Q6 .Table 3: Ablation study of MV-VDP design choices on Meta-World. Columns indicate whether the model applies LoRA fine-tuning (LoRA), concatenates heatmap and image sequences along the view dimension (View Concat), predicts future video frames (Video Pred) and uses pretrained initialization (Initial Weights). The last column reports the average success rate (%) across seven tasks.                               

> #Video Pred View Concat Initial Weights LoRA Avg (%)
> 1✓✓✓✓89.1
> 5✓✓✓-87.4 3✓-✓✓81.1 2-✓✓✓61.1 4✓✓-✓4.6

10 4.5 Safer Deployment and Enhanced Explainability 

Table 4: Number of collision events with and without video-based action checking.    

> With video checking Without video checking
> Collisions 0 / 140 6 / 140

Deploying manipulation policies in the real world poses safety challenges: it’s difficult to assess whether a predicted action sequence is reasonable or safe from its raw numerical representation. In practice, reliable verification often requires actual action execution, which can be unsafe and may damage the robot or surroundings. In contrast, MV-VDP generates realistic, temporally consistent multi-view video and heatmap sequences, allowing users to visually inspect predicted rollouts before execution. This provides a safer, more interpretable action validation mechanism. Appendix G shows examples of predicted videos and heatmaps from MV-VDP. These sequences closely match ground truth in appearance and exhibit consistent motion trends. When predicted videos demonstrate plausible behavior, the actions decoded from heatmaps are typically reasonable. Conversely, visually implausible or unsafe rollouts correspond to undesirable action sequences. To quantify this benefit, we conducted a study with four evaluators, each performing 35 rollouts (140 in total). The evaluators reviewed the generated videos before execution and reran any rollout that appeared unsafe (e.g., potential collisions). Tab. 4 shows that video-based inspection significantly reduces collision events, demonstrating that MV-VDP’s predicted RGB videos enhance the inter-pretability of action outputs and provide a practical tool for safer deployment, thus addressing Q7 .

## 5 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we introduced MV-VDP, a multi-view video diffusion policy that incorporates 3D structural priors via 3D-aware multi-view projections and utilizes a video foundation model as its backbone. Our experiments demonstrate that MV-VDP is data-efficient, robust, generalizable, and interpretable. Despite these strengths, MV-VDP has limitations. Inference remains relatively slow, taking approximately 4.6 s to generate a 24-frame action chunk on an NVIDIA A100 GPU, making it unsuitable for certain high-frequency dexterous tasks. In future work, we plan to integrate advanced diffusion acceleration techniques, such as TurboDiffusion [ 53 ], which is expected to achieve a 100–200 × speedup without compromising performance, along with real-time chunking [ 54 ], into our pipeline to enable real-time control for practical robotic applications. 11 References 

[1] Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ashwin Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley, Grace Connors, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, et al. π0.6: a vla that learns from experience. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759 , 2025. [2] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [3] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.24164 , 2024. [4] Generalist AI Team. Gen-0: Embodied foundation models that scale with physical interaction. 

Generalist AI Blog , 2025. https://generalistai.com/blog/preview-uqlxvb-bb.html. [5] Andy Zhai, Brae Liu, Bruno Fang, Chalse Cai, Ellie Ma, Ethan Yin, Hao Wang, Hugo Zhou, James Wang, Lights Shi, et al. Igniting vlms toward the embodied space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11766 , 2025. [6] Keji He, Yan Huang, Ya Jing, Qi Wu, and Liang Wang. Fine-grained alignment supervision matters in vision-and-language navigation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2026. [7] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10-11):1684–1704, 2025. [8] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 , 2023. [9] Hongtao Wu, Ya Jing, Chilam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Jiafeng Xu, Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hang Li, and Tao Kong. Unleashing large-scale video generative pre-training for visual robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13139 , 2023. [10] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 , 2024. [11] Chilam Cheang, Sijin Chen, Zhongren Cui, Yingdong Hu, Liqun Huang, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Xiao Ma, et al. Gr-3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15493 ,2025. [12] Peiyan Li, Hongtao Wu, Yan Huang, Chilam Cheang, Liang Wang, and Tao Kong. Gr-mg: Leveraging partially-annotated data via multi-modal goal-conditioned policy. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [13] Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, André Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel Salz, Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschannen, Emanuele Bugliarello, et al. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07726 , 2024. [14] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 , 2024. [15] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 ,2025. [16] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892–34916, 2023. [17] Andy Clark. Whatever next? predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and brain sciences , 36(3):181–204, 2013. 12 [18] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pages 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020. [19] Spirit AI Team. Spirit-v1.5: Clean data is the enemy of great robot foundation models. Spirit AI Blog , 2026. https://www.spirit-ai.com/en/blog/spirit-v1-5. [20] Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Zhaoqing Chen, Xianqiang Gao, Xinyi Ye, Qi Lv, Modi Shi, Guanghui Ren, Cheng Ruan, et al. Eo-1: Interleaved vision-text-action pretraining for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21112 , 2025. [21] Xinghang Li, Peiyan Li, Minghuan Liu, Dong Wang, Jirong Liu, Bingyi Kang, Xiao Ma, Tao Kong, Hanbo Zhang, and Huaping Liu. Towards generalist robot policies: What matters in building vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14058 , 2024. [22] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 , 2022. [23] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09747 , 2025. [24] Yucheng Hu, Yanjiang Guo, Pengchao Wang, Xiaoyu Chen, Yen-Jen Wang, Jianke Zhang, Koushil Sreenath, Chaochao Lu, and Jianyu Chen. Video prediction policy: A generalist robot policy with predictive visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14803 , 2024. [25] Jonas Pai, Liam Achenbach, Victoriano Montesinos, Benedek Forrai, Oier Mees, and Elvis Nava. mimic-video: Video-action models for generalizable robot control beyond vlas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15692 , 2025. [26] Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:9156–9172, 2023. [27] Liudi Yang, Yang Bai, George Eskandar, Fengyi Shen, Mohammad Altillawi, Dong Chen, Soumajit Majumder, Ziyuan Liu, Gitta Kutyniok, and Abhinav Valada. Roboenvision: A long-horizon video generation model for multi-task robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22007 , 2025. [28] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Debidatta Dwibedi, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, Carl Doer-sch, Ted Xiao, Dhruv Shah, Fei Xia, Dorsa Sadigh, and Sean Kirmani. Gen2act: Human video generation in novel scenarios enables generalizable robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16283 , 2024. [29] Po-Chen Ko, Jiayuan Mao, Yilun Du, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Learning to act from actionless videos through dense correspondences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08576 , 2023. [30] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Track2act: Predicting point tracks from internet videos enables generalizable robot manipulation. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 306–324. Springer, 2024. [31] Shuang Li, Yihuai Gao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Shuran Song. Unified video action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00200 , 2025. [32] Liudi Yang, Yang Bai, George Eskandar, Fengyi Shen, Mohammad Altillawi, Dong Chen, Ziyuan Liu, and Abhinav Valada. Covar: Co-generation of video and action for robotic manipulation via multi-modal diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16023 , 2025. [33] Yixiang Chen, Peiyan Li, Yan Huang, Jiabing Yang, Kehan Chen, and Liang Wang. Ec-flow: Enabling versatile robotic manipulation from action-unlabeled videos via embodiment-centric flow. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,pages 11958–11968, October 2025. 13 [34] Chuning Zhu, Raymond Yu, Siyuan Feng, Benjamin Burchfiel, Paarth Shah, and Abhishek Gupta. Unified world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02792 , 2025. [35] Yanjiang Guo, Yucheng Hu, Jianke Zhang, Yen-Jen Wang, Xiaoyu Chen, Chaochao Lu, and Jianyu Chen. Prediction with action: Visual policy learning via joint denoising process. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:112386–112410, 2024. [36] Lin Li, Qihang Zhang, Yiming Luo, Shuai Yang, Ruilin Wang, Fei Han, Mingrui Yu, Zelin Gao, Nan Xue, Xing Zhu, et al. Causal world modeling for robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21998 , 2026. [37] Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel Indupuru, You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, Ayaan Malik, Kyungmin Lee, William Liang, Nadun Ranawaka, Jiasheng Gu, Yinzhen Xu, Guanzhi Wang, Fengyuan Hu, Avnish Narayan, Johan Bjorck, Jing Wang, Gwanghyun Kim, Dantong Niu, Ruijie Zheng, Yuqi Xie, Jimmy Wu, Qi Wang, Ryan Julian, Danfei Xu, Yilun Du, Yevgen Chebotar, Scott Reed, Jan Kautz, Yuke Zhu, Linxi "Jim" Fan, and Joel Jang. World action models are zero-shot policies, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.15922 .[38] Theophile Gervet, Zhou Xian, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Act3d: 3d feature field transformers for multi-task robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17817 ,2023. [39] Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03954 , 2024. [40] Rujia Yang, Geng Chen, Chuan Wen, and Yang Gao. Fp3: A 3d foundation policy for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08950 , 2025. [41] Shizhe Chen, Ricardo Garcia Pinel, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Polarnet: 3d point clouds for language-guided robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1761–1781. PMLR, 2023. [42] Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Yuanqi Yao, Xinyi Ye, Yan Ding, Zhigang Wang, JiaYuan Gu, Bin Zhao, Dong Wang, et al. Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15830 , 2025. [43] Fuhao Li, Wenxuan Song, Han Zhao, Jingbo Wang, Pengxiang Ding, Donglin Wang, Long Zeng, and Haoang Li. Spatial forcing: Implicit spatial representation alignment for vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12276 , 2025. [44] Ankit Goyal, Valts Blukis, Jie Xu, Yijie Guo, Yu-Wei Chao, and Dieter Fox. Rvt-2: Learning precise manipulation from few demonstrations. In RSS 2024 Workshop: Data Generation for Robotics , 2024. [45] Peiyan Li, Yixiang Chen, Hongtao Wu, Xiao Ma, Xiangnan Wu, Yan Huang, Liang Wang, Tao Kong, and Tieniu Tan. Bridgevla: Input-output alignment for efficient 3d manipulation learning with vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07961 , 2025. [46] Yixiang Chen, Yan Huang, Keji He, Peiyan Li, and Liang Wang. Verm: Leveraging foun-dation models to create a virtual eye for efficient 3d robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16724 , 2025. [47] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yitong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, 14 Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. [48] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09748 , 2022. [49] Jianhong Bai, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Xiao Fu, Zuozhu Liu, Haoji Hu, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang. Syncammaster: Synchronizing multi-camera video generation from diverse viewpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07760 , 2024. [50] Suraj Nair, Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Abhinav Gupta. R3m: A universal visual representation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601 , 2022. [51] Kevin Zhang, Mohit Sharma, Jacky Liang, and Oliver Kroemer. A modular robotic arm control stack for research: Franka-interface and frankapy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.02398 , 2020. [52] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. [53] Jintao Zhang, Kaiwen Zheng, Kai Jiang, Haoxu Wang, Ion Stoica, Joseph E Gonzalez, Jianfei Chen, and Jun Zhu. Turbodiffusion: Accelerating video diffusion models by 100-200 times. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16093 , 2025. [54] Kevin Black, Manuel Y Galliker, and Sergey Levine. Real-time execution of action chunking flow policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07339 , 2025. [55] Markus Schütz, Bernhard Kerbl, and Michael Wimmer. Rendering point clouds with compute shaders and vertex order optimization. In Computer graphics forum , volume 40, pages 115–126. Wiley Online Library, 2021. 15 Multi-View Video Diffusion Policy ————Appendix———— 

## A Multi-View Video Diffusion 

In this section, we provide a detailed description of the multi-view video diffusion process used in MV-VDP, which is based on the Wan2.2 framework [ 47 ]. This process consists of three main components: the 3D VAE encoder, the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) block, and the 3D VAE decoder. We will explain about these components and how they integrate within our pipeline. 

A.1 3D VAE Encoder 

The first step in the video diffusion process is encoding the input RGB image sequences and heatmap sequences (which should first be colorized to have 3 RGB channels) into a latent space using a 3D Variational Autoencoder (VAE). Both the input RGB sequence and the heatmap sequence are treated as a video sequence V ∈ R(1+ T )×H×W ×3, where (1 + T ) is the total number of frames, H and W

are the spatial dimensions of each frame, and 3 denotes the RGB color channels. The 3D VAE performs both spatial and temporal compression to reduce the dimensionality of the input video. 

Spatial Compression: The spatial compression is achieved by applying a series of 3D convolutions, which reduce the spatial resolution of the input video from H × W to H/ 8 × W/ 8, while expanding the number of channels to C = 16 . This allows the model to capture important spatial features in a lower-dimensional representation. 

Temporal Compression: In addition to spatial compression, the 3D VAE also reduces the temporal resolution by applying 3D convolutions across the time dimension. Specifically, the input video sequence is compressed in the time dimension from (1 + T ) frames to [1 + T / 4] , where the temporal resolution is reduced by a factor of 4. This temporal compression allows the model to learn key temporal features while reducing the computational cost of processing long video sequences. The 3D VAE encoding process can be formally expressed as: 

q(z|V ) = N (z; μ, σ 2) (5) where μ and σ are the mean and variance outputs from the VAE encoder, and z represents the latent variables. 

A.2 Diffusion Transformer (DiT) 

After obtaining the latent representations from the 3D VAE encoder, these are passed to the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) to model the temporal evolution of the video. The DiT is responsible for predicting future frames of the video through a denoising diffusion process. The input to the DiT consists of a sequence of latents {z0, z 1, . . . , z T }, where each zt represents the concatenated latent representation of the video and heatmap at time step t. During inference, Gaussian noise is added to these latent representations to simulate the diffusion process. The model is trained to denoise the noisy latents at each timestep. The model predicts the velocity between latent frames using flow matching [ 22 ]. This velocity prediction is crucial for generating realistic video frames. The objective is to minimize the difference between the predicted velocity and the ground truth, defined as: 

vt = dz t

dt = z1 − z0 (6) During inference, the model predicts the velocity at each timestep to generate temporally consistent video sequences. 16 A.3 3D VAE Decoder 

After the latents are processed by the DiT, they are passed to the 3D VAE decoder to reconstruct the video frames. The decoder takes the output latent representations {z0, z 1, . . . , z T } and maps them back to the pixel space, producing the final RGB or heatmap sequences ˆV ∈ R(1+ T )×H×W ×3.The decoding process mirrors the encoding process, with the addition of upsampling operations to reconstruct high-resolution frames from the low-dimensional latent space. 

A.4 Efficient Inference with Cache Mechanism 

To facilitate efficient inference for long video sequences, Wan incorporates a feature cache mechanism that stores previously computed features for reuse during the inference process. This approach reduces both memory and computational requirements, enabling the model to handle arbitrarily long video sequences. For further details on the diffusion process, we refer the reader to [47]. 

## B Projection and Back Projection 

We adopt the projection and back projection techniques outlined in BridgeVLA [ 45 ] and RVT-2 [ 44 ], with the following brief overview of the process: 

B.1 Projection Process 

The projection procedure involves three primary steps for mapping a point cloud of N points to an RGB and depth image of size (h, w ):

Projection To project a 3D point cloud onto a 2D image, we first compute the depth dn and the pixel coordinates (xn, y n) for each point indexed by n ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , N }, where fn is the RGB value. These values are derived using the camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. The 2D pixel index in

is then calculated as in = xn · w + yn, where w is the image width. This projection process can be efficiently accelerated by leveraging GPU-optimized matrix multiplications. 

Z-ordering For each pixel j in the image, we identify the point with the smallest depth dn among all the points projecting onto that pixel {n | in = j}. The RGB value fn of this point is then assigned to pixel j in the RGB image, and the corresponding depth dn is stored in the depth image. To enhance the performance of Z-ordering, we pack the depth and index of each point into a 64-bit integer. The higher 32 bits store the depth, and the lower 32 bits store the point index. This packing allows us to use two CUDA kernels for efficient computation. In the first kernel, we process each point in parallel and attempt to store its packed depth-index value at the corresponding pixel j in a depth-index image using the atomicMin operation. This ensures that only the point with the smallest depth at each pixel is retained. In the second kernel, the depth-index is unpacked, and the depth and feature images are reconstructed by referencing the corresponding point features. This technique, initially introduced by Schütz et al. [55] for rendering colored point clouds by packing 32-bit color values, is extended here to support images with an arbitrary number of channels. 

Screen-Space Splatting While the projection and Z-ordering steps are sufficient for basic image rendering, points are treated as infinitesimal light sources, which can result in visual noise when the resolution of the point cloud in screen space is lower than the image resolution. To address this issue, we apply 3D splatting, where each point is modeled as a disc of radius r facing the camera. This approach is applied in screen space after projection and Z-ordering, reducing the computational burden of these steps. For each pixel j, the algorithm searches within a local neighborhood to find the nearest pixel k with a smaller depth. If pixel k satisfies dk < d j and is closer than r · focal_length /d k,the feature and depth of pixel j are replaced by those of pixel k.17 Table 5: Hyperparameters used for training and inference in MV-VDP.                                           

> Hyperparameter Multi-View Video Diffusion Transformer Rotation & Gripper Predictor
> Optimizer AdamW AdamW Learning rate 1.0×10 −41.0×10 −4
> Epochs 100 100 Batch size 64 64 Weight decay 01.0×10 −5
> Image resolution 256 ×256 256 ×256
> Heatmap std. ( σ)1.5 –Predicted video length 24 –RGB loss weight ( λ)0.5 –Heatmap loss weight 0.5 –LoRA modules q, k, v, o, ffn.0, ffn.2 –LoRA rank 32 –Training timesteps 1000 –Inference steps 5–Classifier-free guidance 1–

Table 6: Average Success Rate On Meta-World with different RGB Loss Weights and Heatmap Standard Deviations.              

> Hyperparameter RGB Loss Weight ( λ)Heatmap Standard Deviation ( σ)0.1 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 3.5 Avg. Suc. (%) 92 89.1 89.1 89.1 89.7 86.9

B.2 Back Projection Process 

The back-projection procedure aims to identify the most accurate 3D position within the workspace, based on the three heatmaps generated by our virtual cameras. This process discretizes the workspace into a set of 3D points, computing the corresponding locations for each point on the three heatmaps. The probabilities for each point across the three heatmaps are averaged, and the point with the highest average probability is selected as the target 3D point. For a more detailed explanation of these techniques, we refer the reader to the original works [ 45 , 44 ]. 

## C Training & Inference Details 

In this section, we detail the training and inference procedures for MV-VDP. The corresponding hyperparameters used during both training and inference are listed in Table 5. For the Meta-World benchmark, we train MV-VDP using a total of 32 NVIDIA H20 GPUs for 21.8k steps. The training of the multi-view video diffusion transformer and the Rotation and Gripper Predictor takes approximately 42 hours and 36 hours, respectively. For the real-world benchmark, we train the same models using 32 NVIDIA H200 GPUs for 8.6k steps, which takes around 11 hours and 10 hours, respectively. For real-world deployment, the inference process requires more than 30 GB of GPU memory. Thus, we perform inference on a server with an NVIDIA A100 GPU, utilizing FastAPI for communication between the server and the robot client. To assess inference time, we conduct 30 trials, and the average time taken from point cloud input to the output of an action chunk (of length 24) is 4.6 seconds. 18 D Robustness Analysis for Key Parameters 

In this section, we evaluate the robustness of our model with respect to key hyperparameters, specifically the RGB loss weight λ and Heatmap standard deviation σ. We vary these hyperparameters individually, retrain the model, and re-evaluate it on the Meta-World benchmark. To ensure a fair comparison, we keep all other parameters fixed for each experiment. The results are summarized in Table 6. As shown, when the λ parameter is varied by 80%, the success rate changes by only 3.3%; when the σ parameter is varied by 133%, the success rate changes by just 2.5%. These findings highlight that our model is highly robust to variations in these hyperparameters. 

## E Simulation Baselines 

We evaluate our method against a diverse set of imitation-learning and video-prediction baselines, commonly benchmarked on the Meta-World dataset. The baseline results presented in our tables follow the numbers from prior works [ 29 , 33 ]. Below, we summarize the core characteristics and implementations of each baseline. 

BC-Scratch and BC-R3M BC-Scratch [ 50 ] is a standard multi-task behavioral cloning baseline, trained end-to-end using expert demonstrations. It employs a dual-stream encoder, processing RGB observations with a ResNet-18 and task descriptions with a CLIP text encoder. The encoded features are concatenated and passed through a multi-layer perceptron to directly predict actions. BC-R3M [ 50 ] follows the same architecture and training protocol but initializes the visual encoder with R3M-pretrained weights, which improves visual representations and generalization. 

Diffusion Policy Diffusion Policy [ 7 ] frames action generation as a diffusion process, where continuous action sequences are sampled through iterative denoising, conditioned on a fixed window of past observations. Trained via imitation learning, this approach offers a flexible and expressive model of multimodal action distributions. However, it does not explicitly model future visual observations nor utilize 3D-related information. 

UniPi UniPi [ 26 ] is a two-stage video-prediction policy learning framework. It first learns a vision-language–conditioned video prediction model to forecast future observations, and then trains an inverse dynamics model using behavioral cloning to map predicted frame transitions to actions. This decomposition allows UniPi to leverage learned visual dynamics, though action generation remains indirect and dependent on the inverse dynamics model’s quality. 

AVDC AVDC [ 29 ] adopts an object-centric, flow-based approach for visuomotor control. It predicts future video frames and extracts object motion trajectories using off-the-shelf point tracking methods. These trajectories are then used to generate robot actions. AVDC leverages a flow-based formulation that decouples perception and control, which helps it achieve robust performance across a range of environments. 

Track2Act Track2Act [ 30 ] is an object-centric manipulation framework that decomposes action generation into object motion prediction and control. Given visual observations and a goal specifi-cation, it first predicts future object trajectories by tracking keypoints in videos. These trajectories then condition a behavior cloning policy to output robot actions. To mitigate execution errors and modeling inaccuracies, Track2Act incorporates a residual action correction module that refines predicted actions during execution. 

DreamZero. DreamZero [ 37 ] is a 14B video-action model (VAM) built on a pretrained video diffusion backbone. It jointly predicts future video frames and robot actions in an autoregressive manner using flow matching with teacher forcing. Through a series of system- and model-level optimizations, including DreamZero-Flash, which decouples the denoising schedules for video and action prediction, DreamZero achieves a 38 × inference speedup, enabling real-time closed-loop control at 7 Hz. For a fair comparison with our method, we replace its original Wan2.1-I2V-14B backbone with Wan2.2-TI2V-5B to better align the two methods in model capacity. All other settings follow the official recommendations. 19 F Real-World Baselines 

In real-world experiments, we compare MV-VDP with representative baselines spanning 3D-based visuomotor policies, video-prediction methods, and vision-language-action (VLA) models. Below, we describe the core modeling choices of each baseline and how they are instantiated in our setting. 

DP3 DP3 [ 39 ] is a 3D-based visuomotor policy that directly maps geometric observations to continuous action sequences. It represents the environment using sparse point clouds reconstructed from depth observations, which are encoded with a lightweight MLP-based point encoder. Actions are generated using a diffusion-based policy head conditioned on the encoded 3D features and robot proprioception. In contrast to MV-VDP, DP3 does not leverage the pretrained knowledge of foundation models, nor does it explicitly predict future visual observations. For fairness in our experiments, we use the official DP3 implementation with point clouds constructed from multi-view depth observations. 

π0.5 π0.5 [2] is a large-scale vision-language-action (VLA) model that unifies perception, language understanding, and action generation within a single autoregressive transformer. It formulates imita-tion learning as next-token prediction, jointly processing visual observations, language instructions, and robot actions using a pretrained vision-language backbone. One key feature of π0.5 is its hybrid action representation. During training, actions are discretized into tokens for scalable pretraining, while at inference time, an action expert generates continuous action chunks via flow matching. This design enables efficient non-autoregressive action generation while retaining the language grounding and reasoning capabilities of the underlying model. However, π0.5 does not explicitly model future visual observations or incorporate 3D geometric representations. In our experiments, we use the official π0.5 implementation, inputting 3 RGB observations for fair comparison. 

UVA UVA [ 31 ] is a video-prediction policy learning framework that jointly models future visual observations and robot actions. It learns a unified latent representation by predicting future video frames and corresponding action chunks over a fixed horizon, encouraging the model to capture scene dynamics. While video and action prediction are trained jointly, policy inference decodes actions directly from the learned latent representation for efficiency. Despite modeling future observations, UVA operates on single-view video inputs and does not leverage multi-view prediction or cross-view geometric consistency. In our experiments, we follow the default settings of UVA, using 4-step history observations and single-view video prediction. 

BridgeVLA BridgeVLA [ 45 ] is a 3D-aware vision-language-action model that predicts robot ac-tions via heatmap-based keyframe estimation. It represents the scene using point clouds reconstructed from RGB-D observations, which are projected into multiple orthographic views. A vision-language backbone predicts 2D heatmaps for each view, which are back-projected to infer the next end-effector translation. Remaining action components are predicted using an MLP. Action execution is carried out by an external motion planner that moves the robot to the predicted keyframe pose. BridgeVLA is trained using large-scale 2D heatmap pretraining, followed by 3D action fine-tuning, aligning vision-language pretraining with downstream manipulation tasks. However, it predicts only a single next keyframe at each step and does not explicitly model continuous action execution or future visual evolution. We evaluate BridgeVLA using its official implementation and merged point clouds from multiple depth cameras. Overall, these baselines cover a broad spectrum of design choices, ranging from direct 3D-to-action mappings, to video prediction, to vision–language–guided key-pose estimation, enabling a comprehensive comparison with our multi-view video diffusion policy. 

## G Visualization of Video Prediction 

We visualize the video prediction outputs from MV-VDP for both the Meta-World and real-world (Fig. 5 to Fig. 9) environments. As shown, the generated RGB videos are realistic and align well with the generated heatmaps. This consistency allows the predicted actions to be validated visually, providing an effective tool to avoid unsafe deployments. We further compare the prediction results 20 under different denoising step settings in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. When the denoising step is set to 1, the visual quality of the generated RGB videos deteriorates noticeably, while the peak locations of the predicted heatmap videos remain stable. Increasing the denoising step to 5 or 50 does not lead to a significant visual difference in the generated outputs. 21 View  1

> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  2
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  3
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.

Figure 5: Visualization of the predicted RGB sequences and heatmap sequences for the Button-Press-Top task in Meta-World. For each view, the first and third rows show predictions from MV-VDP, while the second and fourth rows show the corresponding ground truth. The peak locations of both predicted and ground-truth heatmaps are overlaid on the predicted and ground-truth RGB images, respectively. The results show that (1) the predicted RGB sequences are visually realistic, and (2) the heatmap peaks closely follow the end effector in the RGB images, indicating strong consistency between the predicted heatmaps and RGB sequences. 22 View  1

> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  2
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  3
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.

Figure 6: Visualization of the predicted RGB sequences and heatmap sequences for the Door-Open task in Meta-World. For each view, the first and third rows show predictions from MV-VDP, while the second and fourth rows show the corresponding ground truth. The peak locations of both predicted and ground-truth heatmaps are overlaid on the predicted and ground-truth RGB images, respectively. The results show that (1) the predicted RGB sequences are visually realistic, and (2) the heatmap peaks closely follow the end effector in the RGB images, indicating strong consistency between the predicted heatmaps and RGB sequences. 23 View  1

> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  2
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  3
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.

Figure 7: Visualization of the predicted RGB sequences and heatmap sequences for the Push-T 

task. For each view, the first and third rows show predictions from MV-VDP, while the second and fourth rows show the corresponding ground truth. The peak locations of both predicted and ground-truth heatmaps are overlaid on the predicted and ground-truth RGB images, respectively. The results show that (1) the predicted RGB sequences are visually realistic, and (2) the heatmap peaks closely follow the end effector in the RGB images, indicating strong consistency between the predicted heatmaps and RGB sequences. 24 View  1

> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  2
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  3
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.

Figure 8: Visualization of the predicted RGB sequences and heatmap sequences for the Scoop Tortilla task. For each view, the first and third rows show predictions from MV-VDP, while the second and fourth rows show the corresponding ground truth. The peak locations of both predicted and ground-truth heatmaps are overlaid on the predicted and ground-truth RGB images, respectively. The results show that (1) the predicted RGB sequences are visually realistic, and (2) the heatmap peaks closely follow the end effector in the RGB images, indicating strong consistency between the predicted heatmaps and RGB sequences. 25 View  1

> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  2
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.
> View  3
> GT
> Pred.
> GT
> Pred.

Figure 9: Visualization of the predicted RGB sequences and heatmap sequences for the Put Lion task. For each view, the first and third rows show predictions from MV-VDP, while the second and fourth rows show the corresponding ground truth. The peak locations of both predicted and ground-truth heatmaps are overlaid on the predicted and ground-truth RGB images, respectively. The results show that (1) the predicted RGB sequences are visually realistic, and (2) the heatmap peaks closely follow the end effector in the RGB images, indicating strong consistency between the predicted heatmaps and RGB sequences. 26 Figure 10: Visualization of video predictions under different denoising steps (Part I). Predicted RGB videos and heatmap videos under different denoising step settings. Lower denoising steps lead to visibly lower RGB video quality, while the predicted heatmaps remain relatively stable. 27 Figure 11: Visualization of video predictions under different denoising steps (Part II). Predicted RGB videos and heatmap videos under different denoising step settings. Lower denoising steps lead to visibly lower RGB video quality, while the predicted heatmaps remain relatively stable. 28