Title: Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16384v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 01:53:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
PLURALIS RESEARCH 

# MI X T U R E S O F SU B S PAC E S F O R BA N DW I D T H EF F I C I E N T 

# CO N T E X T PA R A L L E L TR A I N I N G 

Sameera Ramasinghe 1, Ajanthan Thalaiyasingam 1, Hadi Mohaghegh Dolatabadi 1, Gil Avraham 1, Violetta Shevchenko 1, Yan Zuo 1, Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage 1 and Alexander Long 1

> 1Pluralis Research

Pretraining language models with extended context windows enhances their ability to leverage rich information during generation. Existing methods split input sequences into chunks, broadcast them across multiple devices, and compute attention block by block which incurs significant communication overhead. While feasible in high-speed clusters, these methods are impractical for decentralized training over low-bandwidth connections. We propose a compression method for communication-efficient context parallelism in decentralized settings, achieving a remarkable compression rate of over 95% with negligible overhead and no loss in convergence. Our key insight is to exploit the intrinsic low-rank structure of activation outputs by dynamically constraining them to learned mixtures of subspaces via efficient reparameterizations. We demonstrate scaling billion-parameter decentralized models to context lengths exceeding 100K tokens on networks as slow as 300Mbps , matching the wall-clock convergence speed of centralized models on 100Gbps interconnects. 

Keywords: Decentralized training, Context parallalism 

1. I N T RO D U C T I O N 

Rapid scaling of large language models (LLMs) has made distributed training a necessity (Dubey et al., 2024; Kolesnikov et al., 2020; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2023). As both model size and context length continue to grow, efficient training increasingly depends on parallelization across multiple devices. Traditional distributed training paradigms assume high-bandwidth, low-latency interconnects, typically available in centralized data centers. In contrast to such centralized settings, the emerging paradigm of 

decentralized training (Koloskova et al., 2019; 2020; Lian et al., 2017; Ryabinin et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2022) enables collaborative and democratized machine learning by distributing computation across heterogeneous, geographically dispersed nodes over the Internet, without requiring specialized networking hardware or centralized orchestration. However, decentralized training presents a core technical challenge: limited communication bandwidth . When nodes are connected via commodity networks, communication quickly becomes a bottleneck. Most prior work, has addressed this issue in the context of distributed data parallelism (DDP), where each node maintains a full model replica and synchronizes gradients during training. A variety of bandwidth-efficient techniques, such as gradient quantization (Nassif et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018), sparsification (Shi et al., 2019; Singh and Kumar, 2024; Wang et al., 2021a), and delayed synchronization (Douillard et al., 2023; 2025; Liu et al., 2024b; Ryabinin et al., 2021), have been proposed to reduce overhead in this setting. Pipeline parallelism (PP) (Huang et al., 2019), where model layers are partitioned across devices, has also been explored to a limited extent (Ramasinghe et al.; Wang et al., 2021b). A significantly more challenging – and, to our knowledge, entirely unexplored – setting is context parallelism 

(CP) in decentralized environments. CP has become critical for pretraining frontier LLMs, as it enables efficient training with extremely long sequences, often exceeding 100K tokens (e.g., L L A MA 3 (Dubey et al., 2024): 130K , L L A MA 4: 256K , D E E P SE E K (Liu et al., 2024a): 128K , Q W E N 3 (Yang et al., 2024): 128K ), thereby enhancing the model’s ability to capture long-range dependencies. In context-parallel training, each 

> Corresponding author(s): author@email.com
> © 2026 Pluralis Research. All rights reserved.
> arXiv:2606.16384v1 [cs.LG] 15 Jun 2026 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

node processes a local chunk of the input and broadcasts its attention activations to all other nodes in every layer and at every step. This imposes substantial communication demands, as attention mechanisms require 

global access to all key and value activations. While centralized systems handle this using high-bandwidth interconnects, all-to-all communication becomes prohibitively expensive in decentralized environments with low-bandwidth links. In this work, we propose a method to drastically reduce the communication required for context-parallel attention without sacrificing model quality, enabling decentralized systems connected via standard internet-grade links to match the convergence performance of centralized systems with datacenter-grade bandwidth. Our approach leverages the observation that attention activations (queries, keys, and values) often reside on low-dimensional manifolds. We exploit this structure by factorizing the attention weights so that outputs lie within dynamic mixtures of low-dimensional subspaces. To ensure convergence, we optimize the factored weights on a Riemannian product manifold and introduce an efficient reparameterization scheme that significantly reduces computational and communication overhead. Additionally, we provide theoretical guarantees on the expressivity and convergence of our method, offering principled justification for each design choice. Crucially, this approach introduces only minor architectural changes with negligible training overhead, and these components can be removed after training , yielding a standard transformer architecture compatible with existing inference infrastructure and downstream deployment frameworks. We employ our method up to billion-parameter scale models under various settings and demonstrate that our method achieves over 95 %

communication compression without harming performance, enabling training with long context windows across devices connected via commodity internet ( 300Mbps ), while matching the wall-clock convergence of centralized systems with high-speed interconnects ( 100Gbps ). 

2. B AC K G RO U N D A N D M OT I VAT I O N 

2.1 CO N T E X T -PA R A L L E L T R A I N I N G A N D T H E C O M M U N I C AT I O N B OT T L E N E C K 

We begin with a brief exposition on CP training and refer the reader to (Dubey et al., 2024) for an extended read. Transformer attention requires each query to interact with all key-value pairs, resulting in a computational complexity that grows quadratically with context window. This becomes particularly prohibitive for long sequences, which makes parallelization strategies essential. In context-parallel settings, the input sequence 

𝑋 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑑 , where 𝑛 is the context length and 𝑑 is the model dimension, is partitioned across 𝑚 devices along the context dimension: 

𝑋 =[︀ 𝑋 ⊤ 

> 1

· · · 𝑋 ⊤

> 𝑚

]︀ ⊤, 𝑋 𝑖 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 ,

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑛 𝑖 = 𝑛. 

Each device 𝑖 computes local queries, keys, and values per head. For clarity we suppress the head index; all quantities are understood to be per attention head unless otherwise stated: 

𝑄 𝑖 = 𝑋 𝑖 𝑊 𝑞 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 , 𝐾 𝑖 = 𝑋 𝑖 𝑊 𝑘 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 , 𝑉 𝑖 = 𝑋 𝑖 𝑊 𝑣 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 .

Computing attention locally requires global access to keys and values: 

𝐾 g =[︀ 𝐾 ⊤ 

> 1

· · · 𝐾 ⊤

> 𝑚

]︀ ⊤ ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑑 , 𝑉 g =[︀ 𝑉 ⊤ 

> 1

· · · 𝑉 ⊤

> 𝑚

]︀ ⊤ ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑑 ,

Typically, CP performs (some form of) all-gather , where each device broadcasts its local 𝐾 𝑖 , 𝑉 𝑖 to form 

𝐾 g, 𝑉 g, incurring communication cost 𝑂 (𝑛𝑑 ) per device where 𝑑 ≪ 𝑛 . Recently proposed Ring Attention (Liu et al., 2024c) pipelines this communication in a ring topology, incrementally exchanging local key-value blocks and computing partial attentions at each stage. Above methods fundamentally rely on the costly communication of large 𝐾, 𝑉 matrices.         

> 2Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> Layer
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> 0.006
> 0.007
> 0.008
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

Figure 1: Attention outputs of LlaMa-70B. Shown is the empirical rank of the 𝑄 , 𝐾 , and 𝑉 activations, normalised by their maximum possible rank, for every layer of the official L L A MA 70B checkpoint. All three projections are extremely low-rank: 𝑄 and 𝐾 sit at roughly 0.1% of full rank, while 𝑉 is slightly larger at ∼ 0.5% .2.2 AT T E N T I O N OU T P U T S EX H I B I T LOW -R A N K ST RU C T U R E 

Our compression scheme is inspired by the observation that the attention outputs of pretrained transformers lie on a low-dimensional manifold. To support this, we analyze publicly available checkpoints of large-scale pretrained LLMs and examine their attention activations. Fig. 1 presents an illustration of LL A MA 70B .Specifically, we measure the stable rank of the query ( 𝑄 ), key ( 𝐾 ), and value ( 𝑉 ) activations across each attention layer. The stable rank of a matrix 𝐴 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑑 is defined as: srank( 𝐴 ) = ‖𝐴 ‖2

> 𝐹
> ‖𝐴 ‖22

, where ‖𝐴 ‖𝐹 denotes the Frobenius norm and ‖𝐴 ‖2 the spectral norm. Unlike the conventional matrix rank – which is highly sensitive to small perturbations and numerical noise – the stable rank offers a robust, continuous measure of effective dimensionality. This makes it particularly suitable for characterizing learned neural representations, where numerous singular values are typically small yet non-zero due to noise or over-parameterization. As depicted in Fig. 1, the stable ranks of attention activations remain low across all layers. Interestingly, 𝑄 

and 𝐾 generally exhibit slightly lower ranks than 𝑉 , indicating a higher degree of compressibility 1. This observation underpins our approach, leveraging low-rank factorization for efficient compression. Further evidence of this phenomenon in other architectures is provided in Appendix B. Next, we formalize this idea. 

3. M E T H O D 

We now present our proposed method for efficient context-parallel transformer training. First, we formalize how the empirically observed low-rank structure in attention activations enables effective compression. Next, we explain why using a fixed subspace for compression can be overly restrictive, motivating our joint learning strategy that adaptively optimizes both the projection subspace and the attention weights (§3.1). We then introduce a computationally efficient reparameterization approach that maintains optimality guarantees while significantly reducing overhead (§3.2). Finally, we describe how to reduce communication costs by dynamically compressing attention activations through per-chunk rotations and demonstrate how the model can seamlessly revert to a standard transformer architecture at inference time (§3.3–3.5). In §. 2.2, we saw that the 𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉 activations of large pretrained transformers exhibit a pronounced low-rank structure (Fig. 1). This finding implies that it is feasible to transmit only the low-dimensional components of these activations between devices, thereby achieving near-lossless compression in practice. Formally, let the       

> 1We only need to compress 𝐾 and 𝑉 since 𝑄 can remain local.
> 3Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

columns of an orthonormal matrix 𝑈 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , with 𝑟 ≪ 𝑑 , span the dominant subspace of the activations. Rather than communicating the full local activation matrix 𝑍 = 𝑋 (𝑖 )𝑊 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 , where 𝑍 ∈ { 𝐾, 𝑉 } denotes key/value activations, 𝑊 ∈ { 𝑊 𝑘 , 𝑊 𝑣 } and 𝑋 is the input to the attention layer, we can transmit only its compressed representation: 𝑍 comp = 𝑋 (𝑖 )𝑊 𝑈 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑟 . The original activations can then be reconstructed at the receiving node as: 𝑍 ≈ 𝑍 comp 𝑈 ⊤. This compression method preserves all information within the subspace spanned by 𝑈 , and is lossless when activations lie entirely in this subspace. Equivalently, this projection can be folded onto the attention weights and be interpreted as factorizing them into a low-rank representation: 𝑊 = 𝐵 (𝑈 𝑈 ⊤), 𝐵 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 .

Sub - optimality of a fixed subspace. The formulation above implicitly assumes that an a priori choice of 𝑈 

is sufficiently expressive for every layer and every chunk in every optimization stage. It is straightforward to see where this assumption can break down. Even if there is an optimal low-rank attention weight matrix, restricting weights to the form 𝑊 = 𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ limits the search to the column space of 𝑈 . If this space does not contain the true optimum, the model may converge to a suboptimal solution. In short, fixing 𝑈 can prevent the model from reaching the best possible performance. 3.1 JO I N T OP T I M I Z AT I O N OV E R A PRO D U C T MA N I F O L D 

To address the limitations of a fixed 𝑈 , we propose jointly optimizing factorization 𝑊 = 𝐵 𝑈 𝑈 ⊤. Specifically, we simultaneously learn both the subspace representation 𝑈 and the matrix 𝐵 on the product manifold: 

ℳ = R𝑑 ×𝑑 × St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ). Here, 𝐵 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 is optimized in standard Euclidean space, whereas 𝑈 resides on the Stiefel manifold St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ), where updates can be naturally performed via Riemannian gradient descent 

> 2

. The following result establishes that this joint optimization achieves linear convergence under gradient descent. 

Convergence. Let Φ( 𝑊, 𝜗 ) be a smooth loss and consider the factorization 𝑊 = 𝐵 𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ for attention weights where 𝐵 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 , 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ), and 𝜗 ∈ R𝑝 denotes all other parameters. Minimizing the reparameterized objective ^Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) = Φ (︀ 𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤, 𝜗 )︀ over the product manifold ℳ := R𝑑 ×𝑑 ×

St( 𝑑, 𝑟 )×R𝑝 with Riemannian gradient descent, and under mild assumptions, yields Q-linear (geometric) convergence to a first-order stationary point. For the formal result and proof, see Lemma 1 (Appendix). Note that since ‖𝑈 ‖ = 1 , the factorized objective remains Lipschitz smooth, and the convergence result naturally follows from the standard gradient descent theory on both Euclidean and Riemannian manifolds. We include a full proof in Appendix A for completeness, explicitly treating the product manifold structure and assuming a Polyak–Łojasiewicz (PL) condition. 3.2 RE D U C I N G CO M P U TAT I O NA L CO S T V I A RE PA R A M E T E R I Z AT I O N O F 𝑈 

Direct optimisation of 𝑈 on the Stiefel manifold St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ) via Riemannian gradient descent provides strong theoretical guarantees but is costly: after every Euclidean update, 𝑈 must be re-orthonormalised (the standard “retraction” on to the manifold), which is performed with a QR or SVD factorisation to restore 𝑈 ⊤𝑈 = 𝐼 𝑟 . To mitigate this, we use an efficient reparameterization of 𝑈 using a fixed orthonormal basis 𝑈 and a learnable rotation 𝑅 (𝜃 ) ∈ 𝑂 (𝑑 ):

𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 , 

where 𝑂 (𝑑 ) denotes the orthogonal manifold consisting of all 𝑑 × 𝑑 orthonormal matrices. If the mapping 𝜃 ↦ →

𝑅 (𝜃 ) is sufficiently expressive, rotations 𝑅 (𝜃 ) can fully parameterize 𝑂 (𝑑 ), preserving the representational power of the manifold while significantly reducing computational overhead.                

> 2The Stiefel manifold St( 𝑑, 𝑟 )is defined as the set of all 𝑑 ×𝑟 matrices with orthonormal columns, formally given by St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ) =
> {𝑈 ∈R𝑑 ×𝑟 :𝑈 ⊤𝑈 =𝐼 𝑟 }.
> 4Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Preservation of geometry and stationary points. Reparameterizing 𝑈 as 𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 moves the orthonormal constraint onto an unconstrained Euclidean variable 𝜃 , eliminating expensive QR/SVD steps and letting us run ordinary SGD/Adam in 𝜃 -space. A natural concern is that this change of variables might distort the loss landscape and hinder optimization; however, we show that this is not the case. The chain rule shows 

∇𝜃 ̂︀ Φ( 𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) = 𝐷 𝜃 𝑈 (𝜃 )⊤ grad 𝑈 Φ(︀ 𝐵, 𝑈 (𝜃 ), 𝜗 )︀ , so ∇𝜃 ̂︀ Φ is exactly the pull-back of the original Riemannian gradient. Thus, the first-order critical points remain unchanged. The following statement formalizes this result. 

Equivalence of stationery points. Under the reparameterization 𝑈 = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 , minimizing ^Φ possesses exactly the same local minima and strict saddle points as minimizing Φ. For the formal result and proof, see Theorem 1 (Appendix). Thus, we can effectively represent and optimize the projection subspace implicitly through rotations without compromising the quality or optimality of solutions. 3.3 RE D U C I N G T H E CO M M U N I C AT I O N CO S T 

The reparameterization 𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 allows us to locally cache the fixed orthonormal frame 𝑈 at each node, and transmit only the parameters 𝜃 . However, to fully parameterize rotations in the orthogonal group 𝑂 (𝑑 ),one typically requires 12 𝑑 (𝑑 − 1) parameters, i.e., 𝜃 ∈ R𝑑 (𝑑 −1) /2. We show next that in practice performing a dense search over all possible rotations is unnecessary. Specifically, we can obtain a trade-off between the search space and the communication efficiency by controlling the dimensionality of 𝜃 .To achieve a more compact representation for the communication cost reduction, we select a small set of fixed skew-symmetric matrices {𝐴 1, . . . , 𝐴 𝑘 } ⊂ o(𝑑 ), 𝐴 𝑇 𝑖 = −𝐴 𝑖 (where o(𝑑 ) denotes the Lie algebra of the orthogonal group) and define the corresponding 𝑘 -dimensional Lie subgroup (Edelman et al., 1998; Hall, 2015): 

ℛ𝑘 ={︁ 𝑅 (𝜃 ) = exp (︁∑︀ 𝑘 𝑙 =1 𝜃 (𝑙 )𝐴 𝑖 )︁ | 𝜃 ∈ R𝑘 }︁ ,

where 𝜃 (𝑙 ) is the 𝑙 𝑡ℎ element of 𝜃 . Because the exponential map is a local diffeomorphism around 𝜃 = 0 ,the set 𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 forms a 𝑘 -dimensional submanifold of St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ) for sufficiently small ‖𝜃 ‖. Choosing 

𝑘 ≪ 12 𝑑 (𝑑 −1) thus provides a favorable trade-off between communication cost and representational flexibility. Importantly, our earlier result on the absence of spurious minima remains valid provided an optimal frame 

𝑈 ⋆ lies within (or sufficiently close to) the reachable manifold {𝑅𝑈 : 𝑅 ∈ ℛ 𝑘 }, as the mapping 𝜃 ↦ → 𝑈 (𝜃 )

remains locally surjective onto this manifold. 3.4 DY NA M I C M I X T U R E S O F S U B S PAC E S V I A P E R -C H U N K ROTAT I O N S 

§ 3.3 depicted that the rotation dimension 𝑘 controls a trade-off between representational flexibility and communication efficiency. With a well-chosen a priori 𝑈 , it becomes feasible to use a small 𝑘 , restricting the optimization to a local neighborhood around 𝑈 .We generate this prior through a short, uncompressed warm-up phase , in which the model is trained for a small number of iterations ( < 500 ) using a reduced context length to avoid communication bottlenecks. After this phase, each node computes the top 𝑟 principal components of its local attention weights and stores them as a fixed subspace basis 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ). Empirical evidence from prior work on weight–subspace stabilization (e.g., (Feng et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024)) suggests that dominant activation subspaces emerge early in training, supporting this strategy. 

> 5Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Per-sample adaptation. Using a single global rotation for all inputs may underfit heterogeneous data. To retain expressivity without increasing 𝑘 , we introduce a lightweight mechanism to predict a unique rotation parameter 𝜃 for each sequence chunk. Recall that, in context-parallel training, each node 𝑖 processes a distinct chunk 𝑋 𝑖 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 from the input sequence. For an attention output chunk 𝑍 𝑖 = 𝑊 𝑋 𝑖 , we employ a small linear prediction head: 𝜓 : R𝑑 → R𝑘 , 𝜃 = 𝜓 (︀ 𝑍 avg ,𝑖 )︀ , where 𝑍 avg ,𝑖 is the average attention output of the chunk, generating chunk-specific rotation parameters. Given a set of preshared skew-symmetric generators 

{𝐴 𝑙 }𝑘 𝑙 =1 ⊂ o(𝑑 ) cached locally on each node, we construct the rotation as: 𝑅 (𝜃 𝑖 ) = exp (︁∑︀ 𝑘 𝑙 =1 𝜃 𝑖 (𝑙 )𝐴 𝑙 )︁ ∈ℛ𝑘 ⊂ 𝑂 (𝑑 ). Locally, keys and values are compressed as 𝑍 comp ,𝑖 = 𝑍 𝑖 𝑅 (𝜃 𝑖 ) 𝑈 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑟 . (𝑍 (comp ,𝑖 ), 𝜃 𝑖 )

is then broadcasted, and the receiving nodes reconstructs the keys/values as: 𝑍 𝑖 ≈ 𝑍 (𝑖, comp ) 𝑈 ⊤𝑅 (𝜃 𝑖 )⊤.

Note that peak memory is dominated by the attention computation, scaling as 𝒪 (𝑛 2 

> 𝑖

), making the linear head’s overhead 𝒪 (𝑑𝑘 ) negligible—an observation we also demonstrate empirically. The overall procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Bandwidth cost. In our method, each node transmits 𝑛𝑟 floats (activations) in ˜𝑍 and 𝑘 additional scalars in 

𝜃 . Typically, we have 𝑘 ≪ 𝑛𝑟 ≪ 𝑛𝑑 , ensuring low communication overhead. Remarkably, we found that even using 𝑘 = 1 – a single rotation angle that defines a plane – is sufficient to preserve training stability and input-adaptive flexibility, achieving bandwidth efficiency comparable to that of a fixed global rotation. In implementation, we set 𝑆 ∼ 𝒩 (0 , 1) 𝑑 ×𝑑 to be fixed and define the skew-symmetric generator 𝐴 :=  

> 𝜃
> ‖𝑆 −𝑆 ⊤‖F

(𝑆 − 𝑆 ⊤), 𝐴 ⊤ = −𝐴, 𝜃 ≥ 0 . For 𝜃 ∈ R we set the rotation 𝑅 (𝜃 ) = exp( 𝜃𝐴 ) ∈ 𝑂 (𝑑 ), so 

𝐴 fixes the rotation plane while 𝜃 sets its magnitude. 

Second-order approximation. Since 𝐴 is skew-symmetric, its spectral norm satisfies ‖𝐴 ‖2 = 𝜃 . For sufficiently small |𝜃 | ≤ 𝜖 ≪ 1, the rotation matrix 𝑅 (𝜃 ) admits a second-order Taylor approximation: 

𝑅 (𝜃 ) ≈ 𝐼 + 𝜃𝐴 + 12 𝜃 2𝐴 2. (1) This approximation provides two key advantages. 1) Computational cost: scaling as 𝒪 (𝑑 2), in contrast to the exact matrix exponential computation (e.g., by Padé or Schur decomposition), which scales as 𝒪 (𝑑 3). 2) 

Near identity bias: it induces a beneficial near-identity bias, effectively acting as an approximately unbiased estimator of identity 𝐼 when 𝜃 is small and centered around zero (enforced via clipping). In this regime, higher-order terms vanish in expectation, yielding E[𝑅 (𝜃 )] ≈ 𝐼 . This property allows rotations to remain close to the initial warm-start subspace 𝑈 , facilitating controlled local adaptation without significant drift. By fixing 𝐴 and using a scalar 𝜃 , we achieve a communication complexity of 𝒪 (𝑛𝑟 ), significantly lower than the naive 𝒪 (𝑛𝑑 ).Attention weights must still be synchronized across devices, but they evolve far more slowly than activations (Ba et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2023). We therefore average the corresponding weights only every 𝑐 steps; in all experiments we use 𝑐 = 200 , which incurs negligible communication overhead. 3.5 UN P L U G G I N G T H E PRO J E C T I O N CO M P O N E N T S 

Our method augments the transformer architecture with two non-standard components: (i) a small linear rota-tion head predicting the rotation parameters 𝜃 , and (ii) low-rank projection matrices 𝑈 used for compressing activations. Although these components pose minimal overhead during training, strict API compatibility with off-the-shelf transformer models might be necessary for certain downstream applications. As training proceeds, the learnable weights associated with our auxiliary projection heads collapse onto the data–dependent subspaces they steer. Once the model is close to convergence we can therefore drop these heads entirely , reverting to a vanilla Transformer without losing the predictive gains accumulated during training. The following result formalizes the collapse mechanism. 

> 6Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Algorithm 1 Compression-aware context parallel attention (per node, per head) 

Require: Input 𝑋 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑑 , Attention weight 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 , Warm-started basis ¯𝑈 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , learnable linear head 𝜓 : R𝑑 → R𝑚 , sync interval 𝑐 , current step 𝑡  

> 1:

Compute local keys and values: 𝑍 ← 𝑋𝑊  

> 2:

𝑍 avg ← MeanToken (𝑍 ) 

> 3:

𝜃 ← 𝜓 (𝑍 avg ) ◁ Compute rotation param from local chunk  

> 4:

𝑈 ← 𝑅 (𝜃 ) ¯𝑈 ◁ Construct data-dependent subspace  

> 5:

Compress: 𝑍 comp ← 𝑍𝑈  

> 6:

Broadcast (𝑍 comp , 𝜃 ) to all other nodes  

> 7:

Receive (𝑍 (comp ,𝑗 ), 𝜃 𝑗 ) from all other nodes 𝑗  

> 8:

for all received (𝑍 (comp ,𝑗 ), 𝜃 𝑗 ) do  

> 9:

𝑈 𝑗 ← 𝑅 (𝜃 𝑗 ) ¯𝑈  

> 10:

𝑍 𝑗 ← 𝑍 (comp ,𝑗 )𝑈 ⊤ 

> 𝑗

◁ Decompress  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Aggregate global 𝑍 𝑔 ∈ { 𝐾 𝑗 , 𝑉 𝑗 }, ∀𝑗 from all nodes  

> 13:

Compute blockwise attention: 𝐴 ← Softmax (𝑄𝐾 ⊤/√𝑑 )𝑉  

> 14:

if 𝑡 mod 𝑐 = 0 then  

> 15:

𝑊 ← AllReduceAvg (𝑊 ) ◁ Sparse sync of attention weights  

> 16:

end if Bound on “idle” attention directions with data dependent projectors. Let the sample projector be 

𝑃 (𝑥 ) = 𝑈 (𝑥 )𝑈 (𝑥 )⊤. Pick any other projector 𝑄 that projects onto an arbitrary subspace. Define the average overlap 𝑝 𝑄 := E𝑥 [︀ ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2]︀ ∈ [0 , 1] . Run stochastic gradient descent with weight decay 𝜆 > 

0. Then, the attention weights that lie inside the 𝑄 -subspace obey lim 𝑡 →∞ ⃦⃦ 𝑊 (𝑡 )𝑄 ⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 for an 𝐿 Lipshchitz bounded loss. Hence, if the data almost never excites those directions ( 𝑝 𝑄 ≪ 1), the corresponding weights shrink away. That is, idle directions are pruned for free. For the formal theorem and proof, see Theorem 3 (Appendix). 

Once the weights have collapsed onto their data–aligned subspaces, both the rotation head and its basis matrix 

𝑈 are redundant. We can therefore detach these components and perform a brief, low-learning-rate fine-tuning pass to polish the remaining parameters. As Fig. 4 shows, the loss curve remains smooth across this transition, indicating that no optimisation shock is introduced. At inference time the model is now indistinguishable from a standard transformer: it adds zero extra parameters, requires no custom kernels, and is fully compatible with existing deployment pipelines. 

4. R E L AT E D WO R K 

Decentralized training. Decentralized learning dispenses with a central coordinator, instead relying on a collective of autonomous devices that cooperate over mesh-style networks to train large-scale models. These devices are typically heterogeneous and geographically dispersed, confronting links of nonuniform latency and bandwidth. The foundational theory on convergence and robustness has been established by (Koloskova et al., 2019; 2020; Lian et al., 2017), while complementary systems work has demonstrated practical viability on real clusters (Diskin et al., 2021; Ryabinin and Gusev, 2020). Most prior art, however, is confined to DDP settings (Diskin et al., 2021; Koloskova et al., 2019; 2020; Lian et al., 2017), limiting model size to the aggregate memory of an individual node. Note that this is a comparatively well studied domain, and is orthogonal to the unexplored decentralized context parallel setting that we explore. A notable work in DDP domain is Power Gossip (Vogels et al., 2020), which replaces synchronous all-to-all communication 

> 7Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

with gossip-style information exchange among neighboring replicas arranged in a mesh. Its key insight is that, when each replica trains independently via local SGD, the pairwise weight differences evolve in a low - rank sub -space, enabling them to efficiently compress the weight differences during gossip. Another interesting DDP method is Photon (Sani et al., 2024), where its communication savings stem primarily from infrequent gradient exchanges rather than from any explicit compression scheme. Such skip -sync approaches are infeasible in context - parallel pipelines, where activations must be transferred between nodes at every forward and backward pass. Nevertheless, these DDP -style techniques are orthogonal to our method and could be combined with it in hybrid setups. Scheduling-oriented approaches such as SWARM parallelism (Ryabinin et al., 2023) and Tasklets (Yuan et al., 2022) alleviate straggler effects and network stochasticity, yet they still inherit the communication overhead intrinsic to the decentralized setting. In contrast, we introduce the first communication-compression strategy tailored to CP, removing a critical bandwidth bottleneck that has thus far hindered scaling decentralized models across larger context windows. 

Context - parallel attention. For single -device long - sequence processing, sparse approximations such as BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) cut attention complexity to 𝑂 (𝑛 ), while IO - aware exact kernels like FlashAt-tention (Pagliardini et al., 2023) maximize hardware throughput with tiling and on -chip caching. Recent systems research parallelizes the sequence dimension itself (Grattafiori et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Rasley et al., 2020): Blockwise Parallel Transformers overlap compute and ring -all - reduce to achieve near - linear speedups on sequences of 32K tokens (Liu and Abbeel, 2023), and RingAttention extends the idea to virtually unlimited contexts via pipelined block exchanges (Liu et al., 2024c). These methods, however, still broadcast full key/value tensors. Our approach instead transmits a compact low - rank representation plus a lightweight rotation, reducing bandwidth while preserving exact attention semantics and thus complementing existing context-parallel frameworks. 

5. E X P E R I M E N T S 0 100 200 300 400         

> Hours
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps 0100 200 300 400
> Hours
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss 0100 200 300 400
> Hours
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss

Figure 2: Convergence in low-bandwidth settings. From left to right: Fineweb, C4, and BookCorpus. The training curves are presented against wall-clock time for an 8-layer ( 800M ) model trained with a 132K context window parallelized across 8 GPUs. Decentralized models utilize 300Mbps connections while the centralized model has datacenter-grade 100Gbps links. Our compressed model achieves on-par convergence to the centralized model, even under a 300Mbps bandwidth budget. In contrast, the non-compressed decentralized model with 300Mbps links suffers from significantly slower convergence. 5.1 EX P E R I M E N TA L SE T U P 

We evaluate decoder-only models on three large-scale corpora – FineWeb (FW) (Merity et al., 2016), C4 (Raffel et al., 2019), and BookCorpus (BC) (Zhu et al., 2015). For each dataset, we reserve 10 % of the training split for validation. All model backbones follow L L A M A 3 (Dubey et al., 2024); exact model specifications are given in the corresponding sections. We use a base-learning-rate = 3 × 10 −4 with linear warm-up and decay, and apply a weight-decay = 0.01 . Every transformer layer is compressed except for the final block, 

> 8Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Table 1: Design ablations (val. perplexity ↓). All models are trained for 10K steps with a 132K context. Second-order approximations preserve performance, while overcompressing 𝑉 degrades it. 

SE T T I N G FW C4 BC Ours 22.64 23.33 25.27 

Ours + Fixed ¯𝑈 26.57 27.11 30.33 Ours + Rand. rot. 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 24.93 25.17 29.58 Ours - 2nd-order approx. 22.64 23.33 25.27 

Ours - No warm start 26.63 26.91 30.15 Ours ( 𝐾, 𝑉 → 98% ) 24.74 24.99 29.46 Ours ( 𝐾 → 99% , 𝑉 → 95% ) 24.68 24.91 29.22 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 

> Hours
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps
> 0
> 5000
> 10000
> 15000
> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 3: Scaling across parallelism strategies. 

Our compression based CP scheme can be seam-lessly fused with other parallel training strategies. We train a 3B -parameter model ( 32 layers) with both pipeline parallel and CP enabled across 32 A100 s. Our compressed approach yields substantial through-put gains over uncompressed decentralized CP and nearly matches the performance of centralized CP. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 

> Iterations
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Ours - Late unplugging
> Ours - Early unplugging

Figure 4: Unplugging projection components. Af-ter sufficient training, the rotation head and projec-tion layers can be removed—reverting the network to a vanilla transformer—without impairing conver-gence. Training curves with dashed lines mark-ing projection removal points. Late removal pre-serves convergence (see §. 3.5), while early removal causes a temporary disruption followed by surpris-ingly rapid recovery. where 𝐾 and 𝑉 projections are compressed by 98 % and 95 % (overall 96 .5% ), respectively by choosing 𝑟 

w.r.t. 𝑑 appropriately. We use the GPT2 tokenizer for all models. 5.2 BA N DW I D T H E F F I C I E N C Y I N D E C E N T R A L I Z E D S E T T I N G S 

We train an 8-layer, 800M -parameter model ( embedding-size = 2048 , attention-heads = 8 ) under two network settings: a centralized 100Gbps fabric and decentralized 300Mbps internet-grade links. Using CP, we process a sequence length of 132K tokens across eight A100 GPUs connected at the respective bandwidths. Fig. 2 shows that vanilla CP over a 300Mbps link is more than 20 × slower compared to a centralized 100Gbps mesh. With our compression, the same 300Mbps setup converges almost as fast as the centralized baseline. 

Validation. Table 2 reports test-time performance of the trained models. To this end, we train each model up to its compute-optimal point, following the Chinchilla scaling law (Hoffmann et al.). Specifically, for our 800M -parameter models, we use a 1 : 20 model-to-token ratio and train for 16B tokens on each dataset. 

> 9Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Table 2: Validation perplexity ( ↓) and throughput (TPS). All models are trained with a 132K context window to the compute-optimal point (Hoffmann et al.) ( 16B training tokens). Our method yields a 20 × TPS boost while slightly outperforming centralized CP in perplexity, with minimal memory overhead. 

MO D E L FW C4 BC TPS ME M (GB)/GPU 

Cen. CP - 100Gbps 17.18 17.51 17.88 56K 38.4 Dec. CP - 300Mbps † – – – 2.7K 38.4 

Dec. CP Comp. - 300Mbps (ours) 17.06 17.47 17.81 55K (×20 ) 38.7 (+0.7%)  

> †

Training uncompressed models to convergence at 300Mbps is infeasible ( >150 days); only throughput is reported. Table 3: Effect of warmup steps (val. perplexity ↓). All models are trained for 10K steps with a 132K 

context. The method is not highly sensitive to the number of warmup steps. 

WA R M U P -S T E P S PE R P L E X I T Y 

0 26.63 100 24.44 300 22.66 500 22.64 1000 22.87 2000 22.64 5000 22.71 Remarkably, our compressed decentralized model matches, and even slightly outperforms, the perplexity of the centralized model at the same number of training iterations, while delivering significantly higher throughput than vanilla (uncompressed) CP over commodity links. Training the uncompressed model to completion over low-bandwidth links is computationally infeasible (estimated at over 150 days), so we report only its throughput (TPS) in this setting. 5.3 AB L AT I O N S 

We perform ablations on 800M -parameter models with a 132K context across eight A100 GPUs (see Table 1). Models using learned rotations outperform those with fixed or random projections. The second-order exponential approximation does not impact performance, confirming its adequacy. Omitting the warm-start initialization of principal directions ( ¯𝑈 ) noticeably degrades results, highlighting the importance of this prior. 

Scaling: Our compression based CP scales well and can be seamlessly fusing with other parallel training strategies. We scale the model to 32 layers ( 3B parameters) with both pipeline parallel and CP enabled over 

32 A100 s (Fig. 3) and achieve a significant throughput gain. 

Reparameterization: A key step of our method is reparameterizing 𝑈 which bypasses expensive Riemannian operations (QR/SVD pullbacks). As shown in Table 4, this reparameterization significantly improves throughput (TPS). More ablations against architecture choices are provided in Appendix C. 

Warmup steps: To measure the effect warmup steps of we conducted an ablation study varying the warm-up duration and evaluated the resulting perplexity on the FineWeb dataset. The results are shown in Table 3. As demonstrated, even with a reduced warm-up of 300 steps, the model achieves comparable performance, indicating no significant degradation. In practice, we default to 500 steps to provide a safe and stable baseline. This study further emphasizes the lightweight and robust nature of our warm-up strategy, especially in contrast to the more elaborate scheduling mechanisms commonly employed in modern LLM pre-training. Note that 

> 10 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

0 5000 10000 

Iterations 

4

6

8

10 

> Loss

Ours (96.5%) 

Quantized (75%) 

TopK (90%) 

Baseline 0 5000 10000 

Iterations 

4

6

8

10 

> Loss

Ours 

BigBird 

CosFormer 

Baseline 

Figure 5: Baseline comparisons. Left: Because no method currently compresses context-parallel training, we build two baselines; Top-𝑘 sparsification and quantization. Right: We also compare with long-context models BigBird and CosFormer. Both are limited to 32K tokens on A100 GPUs, so all models are evaluated at that length. In both panels, our compressed CP curve is nearly indistinguishable from the uncompressed reference, whereas every baseline falls well short. the perplexity differences are minor and stable, indicating performance is stable after 300 warm-up steps. 5.4 UN P L U G G I N G PRO J E C T I O N S A N D ROTAT I O N HE A D S 

As discussed in §. 3.5, practitioners may prefer reverting to a standard transformer after pretraining for compat-ibility with downstream frameworks. We empirically validate our theoretical prediction that attention weights progressively align with the projection subspace, allowing safe removal of projection layers and rotation heads near the end of training. Fig. 4 shows that removing these components late preserves convergence, while doing so prematurely disrupts training. 5.5 CO M PA R I S O N AG A I N S T BA S E L I N E S 

As no prior baselines exist for CP compression, we construct two: (i) Sparsification —a Top-10% scheme (90% compression), transmitting only the largest-magnitude entries of the 𝐾, 𝑉 chunks, inspired by common DDP compression methods; (ii) Quantization —a 4-bit quantization (75% compression) of the 𝐾, 𝑉 activations prior to transmission, following standard practices in activation compression. As shown in Fig. 5 (left), we outperform these baselines comprehensively ( 132 k context window) even when using a more aggressive compression rate of 96 .5% .For completeness, we also compare against long-context models BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) and Cos-Former (Qin et al., 2022), which are not designed for CP and can handle at most 32K tokens on an A100 . For a fair comparison, we apply our compression to CP across four GPUs, each processing 8K tokens. As shown in Fig. 5 (right), both baselines exhibit significantly worse convergence than our method. All experiments are performed on 800M parameter models. 

> 11 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Table 4: TPS gain from design choices. Reparameterization and second-order approximation yield significant throughput improvements. 

SE T T I N G TPS (↑)

Ours 55K 

w/o reparam. 37K w/o 2𝑛𝑑 ord. approx. 30K 

6. C O N C L U S I O N 

We propose the first compression method that enables context-parallel training of language models in decen-tralized environments with low-bandwidth interconnects. Our approach supports training with context lengths over 100K tokens on isolated GPUs connected via internet-grade links (e.g., 300Mbps ), while matching the wall-clock convergence of centralized systems with high-speed ( 100Gbps ) connections. Additionally, our method preserves compatibility with standard transformer architectures by allowing the projection layers to be removed after training, facilitating seamless deployment in downstream frameworks. We provide a theoretical analysis of the key properties of our method and validate its effectiveness through an extensive empirical evaluation. 

7. L I M I TAT I O N S 

Our compression method delivers near-lossless convergence in context-parallel training, but several open questions remain. First, alternative reparameterisations beyond simple subspace rotations may unlock further accuracy or efficiency gains. Second, the method’s surprising ability to locate good minima even as the search space is heavily reduced (via very low-dimensional 𝜃 ) lacks a rigorous explanation; its ties to recent work on implicit regularisation and lottery-ticket-style phenomena deserve closer study. Despite these gaps, this work establishes the first baseline for context-parallel compression and we hope it spurs deeper theoretical and empirical exploration. 

RE F E R E N C E S 

Emmanuel Abbe, Samy Bengio, Enric Boix-Adsera, Etai Littwin, and Joshua Susskind. Transformers learn through gradual rank increase. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. P.-A. Absil, Robert Mahony, and Rodolphe Sepulchre. Optimization Algorithms on Matrix Manifolds .Princeton University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0691132983. Alibaba DAMO Academy. Qwen: Efficient and scalable language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 ,2023. Allen AI. Olmo: Open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02309 , 2024. Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z. Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast weights to attend to the recent past. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2016. Chen Chen, Hong Xu, Wei Wang, Baochun Li, Bo Li, Li Chen, and Gong Zhang. Synchronize only the immature parameters: Communication-efficient federated learning by freezing parameters adaptively. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 2023. doi: 10 .1109/TPDS .2023 .3241965. Early access. 

> 12 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Michael Diskin, Alexey Bukhtiyarov, Max Ryabinin, Lucile Saulnier, Anton Sinitsin, Dmitry Popov, Dmitry V Pyrkin, Maxim Kashirin, Alexander Borzunov, Albert Villanova del Moral, et al. Distributed deep learning in open collaborations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:7879–7897, 2021. Yihe Dong, Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier, and Andreas Loukas. Attention is not all you need: Pure attention loses rank doubly exponentially with depth. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2793–2803. PMLR, 2021. Arthur Douillard, Qixuan Feng, Andrei A Rusu, Rachita Chhaparia, Yani Donchev, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Arthur Szlam, and Jiajun Shen. Diloco: Distributed low-communication training of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08105 , 2023. Arthur Douillard, Yanislav Donchev, Keith Rush, Satyen Kale, Zachary Charles, Zachary Garrett, Gabriel Teston, Dave Lacey, Ross McIlroy, Jiajun Shen, et al. Streaming diloco with overlapping communication: Towards a distributed free lunch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18512 , 2025. Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. Alan Edelman, Tomás A. Arias, and Steven T. Smith. The geometry of algorithms with orthogonality constraints. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications , 20(2):303–353, 1998. doi: 10 .1137/ S0895479895290954. Ruili Feng, Kecheng Zheng, Yukun Huang, Deli Zhao, Michael Jordan, and Zheng-Jun Zha. Rank diminishing in deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:33054–33065, 2022. Elias Frantar and Dan Alistarh. Gptq: Accurate post-training quantization for generative pretrained transform-ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00775 , 2023. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. Brian C. Hall. Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Representations: An Elementary Introduction , volume 222 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics . Springer, Cham, 2 edition, 2015. ISBN 978-3-319-13466-6. doi: 10 .1007/978-3-319-13467-3. Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Training compute-optimal large language models. Yuxuan Hu, Jing Zhang, Zhe Zhao, Chen Zhao, Xiaodong Chen, Cuiping Li, and Hong Chen. Sp 3: Enhancing structured pruning via pca projection. In ACL (Findings) , 2024. Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Jessica Yung, Sylvain Gelly, and Neil Houlsby. Big transfer (bit): General visual representation learning. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part V 16 , pages 491–507. Springer, 2020. 

> 13 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Anastasia Koloskova, Sebastian Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Decentralized stochastic optimization and gossip algorithms with compressed communication. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3478–3487. PMLR, 2019. Anastasia Koloskova, Nicolas Loizou, Sadra Boreiri, Martin Jaggi, and Sebastian Stich. A unified theory of decentralized sgd with changing topology and local updates. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5381–5393. PMLR, 2020. Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 25, 2012. Xiangru Lian, Ce Zhang, Huan Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Wei Zhang, and Ji Liu. Can decentralized algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case study for decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Wanchao Liang, Tianyu Liu, Less Wright, Will Constable, Andrew Gu, Chien-Chin Huang, Iris Zhang, Wei Feng, Howard Huang, Junjie Wang, et al. Torchtitan: One-stop pytorch native solution for production ready llm pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06511 , 2024. Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024a. Bo Liu, Rachita Chhaparia, Arthur Douillard, Satyen Kale, Andrei A Rusu, Jiajun Shen, Arthur Szlam, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Asynchronous local-sgd training for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.09135 , 2024b. Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Blockwise parallel transformers for large context models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8828–8844, 2023. Hao Liu, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. Ring attention with blockwise transformers for near-infinite context. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024c. arXiv:2310.01889. Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture models, 2016. Roula Nassif, Stefan Vlaski, Marco Carpentiero, Vincenzo Matta, Marc Antonini, and Ali H Sayed. Quantiza-tion for decentralized learning under subspace constraints. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 71: 2320–2335, 2023. Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization . Springer, 2nd edition, 2006. ISBN 978-0387303031. Matteo Pagliardini, Daniele Paliotta, Martin Jaggi, and François Fleuret. Faster causal attention over large sequences through sparse flash attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01160 , 2023. Zhen Qin, Weixuan Sun, Hui Deng, Dongxu Li, Yunshen Wei, Baohong Lv, Junjie Yan, Lingpeng Kong, and Yiran Zhong. cosformer: Rethinking softmax in attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08791 , 2022. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. 

arXiv e-prints , 2019. Sameera Ramasinghe, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Gil Avraham, Yan Zuo, and Alexander Long. Beyond top-k: Structured sparsification for compression in pipeline parallel. In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Modularity for Collaborative, Decentralized, and Continual Deep Learning .

> 14 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pages 3505–3506, 2020. Xiaozhe Ren, Pingyi Zhou, Xinfan Meng, Xinjing Huang, Yadao Wang, Weichao Wang, Pengfei Li, Xiaoda Zhang, Alexander Podolskiy, Grigory Arshinov, et al. Pangu-{∖ Sigma }: Towards trillion parameter language model with sparse heterogeneous computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10845 , 2023. Max Ryabinin and Anton Gusev. Towards crowdsourced training of large neural networks using decentralized mixture-of-experts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:3659–3672, 2020. Max Ryabinin, Eduard Gorbunov, Vsevolod Plokhotnyuk, and Gennady Pekhimenko. Moshpit sgd: Communication-efficient decentralized training on heterogeneous unreliable devices. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:18195–18211, 2021. Max Ryabinin, Tim Dettmers, Michael Diskin, and Alexander Borzunov. Swarm parallelism: Training large models can be surprisingly communication-efficient. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 29416–29440. PMLR, 2023. Lorenzo Sani, Alex Iacob, Zeyu Cao, Royson Lee, Bill Marino, Yan Gao, Dongqi Cai, Zexi Li, Wanru Zhao, Xinchi Qiu, et al. Photon: Federated llm pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02908 , 2024. Sunny Sanyal, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sujay Sanghavi. Inheritune: Training smaller yet more attentive language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08634 , 2024. Shaohuai Shi, Qiang Wang, Kaiyong Zhao, Zhenheng Tang, Yuxin Wang, Xiang Huang, and Xiaowen Chu. A distributed synchronous sgd algorithm with global top-k sparsification for low bandwidth networks. In 

2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) , pages 2238–2247. IEEE, 2019. Shruti Singh and Shantanu Kumar. Efficient distributed training through gradient compression with sparsifica-tion and quantization techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07634 , 2024. Hanlin Tang, Ce Zhang, Shaoduo Gan, Tong Zhang, and Ji Liu. Decentralization meets quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.06443 , 3, 2018. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. Thijs Vogels, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, and Martin Jaggi. Powergossip: Practical low-rank communication compression in decentralized deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01425 , 2020. Haozhao Wang, Song Guo, Zhihao Qu, Ruixuan Li, and Ziming Liu. Error-compensated sparsification for communication-efficient decentralized training in edge environment. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , 33(1):14–25, 2021a. Hongyi Wang, Saurabh Agarwal, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Pufferfish: Communication-efficient models at no extra cost. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , 3:365–386, 2021b. Jiaxiang Wu, Weidong Huang, Junzhou Huang, and Tong Zhang. Error compensated quantized sgd and its applications to large-scale distributed optimization. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5325–5333. PMLR, 2018. 

> 15 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 , 2024. Binhang Yuan, Yongjun He, Jared Davis, Tianyi Zhang, Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Percy S Liang, Christopher Re, and Ce Zhang. Decentralized training of foundation models in heterogeneous environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:25464–25477, 2022. Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon, Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, et al. Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:17283–17297, 2020. Jiawei Zhao, Zhenyu Zhang, Beidi Chen, Zhangyang Wang, Anima Anandkumar, and Yuandong Tian. Galore: Memory-efficient llm training by gradient low-rank projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03507 , 2024. Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja Fidler. Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books. In The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , December 2015. 

> 16 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

# Appendix: Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training 

A. T H E O R E T I C A L A NA LY S I S 

To provide formal support for our proposed joint optimization of the factorization 𝑊 = 𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ discussed in the main paper, we now present a rigorous analysis. Specifically, we consider the optimization dynamics on the product manifold ℳ = R𝑑 ×𝑟 × St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ), where 𝐵 is optimized in standard Euclidean space and 𝑈 resides on the Stiefel manifold. Under standard smoothness and boundedness assumptions commonly adopted in optimization theory, the following theorem establishes that our gradient descent updates converge linearly to a first-order stationary point. 

Lemma 1. Let 𝐹 : R𝑛 ×𝑛 × R𝑝 → R be 𝐿 -smooth and bounded below on rank-𝑟 matrices. Write each attention weight as 𝑊 = 𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ with 𝐵 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑛 and 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ) := {𝑋 ∈ R𝑛 ×𝑟 | 𝑋 ⊤𝑋 = 𝐼 𝑟 }, and collect the remaining parameters in 𝜗 ∈ R𝑝 . Define Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) := 𝐹 (𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤, 𝜗 ). Suppose Φ satisfies a PL inequality with constant 𝜇 > 0 in a neighbourhood of an optimum (𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆, 𝜗 ⋆) and that (𝐵 0, 𝑈 0, 𝜗 0) lies in this neighbourhood. Using the updates 𝐵 𝑘 +1 = 𝐵 𝑘 − 𝛼 𝐵 ∇𝐵 Φ𝑘 , 𝑈 𝑘 +1 = exp 𝑈 𝑘 (−𝛼 𝑈 grad 𝑈 Φ𝑘 ), and 

𝜗 𝑘 +1 = 𝜗 𝑘 − 𝛼 𝜃 ∇𝜃 Φ𝑘 with fixed stepsizes 0 < 𝛼 𝐵 , 𝛼 𝑈 , 𝛼 𝜃 ≤ 1/𝐿 and 𝛼 := min {𝛼 𝐵 , 𝛼 𝑈 , 𝛼 𝜃 }, we have for all 𝑘 ≥ 0Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 , 𝑈 𝑘 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) − Φ⋆ ≤ (1 − 𝛼𝜇 )𝑘 [︀ Φ( 𝐵 0, 𝑈 0, 𝜗 0) − Φ⋆]︀ , Φ⋆ := Φ( 𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆, 𝜗 ⋆),

and the iterates converge linearly to (𝐵 ∞, 𝑈 ∞, 𝜗 ∞) with 𝐵 ∞𝑈 ∞𝑈 ⊤∞ = 𝑊 ⋆ and 𝜗 ∞ = 𝜗 ⋆.Proof. Because 𝐹 is 𝐿 -smooth and 𝐵 ↦ → 𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ is linear, 

∇𝐵 Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) = [︀ ∇𝑊 𝐹 (𝑊, 𝜗 )]︀ 𝑊 =𝐵𝑈 𝑈 ⊤ 𝑈 𝑈 ⊤.

And we also know ‖𝑈 ‖ is bounded so ∇𝐵 Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) is 𝐿 -Lipschitz in (𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ); the same holds for ∇𝜗 Φ.For 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ) the Riemannian gradient is 

grad 𝑈 Φ = 𝜋 𝑇 𝑈 St( 𝑛,𝑟 )(︀ ∇𝑈 Φ)︀ ,

Where 𝑇 𝑈 is the tangent space and 𝜋 is the projection back on to St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ). See that the projection 𝜋 𝑇 𝑈 St( 𝑛,𝑟 )

is bounded, so grad 𝑈 Φ is also 𝐿 -Lipschitz. Now we consider gradient descent in each parameter block. By the Euclidean descent lemma (Nocedal and Wright, 2006), 

Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝑈 𝑘 , 𝜃 𝑘 ) ≤ Φ𝑘 − 𝛼 𝐵  

> 2

‖∇ 𝐵 Φ𝑘 ‖2. (1) With 𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝜃 𝑘 fixed, the Riemannian descent lemma on St( 𝑛, 𝑟 ) (Absil et al., 2008) gives 

Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝑈 𝑘 +1 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) ≤ Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝑈 𝑘 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) − 𝛼 𝑈  

> 2

‖∇ 𝑈 Φ𝑘 ‖2. (2) Finally, keeping (𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝑈 𝑘 +1 ) fixed, 

Φ𝑘 +1 ≤ Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 +1 , 𝑈 𝑘 +1 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) − 𝛼 𝜃  

> 2

‖∇ 𝜗 Φ𝑘 ‖2. (3) Summing (1)–(3) yields 

Φ𝑘 +1 ≤ Φ𝑘 − 12[︀ 𝛼 𝐵 ‖∇ 𝐵 Φ𝑘 ‖2 + 𝛼 𝑈 ‖∇ 𝑈 Φ𝑘 ‖2 + 𝛼 𝜃 ‖∇ 𝜃 Φ𝑘 ‖2]︀ . (4) 

> 17 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Let 𝛼 := min {𝛼 𝐵 , 𝛼 𝑈 , 𝛼 𝜃 }.By PL assumption, there exist 𝜇 > 0 and a neighbourhood 𝒩 ⊆ R𝑛 ×𝑛 ×St( 𝑛, 𝑟 )×R𝑝 containing the iterates such that 

‖∇ 𝐵 Φ‖2 + ‖∇ 𝑈 Φ‖2 + ‖∇ 𝜃 Φ‖2 ≥ 2𝜇 [︀ Φ − Φ⋆]︀ ∀(𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) ∈ 𝒩 . (5) Combining (4) and (5) gives 

Φ𝑘 +1 − Φ⋆ ≤ (1 − 𝛼𝜇 )[︀ Φ𝑘 − Φ⋆]︀ ,

and induction yields 

Φ𝑘 − Φ⋆ ≤ (1 − 𝛼𝜇 )𝑘 [︀ Φ0 − Φ⋆]︀ .

which is the claimed linear rate. The geometric decay plus 𝐿 -smoothness implies ∑︀ 𝑘 ‖∇ 𝐵 Φ𝑘 ‖2 < ∞ (similarly for ∇𝑈 Φ𝑘 and ∇𝜃 Φ𝑘 ), hence all gradient blocks vanish. Any limit point (𝐵 ∞, 𝑈 ∞, 𝜃 ∞) therefore satisfies the first-order conditions and attains Φ⋆. Consequently 𝑊 𝑘 := 𝐵 𝑘 𝑈 𝑘 𝑈 ⊤ 

> 𝑘

converges to 𝑊 ⋆ := 𝐵 ∞𝑈 ∞𝑈 ⊤∞, and 𝜃 𝑘 → 𝜃 ∞ = 𝜃 ⋆.A.1 GE O M E T R I C IM PAC T O F ROTAT I O NA L RE PA R A M E T E R I S AT I O N 

Next, to formally verify that our reparameterization 𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 preserves the stationary points of the optimization landscape, we present the complete theorem and proof in this appendix. Specifically, we rigorously demonstrate that optimizing in the unconstrained parameter space 𝜃 via ordinary SGD or Adam does not alter the nature or locations of local minima and strict saddle points of the original constrained optimization problem. This formalizes and extends the intuitive reasoning discussed in the main text, confirming that our rotational reparameterization is geometrically faithful and optimization-efficient. 

Theorem 1. Consider Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) as defined in Proposition 1. and fix an orthonormal matrix 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ).Suppose 𝜃 ↦ → 𝑅 (𝜃 ) is surjective (or dense) in 𝑂 (𝑑 ) = {𝑅 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 |𝑅 𝑇 𝑅 = I𝑑 }. Define the Euclidean reparameterisation ̂︀ 

Φ( 𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) := Φ (︀ 𝐵, 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 𝑈 ⊤𝑅 (𝜃 )⊤, 𝜗 )︀ .

Then the sets of local minima of ̂︀ Φ( 𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) and Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) coincide. Proof. Denote by 𝜑 (𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) = ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) the lifting map from the re-parameterised domain 𝒟 1 = R𝑑 ×𝑑 × Θ

to the original domain 𝒟 2 = R𝑑 ×𝑑 × St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ), where 𝜃 ∈ Θ.For any 𝑈 ∈ St( 𝑑, 𝑟 ) extend its columns to an orthogonal matrix 𝑅 ∈ 𝑂 (𝑑 ) with 𝑈 𝑅 ⊤ = 𝑈 ; surjectivity of 

𝜃 ↦ → 𝑅 (𝜃 ) (or its denseness plus continuity) yields 𝜃 with 𝑅 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 , so 𝑈 = 𝑅 (𝜃 )𝑈 . Hence 𝜑 (𝒟 1) = 𝒟 2.That is, 𝜑 is continuous and surjective. Now, let (𝐵 ⋆, 𝜃 ⋆, 𝜗 *) be a local minimiser of ̂︀ Φ and set 𝑈 ⋆ := 𝑅 (𝜃 ⋆)𝑈 = 𝜑 (𝐵 ⋆, 𝜃 ⋆)𝑈 . Assume, towards a con-tradiction, that (𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆, 𝜗 *) is not a local minimiser of Φ. Then there exists a sequence (𝐵 𝑘 , 𝑈 𝑘 ) → (𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆)

with Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 , 𝑈 𝑘 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) < Φ( 𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆, 𝜗 *). By surjectivity (or density) pick 𝜃 𝑘 such that 𝑈 𝑘 = 𝑅 (𝜃 𝑘 )𝑈 and 

𝜃 𝑘 → 𝜃 ⋆. Continuity of ̂︀ Φ = Φ ∘ 𝜑 gives ̂︀ Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 , 𝜃 𝑘 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) = Φ( 𝐵 𝑘 , 𝑈 𝑘 , 𝜗 𝑘 ) < Φ( 𝐵 ⋆, 𝑈 ⋆, 𝜗 *) = ̂︀ Φ( 𝐵 ⋆, 𝜃 ⋆, 𝜗 *),

contradicting local minimality of ̂︀ Φ. Therefore, local minima of ^Φ lift to local minima of Φ. Let (𝐵 ⋆, 𝜃 ⋆)

Conversely, let (̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝑈 , ̂︀ 𝜗 ) be a local minimiser of Φ. Choose any 𝑅 ∈ 𝑂 (𝑑 ) with ̂︀ 𝑈 = 𝑅 𝑈 and pick ̂︀ 𝜃 such that 𝑅 (̂︀ 𝜃 ) = 𝑅 . If (𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) → (̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝜃, ̂︀ 𝜗 ) then 𝜑 (𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) → (̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝑈 , ̃︀ 𝜗 ), hence ̂︀ Φ( 𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) = Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) ≥

Φ( ̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝑈 , ̂︀ 𝜗 ) = ̂︀ Φ( ̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝜃, ̂︀ 𝜗 ), so (̂︀ 𝐵, ̂︀ 𝜃, ̂︀ 𝜗 ) is a local minimiser of ̂︀ Φ.

> 18 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Thus, 𝜑 induces a bijection between the sets of local minima of Φ and ̂︀ Φ; hence the two optimisation problems have exactly the same local minima. Theorem 1 proves that the Euclidean reparameterisation 𝑈 (𝜃 ) = 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 , 𝑅 (𝜃 ) ∈ 𝑂 (𝑑 ) preserves stationary points . In this section we take a deeper look at how the transformation affects the surrounding loss landscape ,focusing on curvature, conditioning, and global distortions. Specifically, we show that by constraining ‖𝜃 ‖

to a moderate range (via clipping), one can make sure that the curvature of the re-parameterized landscape remain similar to that of the original objective. Throughout, Φ( 𝐵, 𝑈, 𝜗 ) denotes the original objective, while ̂︀ 

Φ( 𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) := Φ (︀ 𝐵, 𝑅 (𝜃 ) 𝑈 , 𝜗 )︀ is its pull-back to the unconstrained parameters 𝜃 .A.1.1 HE S S I A N P U L L –BAC K F O R M U L A 

Let 𝑔 𝑈 = ∇𝑈 Φ ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , 𝐻 𝑈 = ∇2 

> 𝑈 𝑈

Φ ∈ R𝑑𝑟 ×𝑑𝑟 be the gradient and intrinsic (Euclidean) Hessian w.r.t. the Stiefel coordinates . Define the Jacobian of the reparameterisation 𝐽 (𝜃 ) = 𝜕𝑈 (𝜃 )

𝜕𝜃 ∈ R𝑑𝑟 ×𝑚 , 𝑚 =dim Θ .

Lemma 2. For any 𝜃 the Euclidean Hessian of ̂︀ Φ satisfies 

𝐻 𝜃 := ∇2

> 𝜃𝜃

̂︀ Φ = 𝐽 ⊤𝐻 𝑈 𝐽 +

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

(︀ 

𝜕 𝜃 𝑖 𝐽 )︀ ⊤𝑔 𝑈 . (1) 

At stationary points —i.e. when 𝑔 𝑈 = 0 —the second term vanishes and 

𝐻 𝜃 = 𝐽 ⊤𝐻 𝑈 𝐽. (2) 

Proof of Lemma 2. Fix (𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ) and denote 3 𝑢 (𝜃 ) = vec (︀ 𝑈 (𝜃 ))︀ , 𝑔 𝑈 (𝑢 ) = ∇𝑢 Φ, 𝐽 (𝜃 ) = 𝜕𝑢 𝜕𝜃 ∈ R𝑑𝑟 ×𝑚 .

By the multivariate chain rule 

∇𝜃 ̂︀ Φ = 𝐽 ⊤ 𝑔 𝑈 .

Differentiate once more: 

𝐻 𝜃 = ∇𝜃 (︀ 𝐽 ⊤𝑔 𝑈 )︀ =(︀ ∇𝜃 𝐽 ⊤)︀ 𝑔 𝑈 + 𝐽 ⊤(︀ ∇𝜃 𝑔 𝑈 )︀ .

Compute the two addends separately. 

(i) Derivative of the Jacobian. Write the 𝑖 -th column of 𝐽 as 𝐽 (: ,𝑖 ). Then (∇𝜃 𝐽 ⊤)𝑔 𝑈 =∑︀ 𝑚 𝑖 =1 (︀ 𝜕 𝜃 𝑖 𝐽 )︀ ⊤𝑔 𝑈 .

(ii) Derivative of the pulled-back gradient. Because 𝑔 𝑈 is a function of 𝑢 (𝜃 ),

∇𝜃 𝑔 𝑈 =(︀ ∇𝑢 𝑔 𝑈 )︀ ∇𝜃 𝑢 = 𝐻 𝑈 𝐽. 

Substituting (i) and (ii) yields 

𝐻 𝜃 = 𝐽 ⊤𝐻 𝑈 𝐽 +

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

(︀ 

𝜕 𝜃 𝑖 𝐽 )︀ ⊤𝑔 𝑈 ,

which is precisely equation 1. If 𝜃 is a stationary point of ̂︀ Φ, then 𝑔 𝑈 = 0 and the second term vanishes, giving equation 2.                     

> 3For clarity we vectorise matrices, writing 𝑢 = vec( 𝑈 )∈R𝑑𝑟 ,𝑔 𝑈 =∇𝑢 Φ∈R𝑑𝑟 , and 𝐻 𝑈 =∇2
> 𝑢𝑢 Φ∈R𝑑𝑟 ×𝑑𝑟 .
> 19 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Spectral consequences. Writing the singular values of 𝐽 as 𝜎 1 ≥ 𝜎 2 ≥ · · · ≥ 𝜎 𝑟 > 0 and the ordered eigenvalues of 𝐻 𝑈 as 𝜆 1 ≥ · · · ≥ 𝜆 𝑟 , classic congruence inequalities yield 

𝜎 2 

> 𝑟

𝜆 𝑟 ≤ 𝜆 min (𝐻 𝜃 ) ≤ 𝜆 max (𝐻 𝜃 ) ≤ 𝜎 21 𝜆 1. (3) Hence the condition number transforms as 𝜅 (𝐻 𝜃 ) ≤(︀ 𝜎 1/𝜎 𝑟 )︀ 2 𝜅 (𝐻 𝑈 ). Good scaling of 𝐽 is therefore essential for maintaining a well-conditioned landscape. A.1.2 LO C A L P RO P E RT I E S W I T H T H E E X P O N E N T I A L M A P 

We instantiate 𝑅 (𝜃 ) with the exponential map 

𝑅 (𝜃 ) = exp (︁ 

> 𝑚

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜃 𝑖 𝐴 𝑖 )︁ , 𝐴 ⊤ 

> 𝑖

= −𝐴 𝑖 , ⟨𝐴 𝑖 , 𝐴 𝑗 ⟩𝐹 = 𝛿 𝑖𝑗 , (4) where {𝐴 𝑖 } is an orthonormal basis of the Lie algebra o(𝑑 ). For ‖𝜃 ‖ ≪ 1 the first-order expansion gives 

𝑅 (𝜃 ) = 𝐼 +∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝜃 𝑖 𝐴 𝑖 + 𝒪 (︀ ‖𝜃 ‖2)︀ , 𝐽 𝑖 := 𝜕𝑈 𝜕𝜃 𝑖 

= 𝐴 𝑖 𝑈 + 𝒪 (︀ ‖𝜃 ‖)︀ .

Because the 𝐴 𝑖 𝑈 are orthonormal in the embedded space R𝑑 ×𝑟 , the Gram matrix satisfies 𝐽 ⊤𝐽 = 𝐼 + 𝒪 (‖𝜃 ‖).Hence near 𝜃 = 0 ,

𝜎 1, 𝜎 𝑟 = 1 + 𝒪 (‖𝜃 ‖), 𝜅 (𝐽 ) = 1 + 𝒪 (‖𝜃 ‖),

so by equation 3 the condition number of 𝐻 𝜃 matches that of 𝐻 𝑈 up to first order. Locally , therefore, the exponential map is almost isometric : plain SGD or Adam on 𝜃 senses essentially the same curvature as a Riemannian optimiser on 𝑈 .

Corollary 1. Fix any radius 𝜌 < 𝜋 and let ℬ𝜌 = {𝜃 ∈ Θ | ‖ 𝜃 ‖2 ≤ 𝜌 }. There exists 𝑐 𝜌 > 0 such that for all 

𝜃 ∈ ℬ 𝜌 and stationary (𝐵, 𝜃, 𝜗 ),

11 + 𝑐 𝜌 

𝐻 𝑈 ⪯ 𝐻 𝜃 ⪯ (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 ) 𝐻 𝑈 .

In particular, 𝜅 (𝐻 𝜃 ) ≤ (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 )2 𝜅 (𝐻 𝑈 ).

Proof. Combine equation 2 with the bound ‖𝐽 ⊤𝐽 − 𝐼 ‖2 ≤ 𝑐 𝜌 that follows from the expansion above and continuity of 𝑅 (𝜃 ) inside ℬ𝜌 .

Intuition. Corollary 1 asserts that, as long as the Lie–algebra parameter stays inside the ball ℬ𝜌 = {𝜃 :

‖𝜃 ‖2 ≤ 𝜌 } with 𝜌 < 𝜋 , the Hessian in the new coordinates, 𝐻 𝜃 , differs from the original Stiefel-space Hessian, 

𝐻 𝑈 , by no more than a scalar factor 1 + 𝑐 𝜌 in either direction: 

11 + 𝑐 𝜌 

𝐻 𝑈 ⪯ 𝐻 𝜃 ⪯ (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 ) 𝐻 𝑈 , 𝑐 𝜌 = 𝒪 (𝜌 ).

Here “ ⪯” denotes the usual Loewner order, so the inequality means that every quadratic form 𝑣 ⊤𝐻 𝜃 𝑣 lies between 𝑣 ⊤𝐻 𝑈 𝑣/ (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 ) and (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 ) 𝑣 ⊤𝐻 𝑈 𝑣 . Consequently the condition number is inflated by at most the square of this factor, 𝜅 (𝐻 𝜃 ) ≤ (1 + 𝑐 𝜌 )2𝜅 (𝐻 𝑈 ), and tends back to 𝜅 (𝐻 𝑈 ) as 𝜌 → 0. In practical terms, when the rotation angles encoded by 𝜃 remain moderate ( ‖𝜃 ‖ ≲ 1 rad), plain Euclidean optimisers experience almost the same curvature, and therefore the same step-size stability and convergence speed, as a Riemannian optimiser that works directly on 𝑈 . Only as ‖𝜃 ‖ approaches the injectivity radius ( ≈ 𝜋 ) does the Jacobian cease to be nearly orthonormal, distorting the landscape enough to break this near-isometry. In practice, we clip ‖𝜃 ‖ < 0.5 to enforce this constraint. Note that without this constraint, the models sometimes demonstrated unstable convergence. 

> 20 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

A.1.3 GL O BA L D I S T O RT I O N S A N D I N J E C T I V I T Y R A D I U S 

The exponential map is injective on ‖𝜃 ‖2 < 𝜋 √2 (the minimal distance to the cut-locus). As ‖𝜃 ‖ → 𝜋 ,several phenomena occur: a) Jacobian degeneration. Some singular values 𝜎 𝑖 (𝐽 ) collapse to zero, flattening curvature along their directions and introducing plateaus in ̂︀ Φ even if 𝐻 𝑈 is full-rank. b) Anisotropic stretching. Other singular values blow up , turning moderate curvature in 𝐻 𝑈 into steep walls in 𝜃 -space. A.1.4 PR AC T I C A L TA K E AWAY 

Rotational reparameterisation via the exponential map yields a locally isometric embedding of the Stiefel manifold into Euclidean space, ensuring that first-order methods experience essentially unchanged curvature near the solution set. However, as the Lie-algebra coordinates move towards the injectivity radius, the Jacobian may distort the landscape dramatically. Clipping or norm-projection of 𝜃 acts like a trust-region mechanism that retains favourable conditioning but risks biasing the search if the feasible clip radius is chosen too small. The practitioner’s rule-of-thumb is therefore: 

Maintain ‖𝜃 ‖2 ≲ 1 rad whenever possible; if larger rotations are essential, monitor ‖𝐽 ‖2 or curvature statistics and re-centre / rescale when they inflate or collapse. 

A.2 RA N K C O L L A P S E O F T H E AT T E N T I O N W E I G H T S 

To rigorously characterize the collapse of auxiliary projection heads onto data-dependent subspaces, as discussed in the main text, we present a detailed result and proof next. Specifically, we demonstrate formally how attention weights associated with infrequently activated directions shrink under optimization with weight decay. This confirms analytically that auxiliary projection heads become effectively redundant near convergence, justifying their safe removal and transition to a standard Transformer architecture without sacrificing accumulated predictive performance. First, we consider fixed projection matrices below. That is the case where 𝑈 is not data dependent. 

Proposition 1. Let 𝑈 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , 𝑈 ⊤𝑈 = 𝐼 𝑟 , 𝑃 := 𝑈 𝑈 ⊤, 𝑃 ⊥ := 𝐼 𝑑 − 𝑃. Fix any ℓ2-regularised objective of the form ℒ(𝑊 ) = 𝐹 (︀ 𝑊 𝑃 )︀ + 𝜆  

> 2

‖𝑊 ‖2 

> 𝐹

, 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑘 , 𝜆 > 0. Assume only that 

𝐹 : R𝑑 ×𝑘 → R is continuously differentiable. Consider the Gradient flow ˙𝑊 (𝑡 ) = −∇ 𝑊 ℒ(︀ 𝑊 (𝑡 ))︀ , Then the 

orthogonal component 𝑊 ⊥ := 𝑊 𝑃 ⊥ obeys 

‖𝑊 ⊥(𝑡 )‖𝐹 = (1 − 𝜂𝜆 ) 𝑡 ‖𝑊 (0)  

> ⊥

‖𝐹 

Hence 𝑊 ⊥(𝑡 ) → 0, and every limit point satisfies 𝑊 ⋆ ∈ col( 𝑈 ).Proof. Let 𝐺 := ∇𝑋 𝐹 (𝑋 )⃒⃒ 𝑋 =𝑊 𝑃 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑘 . Then we have, 

∇𝑊 𝐹 (𝑊 𝑃 ) = 𝐺 𝑃. (1) Consider the full gradient of the regularized objective 

∇𝑊 ℒ(𝑊 ) = 𝐺 𝑃 + 𝜆𝑊. (2) Define the parallel and orthogonal blocks 𝑊 ‖ := 𝑊 𝑃, 𝑊 ⊥ := 𝑊 𝑃 ⊥ so that 𝑊 = 𝑊 ‖ + 𝑊 ⊥. Because 

𝑃 𝑃 ⊥ = 0 ,

𝑊 ‖𝑃 ⊥ = 0 , 𝑊 ⊥𝑃 = 0 . (3) 

> 21 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Using ∇𝑊 ℒ(𝑊 ) = 𝐺 𝑃 + 𝜆𝑊 in the update and projecting: 

𝑊 (𝑡 +1) 𝑃 ⊥ =(︀ 𝑊 (𝑡 ) − 𝜂 (𝐺𝑃 + 𝜆𝑊 (𝑡 )))︀ 𝑃 ⊥ = (1 − 𝜂𝜆 ) 𝑊 (𝑡 )𝑃 ⊥.

Induction yields ‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> ⊥

‖𝐹 = (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ‖𝑊 (0)  

> ⊥

‖𝐹 .

So we have ‖𝑊 ⊥(𝑡 )‖𝐹 → 0. Thus 𝑃 ⊥𝑊 (𝑡 ) → 0, i.e. every accumulation point lies entirely in col( 𝑈 ).Next, we consider the case where 𝑈 is data dependent under full-batch gradient descent. 

Theorem 2. For every sample 𝑥 let 𝑈 (𝑥 ) ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , 𝑈 (𝑥 )⊤𝑈 (𝑥 ) = 𝐼 𝑟 , 𝑃 (𝑥 ) := 𝑈 (𝑥 )𝑈 (𝑥 )⊤ ∈

R𝑑 ×𝑑 . Fix a loss family 𝐹 𝑥 : R𝑑 ×𝑘 → R that is 𝐿 bounded as: ⃦⃦ ∇𝑍 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑍 )⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 ∀𝑥, 𝑍. Define the regularised objective ℒ(𝑊 ) := E𝑥 [︀ 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑊 𝑃 (𝑥 )) ]︀ + 𝜆  

> 2

‖𝑊 ‖2 

> 𝐹

, 𝜆 > 0, 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑘 . Let 𝑄 ∈

R𝑑 ×𝑑 be an orthogonal projector and set 𝑊 𝑄 := 𝑊 𝑄 . Introduce the average spectral overlap 𝑝 𝑄 := 

E𝑥 [︀ ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2]︀ ∈ [0 , 1] . Run gradient descent 𝑊 (𝑡 +1) = 𝑊 (𝑡 ) − 𝜂 ∇𝑊 ℒ(𝑊 (𝑡 )), 0 < 𝜂𝜆 < 1. Then for every 𝑡 ≥ 0 ‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ≤ (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ‖𝑊 (0)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 [︀ 1 − (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ]︀ and consequently 

lim sup 

> 𝑡 →∞

‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ≤ 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 .

Proof. For 𝑍 := 𝑊 𝑃 (𝑥 ) set 𝐺 (𝑥 ) := ∇𝑍 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑍 ). Because ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑊 𝑃 (𝑥 )) = 𝐺 (𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑥 ), adding the 

ℓ2-regulariser gives 

∇𝑊 ℒ(𝑊 ) = E𝑥 [𝐺 (𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑥 )] + 𝜆𝑊. 

Right–multiplying the GD update by 𝑄 ,

𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

= (1 − 𝜂𝜆 ) 𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

− 𝜂 E𝑥 [𝐺 (𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑥 )] 𝑄. 

Using the bound and ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2 ≤ 1,

‖𝐺 (𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2.

Taking expectation and the definition of 𝑝 𝑄 ,⃦⃦ 

E𝑥 [𝐺 (𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑥 )] 𝑄 ⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 𝑝 𝑄 .

Applying the bound in the recursion, 

‖𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ≤ (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝜂𝐿𝑝 𝑄 .

The inhomogeneous geometric series yields 

‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ≤ (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ‖𝑊 (0)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝐿𝑝 𝑄 

𝜆 [︀ 1 − (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ]︀ .

Since 0 < 1 − 𝜂𝜆 < 1, lim 

> 𝑡 →∞

(1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 = 0 , giving lim sup 

> 𝑡 →∞

‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ≤ 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿/𝜆 .Finally, we extend the above result to the case where 𝑈 is data dependent and the networks is optimized via stochastic mini-batch gradient descent. 

> 22 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

Theorem 3. For every sample 𝑥 let 𝑈 (𝑥 ) ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , 𝑈 (𝑥 )⊤𝑈 (𝑥 ) = 𝐼 𝑟 , 𝑃 (𝑥 ) := 𝑈 (𝑥 )𝑈 (𝑥 )⊤ ∈

R𝑑 ×𝑑 . Fix a loss family 𝐹 𝑥 : R𝑑 ×𝑘 → R that is 𝐿 bounded as: ⃦⃦ ∇𝑍 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑍 )⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 ∀𝑥, 𝑍. Define the regularised objective ℒ(𝑊 ) := E𝑥 [︀ 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑊 𝑃 (𝑥 )) ]︀ + 𝜆  

> 2

‖𝑊 ‖2 

> 𝐹

, 𝜆 > 0, 𝑊 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑘 . Let 𝑄 ∈

R𝑑 ×𝑑 be an orthogonal projector and set 𝑊 𝑄 := 𝑊 𝑄 . Introduce the average spectral overlap 𝑝 𝑄 := 

E𝑥 [︀ ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2]︀ ∈ [0 , 1] . At iteration 𝑡 = 0 , 1, . . . draw an i.i.d. sample 𝑥 𝑡 and perform 

𝑊 (𝑡 +1) = 𝑊 (𝑡 ) − 𝜂 𝑡 𝑔 𝑡 , 𝑔 𝑡 := ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (︀ 𝑊 (𝑡 )𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 ))︀ 𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 ) + 𝜆 𝑊 (𝑡 ),

with stepsizes 𝜂 𝑡 > 0 satisfying 𝜂 𝑡 𝜆 < 1. Set 𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

:= 𝑊 (𝑡 )𝑄 and 𝑝 𝑄 := E𝑥 [︀ ‖𝑃 (𝑥 )𝑄 ‖2]︀ ∈ [0 , 1] .If 𝜂 𝑡 ≡ 𝜂 and 0 < 𝜂𝜆 < 1, then for all 𝑡 ≥ 0

E[︀ ‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ]︀ ≤ (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ‖𝑊 (0)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 [︀ 1 − (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ]︀ 

and hence lim sup 

> 𝑡 →∞

E[︀ ‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ]︀ ≤ 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 .

Proof. Let ℱ𝑡 := 𝜎 (︀ 𝑊 (0) , . . . , 𝑊 (𝑡 ))︀ be the natural filtration. All expectations E[ · ] are taken over the drawn samples {𝑥 𝑠 }𝑠 ≤𝑡 .Multiplying the update by 𝑄 on the right gives 

𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

= 𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

− 𝜂 𝑡 𝑔 𝑡 𝑄. 

Because 𝑔 𝑡 is an unbiased gradient estimate, E[︀ 𝑔 𝑡 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ = ∇𝑊 ℒ(︀ 𝑊 (𝑡 ))︀ .

Take conditional expectation and use E[︀ 𝑔 𝑡 𝑄 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ = E[︀ ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (·)𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ + 𝜆𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

:

E[︀ 𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

| ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ = 𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

− 𝜂 𝑡 𝜆𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

− 𝜂 𝑡 E[︀ ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (·)𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ .

Apply the Frobenius norm and the triangle inequality: 

E[︀ ‖𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ ≤ (1 − 𝜂 𝑡 𝜆 )‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝜂 𝑡 ⃦⃦⃦ E[︀ ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (·)𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀⃦⃦⃦ 𝐹 .

Since ‖∇ 𝑍 𝐹 𝑥 (𝑍 )‖𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 for every 𝑥 and 𝑍 ,⃦⃦ 

∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (·)𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 ⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿 ‖𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 ‖2.

Hence ⃦⃦ E[︀ ∇𝑊 𝐹 𝑥 𝑡 (·)𝑃 (𝑥 𝑡 )𝑄 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀⃦⃦ 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿𝑝 𝑄 . Thus 

E[︀ ‖𝑊 (𝑡 +1)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 | ℱ 𝑡 ]︀ ≤ (1 − 𝜂 𝑡 𝜆 )‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 + 𝜂 𝑡 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿. (5) Let 𝜂 𝑡 ≡ 𝜂 . Taking full expectation of equation 5 yields 𝑦 𝑡 +1 ≤ (1 −𝜂𝜆 ) 𝑦 𝑡 +𝜂𝑝 𝑄 𝐿, where 𝑦 𝑡 := E[︀ ‖𝑊 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 ]︀ .Solving the linear recurrence gives 

𝑦 𝑡 ≤ (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 𝑦 0 + 𝜂𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 [︀ 1 − (1 − 𝜂𝜆 )𝑡 ]︀ .

With 𝑦 0 = ‖𝑊 (0)  

> 𝑄

‖𝐹 we obtain the stated bound; letting 𝑡 → ∞ yields 𝑝 𝑄 𝐿 𝜆 .

> 23 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training

B. A T T E N T I O N O U T P U T A NA LY S I S 

We investigate the attention output activation rank structure of pretrained frontier open-weight models, specifically focusing on prominent architectures such as LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), Qwen (Academy, 2023), and Olmo (AI, 2024) (Fig. 6, 7, and 8, reepectively). Interestingly, our empirical analyses reveal a consistently observed low-rank structure across these diverse model families, suggesting that this phenomenon is intrinsic to transformer-based architectures rather than specific to certain model training procedures or datasets. The low-rank behavior of attention outputs in transformers has garnered considerable interest, as it significantly impacts model efficiency, interpretability, and the potential for compression. Previous studies have documented similar findings; notably, Dong et al. (Dong et al., 2021) observed substantial rank reduction in the self-attention matrices of transformers during training, attributing it to implicit regularization effects induced by the training dynamics. Similarly, Abbe and colleagues (Abbe et al., 2024) provided theoretical insights, demonstrating that rank collapse in attention mechanisms naturally arises from the iterative nature of gradient-based optimization processes. Recent advancements in understanding transformer geometry and optimization further support our obser-vations. Sanyal et al. (Sanyal et al., 2024) reported that transformers inherently favor lower-dimensional subspaces in their activations, leading to stable rank reduction, particularly in large-scale models. This intrinsic property has been leveraged in various model compression schemes, where exploiting the low-rank structure of attention outputs allows for significant reductions in memory footprint and computational overhead without adversely affecting model accuracy (Frantar and Alistarh, 2023; Zhao et al., 2024). Our findings confirm and extend these results by highlighting that the low-rank structure is not only prevalent across different model architectures but also robustly present across models trained on diverse datasets and with varying parameter scales. This observation underscores the potential universality of the low-rank phenomenon in transformer-based language models, further suggesting avenues for universally applicable model compression techniques and efficient parallelization strategies in decentralized training scenarios. 0 5 10 15 20 25 

> Layer
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> 0.006
> 0.007
> 0.008
> 0.009
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

LL A MA -3.2-3B 0 5 10 15 20 25 30  

> Layer
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> 0.006
> 0.007
> 0.008
> 0.009
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

LL A MA -3.1-8B 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80  

> Layer
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> 0.006
> 0.007
> 0.008
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

LL A MA -3-70B Figure 6: Stable rank distribution of the attention activations across L L A MA 3 models normalized by their maximum possible rank. 

C. A B L AT I O N S 

We conduct ablation studies across different network architectures to validate that the effectiveness of our compression scheme is not dependent on specific design choices. Figures 9 and 10 show the convergence behavior of 8-layer and 32-layer models, respectively, both using 8 attention heads. Similarly, Figures 11 and 12 compare convergence between models with 8 and 24 attention heads, respectively; both models have 8 layers. All four configurations use an embedding dimension of 2048. Across all these variations, our compression method maintains convergence comparable to that of the 

> 24

Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training 

QW E N -3-8B QW E N -3-30B 0 20 40 60 80  

> Layer
> 0.000
> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> 0.025
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

QW E N -3-235B Figure 7: Stable rank distribution of the attention activations across Q W E N 3 models normalized by their maximum possible rank. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

> Layer
> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

OL M O -2-7B 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40  

> Layer
> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

OL M O -2-13B 0 10 20 30 40 50 60  

> Layer
> 0.002
> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> Stable rank
> Q
> K
> V

OL M O -2-32B Figure 8: Stable rank distribution of the attention activations across O L M O 2 models normalized by their maximum possible rank. centralized baseline, while achieving throughput competitive with centralized context-parallel models using 100Gbps connections—even though we only utilize 300Mbps connections. In addition, we trained a model with an ultra-long context length of 256K tokens, distributed over 32 A100 GPUs. This model has 8 layers and 8 attention heads. As shown in Figure 13, even in this extreme setting, our compression technique enables decentralized training to match the convergence of the centralized baseline. Note that we plot the loss curves against iterations (not wall-clock time) and hence, 300mbps decentralized (uncompressed) and 100Gbps centralized curves overlap. Throughput is reported next to the curves separately. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 

> Iterations
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps
> 0
> 10000
> 20000
> 30000
> 40000
> 50000
> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 9: Loss over training iterations for 8-layer models (800M). 0 200 400 600 800 1000 

> Iterations
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps
> 0
> 5000
> 10000
> 15000
> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 10: Loss over training iterations for 32-layer models (3B). C.1 RE M OV I N G T H E P RO J E C T I O N C O M P O N E N T S 

In our experiments, we found that removing the projection components around the last 30%-5% range of training consistently results in stable performance across diverse settings. Based on this observation, we recommend using the last 30%-5% range of training as a simple and effective heuristic. Further, even when 

25 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 

> Iterations
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps
> 0
> 10000
> 20000
> 30000
> 40000
> 50000
> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 11: Loss over training iterations for 8-head models (800M). 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 

> Iterations
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> Loss
> Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps
> Cen. CP - 100Gbps
> Dec. CP - 300Mbps
> 0
> 10000
> 20000
> 30000
> 40000
> 50000
> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 12: Loss over training iterations for 24-head models (2.5B). 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 

Iterations 

4

6

8

10 

> Loss

Dec. CP Comp. (ours) - 300Mbps 

Cen. CP - 100Gbps 

Dec. CP - 300Mbps 

0

5000 

10000 

15000 

20000 

25000 

> Throughput (tokens/sec.)

Figure 13: Loss over training iterations for 256K context length training. Our compression preserves the convergence with longer context lengths. Table 5: Effect of Unplugging Step on Perplexity (PPL) 

Unplugging Step PPL 

Not unplugged 22.64 5k 22.69 7k 22.64 8k 22.71 9k 22.71 9.5k 22.77 9.9k 23.12 the projection components are removed earlier in training, the model is able to recover quickly, indicating a degree of robustness to the exact transition point. Nonetheless, the last 30% heuristic offers a practical, safer, and an automatable guideline. We present an ablation on FineWeb in Table 5 to further illustrate this (total steps 10k). Variations correspond to the third decimal point in the validation loss in most cases. 

26 Mixtures of Subspaces for Bandwidth Efficient Context Parallel Training 

Figure 14: Loss over wall-clock time across different bandwidths. With our compression, the decentralized models achieve the convergence rate of centralized models at lower bandwidths.